2 1 spanish colonization and new spain the incas were weak from fighting among themselves over control of their government.
finally many indians died from european diseases such as smallpox measles and influenza.
some historians believe that disease alone would have ensured spanish victory over the indians.
from the spanish perspective their interaction with the aztecs and the incas resulted in great victories that brought wealth and power.
the spanish also saw the conquests as further proof of their natural superiority.
the aztecs and incas of course had a much different view of the same events.
from their perspectives the spanish conquests were disasters that devastated their civilizations.
b identify supporting details what reasons can you identify that help explain why the spanish conquered the aztecs and the incas so easily.
exploring lands to the north the spanish search for treasure reached beyond the lands of the aztecs and incas.
moving north conquistadors explored the spanish borderlands.
the borderlands spanned the present day southern united states from florida to california.
juan ponce de leon pawn say day lay ohn traveled through parts of florida in 1513 looking for a legendary fountain of youth.
indians claimed that anyone who bathed in its magical water would remain young forever.
ponce de leon found no such fountain.
an expedition proves difficult another explorer panfilo narvaez nahr vah es led an expedition that ended in disaster.
in 1528 a storm struck his fleet in the gulf of mexico.
narvaez and many others were lost at sea.
the rest landed on an island in present day texas.
indians captured the few survivors and held them prisoner.
alvar nunez cabeza de vaca kah vay suh day vah kuh assumed leadership of the small group.
cabeza de vaca an enslaved african named estevanico and two others finally escaped their captors in 1533.
the four walked across the plains of texas searching for a spanish settlement.
finally in 1536 they reached a town in mexico.
they had traveled by foot more than 1 000 miles through the southwest.
the search for gold continues from 1539 to 1542 hernando de soto explored florida and other parts of the southeast.
in his search for gold he reached the 1565 1776 spanish explorers and settlements in north america key ponce de leon 1513 narvaez cabeza de vaca estevanico 1528 1536 de soto 1539 1542 coronado 1540 1547 1 spanish territory 1530 4 spanish missions 1565 1776 other spanish settlements spanish explorers took several different routes through north america analyze maps what impact might exploration of the spanish borderlands have had on the present day united states.
i interactive map european colonization of north america 46 2 1 spanish colonization and new spain spanish territories in the americas spanish territory covered central america part of north america and much of the caribbean islands and south america.
analyze maps how did the spanish divide their territory into colonies.
mississippi river.
de soto died along the riverbank without finding the riches he sought.
the conquistador francisco coronado koh roh nah doh heard legends about seven cities of gold in 1540 he led an expedition into the southwestern borderlands.
he traveled to present day arizona and new mexico.
some of his party went as far as the grand canyon.
still the zuni zoo nee villages he visited had no golden streets.
the spanish expeditions into the borderlands met with little success.
faced with strong indian resistance in the north spain focused instead on bringing order to its empire in the south.
identify what reasons did explorers have for traveling north.
the colonization of new spain the conquistadors set up colonies in many parts of the americas.
spain had many causes for colonization or setting up colonies.
one was the search for wealth settlements provided bases from which expeditions could set out in search of gold.
settlements could also created wealth through farming and trade.
a second important cause of settlement was to spread christianity by converting native peoples.
a third cause was to satisfy a thirst for adventure and exploration.
sometimes historians summarize the spanish exploration and settlement of the americas as motivated by gold god and glory thousands of spanish immigrants moved to spanish settlements looking for opportunities the colonies offered especially farming.
at first spain let the conquistadors govern the lands they conquered.
when the conquistadors proved to be poor rulers the spanish king took away their authority he then set up a strong system of government to rule his growing empire.
in 1535 he divided his american lands into new spain and peru.
the northern borderlands were part of new spain.
the king put a viceroy in charge of each region to rule in his name.
a set of laws called the laws of the indies stated how the colonies should be organized and ruled.
the laws provided for three kinds of settlements in new spain pueblos presidios prih sid ee ohz and missions.
some large communities included all three.
spanish settlements spain established many settlements in the americas.
many of these spanish settlements were built in a similar pattern.
the european colonization of north america 47 2 1 spanish colonization and new spain the incas were weak from fighting among themselves over control of their government.
finally many indians died from european diseases such as smallpox measles and influenza.
some historians believe that disease alone would have ensured spanish victory over the indians.
from the spanish perspective their interaction with the aztecs and the incas resulted in great victories that brought wealth and power.
the spanish also saw the conquests as further proof of their natural superiority.
the aztecs and incas of course had a much different view of the same events.
from their perspectives the spanish conquests were disasters that devastated their civilizations.
e2 identify supporting details what reasons can you identify that help explain why the spanish conquered the aztecs and the incas so easily.
exploring lands to the north the spanish search for treasure reached beyond the lands of the aztecs and incas.
moving north conquistadors explored the spanish borderlands.
the borderlands spanned the present day southern united states from florida to california.
juan ponce de leon pawn say day lay ohn traveled through parts of florida in 1513 looking for a legendary fountain of youth.
indians claimed that anyone who f bathed in its magical water would remain young forever.
ponce de leon found no such fountain.
an expedition proves difficult another explorer panfilo narvaez nahr vah es led an expedition that ended in disaster.
in 1528 a storm struck his fleet in the gulf of mexico.
narvaez and many others were lost at sea.
the rest landed on an island in present day texas.
indians captured the few survivors and held them prisoner.
alvar nunez cabeza de vaca kah vay suh day vah kuh assumed leadership of the small group.
cabeza de vaca an enslaved african named estevanico and two others finally escaped their captors in 1533.
the four walked across the plains of texas searching for a spanish settlement.
finally in 1536 they reached a town in mexico.
they had traveled by foot more than 1 000 miles through the southwest.
the search for gold continues from 1539 to 1542 hernando de soto explored florida and other parts of the southeast.
in his search for gold he reached the 1 spanish territories in the americas spanish territory covered central america part of north america and much of the caribbean islands and south america.
analyze maps how did the spanish divide their territory into colonies.
1565 1776 spanish explorers and settlements in north america key ponce de leon 1513 narvaez cabeza de vaca estevanico 1528 1536 de soto 1539 1542 coronado 1540 1547 m spanish territory 1530 i spanish missions 1565 1776 other spanish settlements 0 500 km lambert azimuthal equal area projection interactive map vsan francisco sar luis obispo san gabriel t santa san diego p san xayiendel bac spanish explorers took several different routes through north america analyze maps what impact might exploration of the spanish borderlands have had on the present day united states.
european colonization of north america mississippi river.
de soto died along the riverbank without finding the riches he sought.
the conquistador francisco coronado koh roh nah doh heard legends about seven cities of gold in 1540 he led an expedition into the southwestern borderlands.
he traveled to present day arizona and new mexico.
some of his party went as far as the grand canyon.
still the zuni zoo nee villages he visited had no golden streets.
the spanish expeditions into the borderlands met with little success.
faced with strong indian resistance in the north spain focused instead on bringing order to its empire in the south.
h identify what reasons did explorers have for traveling north.
the colonization of new spain the conquistadors set up colonies in many parts of the americas.
spain had many causes for colonization or setting up colonies.
one was the search for wealth settlements provided bases from which expeditions could set out in search of gold.
settlements could also created wealth through farming and trade.
a second important cause of settlement was to spread christianity by converting native peoples.
a third cause was to satisfy a thirst for adventure and exploration.
sometimes historians summarize the spanish exploration and settlement of the americas as motivated by gold god and glory thousands of spanish immigrants moved to spanish settlements looking for opportunities the colonies offered especially farming.
at first spain let the conquistadors govern the lands they conquered.
when the conquistadors proved to be poor rulers the spanish king took away their authority.
he then set up a strong system of government to rule his growing empire.
in 1535 he divided his american lands into new spain and peru.
the northern borderlands were part of new spain.
the king put a viceroy in charge of each region to rule in his name.
a set of laws called the laws of the indies stated how the colonies should be organized and ruled.
the laws provided for three kinds of settlements in new spain pueblos presidios prih sid ee ohz and missions.
some large communities included all three.
spanish settlements spain established many settlements in the americas.
many of these spanish settlements were built in a similar pattern.
the 2 1 spanish colonization and new spain european colonization of north america 47 2 1 spanish colonization and new spain settlers in st augustine florida in new spain came to town to do business worship and socialize.
mission san francisco de la espada in san antonio texas was one of spains many religious settlements in the americas dedicated to the conversion of the indians to christianity.
pueblos or towns were centers of farming and trade.
in the middle of the town was a plaza or public square.
here townspeople and farmers came to do business or worship at the church.
shops and homes lined the four sides of the plaza.
the spanish took control of indian pueblos and built new towns as well.
in 1598 juan de onate oh nyah tay founded the colony of new mexico among the adobe villages of the pueblo indians.
he used brutal force to conquer the native americans of the region.
don pedro de peralta later founded santa fe as the spanish capital of new mexico.
presidios were forts where soldiers lived.
inside the high thick walls were shops stables and storehouses for food.
soldiers protected the farmers who settled nearby.
the first presidio in the borderlands was built in 1565 at st augustine florida.
st augustine was the first permanent european settlement in what would become the united states.
its founding marked the beginning of the era of colonization in the future territory of the united states which would continue until the united states declared independence in 1776.
the legacy of missions like other europeans in the americas the spanish believed they had a duty to convert indians to christianity.
they set up missions settlements run by catholic priests and friars whose goal was to convert indians to christianity.
they often forced indians to live and work on the missions.
in new mexico the spanish tried to destroy any trace of traditional pueblo indians religious practices and subjected them to severe punishments.
this resulted in the pueblo revolt of 1680.
the pueblo indians rose up against spanish rule.
they killed about 400 spaniards and drove the others out of the region.
the spanish recaptured the region in the mid 1690s.
missions gradually spread across the spanish borderlands.
the first mission in texas was founded in 1659 at el paso.
in 1691 father eusebio francisco kino kee noh crossed into present day arizona.
he eventually set up 24 missions in the area.
the missions were a direct result of early spanish colonization efforts.
over time they had a significant impact in the americas.
by the late 1700s a string of missions dotted the california coast from san diego to san francisco and spanish language and culture gradually spread with them.
ed recall what reasons did spanish colonists have for coming to new spain.
the social order in new spain the laws of the indies also set up a strict social system.
people in spanish colonies were divided into four social classes peninsulares puh nin suh lah rayz creoles kree ohlz mestizos mes tee sohz and indians.
different social classes at the top of the social scale were the peninsulares.
born in spain peninsulares held the highest jobs in government and the church.
they also owned large tracts of land as well as rich gold and silver mines.
below the peninsulares were the creoles people born in the americas to parents of spanish origin.
many creoles were wealthy and well educated.
they owned farms and ranches taught at universities and practiced law.
however they could not hold the jobs that were reserved for peninsulares.
below the creoles were people of mixed spanish and indian background known as mestizos.
mestizos worked on farms and ranches owned by peninsulares and creoles.
in the cities they worked as carpenters shoemakers tailors and bakers.
over the course of spanish colonization mestizos came to be the largest class of people.
the lowest class in the colonies was the indians.
in the early years of spanish colonization indians were the largest class.
the spanish treated them as a conquered people.
under new spains strict social system indians were kept in poverty for hundreds of years.
a blend of spanish and indian cultures the effects of colonization can be seen in the new way of life in new spain that blended spanish and indian ways.
spanish settlers brought their own culture to the colonies.
they introduced their language laws religion and learning.
in 1551 the spanish founded the university of mexico.
native americans also influenced the culture of new spain.
colonists adopted indian foods such as corn tomatoes potatoes and squash.
indian workers used materials they knew well such as adobe bricks to build fine libraries theaters and churches.
sometimes indian artists decorated church walls with paintings of local traditions.
harsh treatment of native americans spanish colonists needed workers for their ranches farms and mines.
to help them the spanish government gave settlers encomiendas en koh mee en dahz land grants that included the right to demand labor or taxes from native americans.
mines in mexico peru and other parts of the americas made spain rich.
treasure ships laden with new spains society was divided into social classes based on birthplace and racial characteristics.
interactive chart thousands of tons of gold and silver sailed regularly across the atlantic.
the spanish forced native americans to work in the gold and silver mines.
in flickering light indians hacked out rich ores in narrow dark tunnels.
many died when tunnels caved in.
these harsh conditions led one priest bartolome de las casas day lahs kah sahs to seek reform.
traveling through new spain las casas witnessed firsthand the deaths of indians due to hunger disease and mistreatment.
what he saw horrified him the indians were totally deprived of their freedom.
even beasts enjoy more freedom when they are allowed to graze in the field.
bartolome de las casas tears of the indians many spanish in new spain did not share las casas view or his values.
so he journeyed to europe and asked the king of spain to protect the indians civil rights.
in the 1540s the royal government passed laws prohibiting the enslavement of native americans.
the laws also allowed indians to own cattle and grow crops.
however few officials in new spain enforced the european colonization of north america 2 1 spanish colonization and new spain european colonization of north america 49 2 1 spanish colonization and new spain new laws or took the time to think about indians basic human needs.
b identify supporting details what were some ways in which peninsulares were powerful.
the transatlantic slave trade the death toll among native americans continued to rise.
faced with a severe shortage of workers spanish colonists looked across the atlantic ocean for a new source of labor.
reasons for the slave trade still seeking to protect native americans bartolome de las casas made a suggestion that had a lasting tragic impact.
his idea was that africans be brought as slaves to replace forced indian laborers.
las casas argued that africans were less likely to die from european diseases.
he also claimed that africans would suffer less because they were used to doing hard farm work in their homelands.
las casass arguments encouraged the atlantic slave trade or the trade of enslaved africans across the atlantic to the americas.
in many parts of africa slavery had existed for centuries.
often war prisoners were enslaved.
eventually these enslaved people or their children might gain freedom.
after the americas were colonized though some africans began to capture and enslave people and sell them to european traders.
the traders then shipped the enslaved men women and children to the americas.
most africans who settled in the americas did so against their will.
by the time he died las casas had come to regret his suggestion.
he saw that enslaved africans suffered as much as the indians.
by that time however it was too late to undo the damage.
slavery had become a key part of the colonial economy.
slave trade expansion the european demand for african labor grew rapidly mainly in spains colonies in the west indies including what are now cuba the dominican republic and puerto rico and in other parts of the americas.
enslaved africans were especially valued on sugar plantations in the west indies and in the portuguese colony of brazil.
a plantation is a large estate farmed by many workers.
sugar could not be grown on small estates because it reguired too much land and labor.
enslaved africans often worked all through the night cutting sugar which was then sold in europe for a large profit.
some scholars estimate that europeans transported more than 10 million enslaved africans across the many africans were captured and shipped to europe and the americas to work as slaves.
analyze maps most africans enslaved in the americas came from which coast of africa.
european colonization of north america 50 2 1 spanish colonization and new spain slavery in the americas destinations of enslaved africans tobacco and slavery tobacco production rose in virginia and maryland as planters in those colonies imported more enslaved africans to grow the crops.
maryland and virginia about 20 million pounds in 1680 27 million pounds in 1700 million pounds in maryland and virginia 4 000 in 1680 17 000 in 1700 35 000 by 1720 enslaved africans were shipped to destinations in europe asia and the americas.
analyze charts which region received the fewest enslaved africans.
which received the most.
atlantic ocean to the americas between the 1500s and the 1800s.
the vast majority came from west africa.
identify central ideas why were plantations developed in the americas.
assessment 1.
generate explanations who helped cortes destroy the aztec empire and why.
identify central issues what two reasons did the spanish have for deciding not to focus on their northern borderlands.
analyze information what makes st augustine a particularly notable spanish settlement.
identify cause and effect what did the spanish government s land grants include that caused hardship for native americans and what hardship did it cause.
summarize how spanish and native american cultures blended in new spain.
european colonization of north america 51 2 1 spanish colonization and new spain european nations began to compete for riches around the world.
religious differences heightened their rivalry.
until the 1500s the roman catholic church was the only church in western europe.
that unity ended when a major religious reform movement sharply divided christians.
teks 5 i vr i i vz objectives explain why europeans explored north americas coast.
identify the reasons for french and dutch colonization in north america.
identify the reasons for english colonization.
explain how virginia began a tradition of representative government.
describe how different groups in jamestown interacted with the environment.
key terms northwest passage protestant reformation coureur de bois charter burgess house of burgesses representative government magna carta bacons rebellion alliance frontier indentured servant religious difference leads to rivalries as europeans settled in the americas they brought their religious conflicts with them.
queen elizabeth encouraged english adventurers to raid spanish colonies and capture spanish treasure fleets.
protestant england also competed with catholic france for lands in north america.
not all rivalries were religious.
both the netherlands and england were protestant.
still they competed for control of land in north america and for economic markets all over the world including asia.
reasons for the exploration of north america like columbus europeans continued during the 1500s to look for new ways to reach the riches of asia.
magellans route around south america seemed long and difficult.
europeans wanted to discover a shorter northwest passage or waterway through or around north america.
giovanni caboto an italian sea captain who the english called john cabot set out to find a northwest passage for the english.
he was confident he had found such a passage but he was mistaken.
the newfound land that he thought he had found off the asian coast in fact lay off the coast of north america.
today newfoundland is part of the easternmost province of canada.
french exploration the french sent another italian captain giovanni da verrazano vehr rah tsah noh in search of a northwest passage.
verrazano journeyed along the north american coast from the present day carolinas to canada.
during the 1530s jacques cartier kar tee yay also sailing for the french traveled more than halfway up the st lawrence river.
explorations of henry hudson in 1609 the english explorer henry hudson sailed for the dutch.
his ship the half moon entered present day new york harbor.
hudson continued to sail some 150 miles up the river that now bears his name.
the following year hudson made a voyage into the far north this time for the english.
after spending a harsh winter in what is now called hudson bay his crew rebelled.
they set hudson his son and seven loyal sailors adrift in a small boat.
the boat and its crew were never seen again.
mapping new regions none of these explorers found a northwest passage to asia.
however they did map and explore many parts of north america.
the rulers the first french dutch and english colonies european rivalries religious reform in 1517 a german monk named martin luther publicly challenged many practices of the catholic church.
soon after he split with the church entirely.
luther believed that the church had become too worldly.
he opposed the power of popes.
he also objected to the catholic teaching that believers could gain eternal lrfe by performing good works.
luther argued that people could be saved only by faith in god.
because of their protests against the church luthers supporters became known as protestants.
the protestant reformation as the new movement was known divided europe.
soon the protestants themselves split forming many different churches.
by the late 1500s religion divided the states of western europe.
roman catholic monarchs ruled spain and france.
a protestant queen elizabeth i ruled england.
in the netherlands the dutch people were mostly protestant.
exploring north america key cabot 1497 hudson 1610 1611 verrazano 1524 marquette and joliet 1673 cartier 1534 1536 la salle 1678 1682 hudson 1609 greenland n iceland louisiana 1 000 km 1 000 mi miller cylindrical projection africa explorers from england france and the netherlands took different routes from europe to north america.
analyze maps why might you expect conflict to develop between the english and french in north america.
access your digital lesson.
52 european colonization of north america 53 2 2 the first french dutch and english colonies of western europe began thinking about how to profit from the regions rich resources through colonization.
q check understanding what factors contributed to rivalries between english and spanish explorers.
new france is colonized samuel de champlain sham playn founded port royal the first permanent french settlement in north america in 1605.
three years later he led another group of settlers along the route cartier had pioneered.
on a rocky cliff high above the st lawrence river champlain built a trading post known as quebec kwih bek.
the opportunity to create wealth through trade was one of the main reasons for french colonization in america.
the french also wanted to surpass their rivals the english.
many french settlers were looking for adventure and hoped to find their fortune in the new world.
economic activity in new france unlike spains american empire new france had little gold or silver.
native americans board a european trading ship to display their selection of furs.
they will exchange the furs for the goods displayed at the feet of the seated european trader.
instead the french profited from fishing trapping and trading.
french colonists who lived and worked in native f american lands beyond the french settlements became known as coureurs de bois koo ruhr duh bwah or runners of the woods the french brought knives kettles cloth and other items for trade with native americans.
in return the indians gave them beaver skins and other furs that sold for high prices in j europe.
coureurs de bois established friendly relations with native american groups.
unlike the spanish the french did not attempt to conquer the indians.
also because coureurs de bois did not establish farms they i did not interfere with indian lands.
indians taught the i french trapping and survival skills such as how to make snowshoes and canoes.
many coureurs married indian women.
missionary work continues catholic missionaries often traveled with fur traders.
a missionary is a person who goes to another land to win converts for a religion.
french missionaries tried to convert native americans to christianity.
they also drew maps and wrote about the lands they explored.
life was difficult especially in winter.
one french priest recalled traveling on foot through deep snow if a thaw came dear lord what pain.
i was marching on an icy path that broke with every step i took as the snow softened.
we often sunk sank in it up to our.
paul le jeune quoted in d parkman colonization along the mississippi river french trappers followed the st lawrence deep into the heart of north america.
led by indian guides they reached the great lakes.
here indians spoke of a mighty river which they called mississippi or father of the waters a french missionary father jacques marquette mar ket and a fur trader louis joliet joh lee et set out to reach the mississippi in 1673.
led by indian guides they followed the river for more than 700 miles before turning back.
nine years later robert de la salle completed the journey to the gulf of mexico.
la salle named the region louisiana in honor of the french king louis xiv.
to keep spain and england out of louisiana the french built forts in the north along the great lakes.
among them was fort detroit built by antoine cadillac near lake erie.
the french also built new orleans a fort near the mouth of the river.
new orleans grew into a busy trading center.
french control of the network of waterways at the heart of north america gave the french a strategic advantage over the spanish and the english.
french colonists imported thousands of africans to work as slaves on plantations around new orleans.
some enslaved africans however joined with the natchez indians in a revolt against the french.
the french put down the natchez revolt in 1729.
some enslaved africans who fought on the side of the french received their freedom.
in louisiana free and enslaved africans together made up the majority of settlers.
government in new france new france was governed much like new spain.
the french king controlled the government directly and people had little freedom.
a council appointed by the king made all decisions.
louis xiv worried that too few french were moving to new france.
in the 1660s therefore he sent about a thousand people to the colony including many young women.
despite the kings efforts to increase the population new france grew slowly.
winters were harsh and the short growing season made farming difficult.
only about 10 000 settlers lived in the colony by 1680.
of those one third lived on farms along the st lawrence.
others chose to become coureurs de bois living largely free of government control.
fell identify main ideas why was the mississippi river important to the french.
the dutch establish new netherland like the french the dutch hoped to profit from their discoveries in the americas by colonizing.
in 1626 peter minuit min yoo wit led a group of dutch settlers to the mouth of the hudson river.
other dutch colonists had already settled on manhattan island and farther up the hudson river.
minuit bought manhattan island from local indians.
minuit called his settlement new amsterdam.
the entire colony was known as new netherland now known as new york.
new netherland was privately funded by the dutch west india company.
many colonists immigrated to new netherland hoping to profit from the regions active fur trade.
from a tiny group of 30 houses new amsterdam grew into a busy port.
the dutch welcomed people of many nations ethnic groups and religions to their the coureurs de bois fishermen and trappers who settled new france were mostly male.
they gladly welcomed female settlers sent to the new world by the french king.
interactive map a canal to transport goods runs down the center of broad street in new amsterdam an early dutch settlement.
new amsterdam later became new york city.
european colonization of north america 54 2 2 the first french dutch and english colonies european colonization of north america 55 2 2 the first french dutch and english colonies colony.
a roman catholic priest who visited new netherland in 1643 reported on the island of manhattan and in its environs there may well be four or five hundred men of different sects and nations the director general told me that there were men of eighteen different languages they are scattered here and there on the river above and below as the beauty and convenience of the spot has invited each to settle.
father isaac jogues quoted in narratives of new netherland 1609 1664 jameson the dutch also built trading posts along the hudson river.
the most important one was fort orange today known as albany.
dutch merchants became known for their good business sense.
the dutch enlarged new netherland in 1655 by taking over the colony of new sweden.
the swedes had established new sweden along the delaware river some 15 years earlier.
trade rivalries in the region dutch traders sent furs to the netherlands.
the packing list for the first native americans trade goods with dutch settlers on manhattan island.
shipment included the skins of 7 246 beaver 853 otter 81 mink 36 cat lynx and 34 small rats the dutch and french became rivals in the fur trade.
both sought alliances with native americans.
an alliance is an agreement between nations to aid and protect one another.
the dutch made friends with the iroquois.
the hurons hyoo rahnz helped the french.
fighting raged for years among the europeans and their native american allies.
dutch culture comes to north america the dutch brought many of their customs from europe to new netherland.
they liked to ice skate and in winter the frozen rivers and ponds filled with skaters.
every year on saint nicholass birthday dutch children put out their shoes to be filled with all sorts of presents.
known in dutch as sinterklaas saint nicholas came to be called santa claus.
some dutch words entered the english language.
a dutch master was a boss.
the people of new amsterdam sailed in yachts.
dutch children munched on cookies and rode through the snow on sleighs.
interaction with native americans and the environment dutch and french settlement on the.
east coast of north america brought major changes to native americans and the environment.
as in new spain european diseases killed thousands of indians and rivalry over the fur trade increased between different european countries native american allies.
the scramble for furs also led to overtrapping.
by 1640 trappers had almost wiped out the beavers on iroquois lands in upstate new york.
the arrival of europeans affected native americans in other ways.
missionaries tried to convert indians to christianity.
indians eagerly adopted european trade goods such as copper kettles and knives.
they also bought muskets and gunpowder for hunting and warfare.
alcohol sold by european traders had a harsh effect on native american life.
europeans all waged warfare to seize indian lands.
as indians were forced off their lands they moved westward onto lands of other indians which sometimes led to violence between native american groups.
the conflict between native americans and europeans would continue for many years.
b identify what was one reason why the new netherland colony was founded.
roanoke and jamestown england watched with envy as other european countries gained riches from their colonies in the americas.
several ambitious english gentlemen proposed that england settle the americas as well.
with queen elizabeths permission sir walter raleigh raised money to outfit a colony in north america.
in 1585 about 100 men set sail across the atlantic.
the colonists landed on roanoke roh uh nohk an island off the coast of present day north carolina.
within a year however the colonists had run short of food and were quarreling with neighboring indians.
when an english ship stopped in the harbor the weary settlers sailed home.
the lost colony of roanoke in 1587 raleigh sent john white one of the original colonists back to roanoke with a new group of settlers that included women and children.
when supplies ran low white returned to england leaving behind 117 colonists.
he planned to return in a few months.
when he got back to england however he found the country was then preparing for war with spain.
it was three years before he was able to sail back to roanoke.
when white arrived he found the settlement strangely quiet.
houses stood empty.
vines twined through the windows and pumpkins sprouted from the earthen floors.
on a tree someone had carved the word croatoan the name of a nearby island.
no other trace of the colonists remained.
white was eager to investigate but a storm was blowing up and his crew refused to make the trip.
to this day the fate of the lost colony remains a mystery.
the founding of jamestown after the failure of roanoke nearly 20 years passed before england again tried to establish a colony in north america.
in 1606 the virginia company of london a private company received a charter from king james i.
a charter is a legal document giving certain rights to a person or company.
the royal charter gave the virginia company the right to settle lands along the east coast of north america.
the charter also guaranteed that colonists of this land called virginia would have the same rights as english citizens.
in the spring of 1607 a group of 105 colonists funded by the virginia company arrived in virginia.
they sailed into chesapeake bay and began building houses along the james river.
they named their tiny outpost jamestown after their king.
jamestown was the first permanent english settlement in what is now the united states.
in the spring of 1607 english colonists began building a settlement at jamestown virginia.
colonists in jamestown hold religious services under a makeshift tent.
the swampy land would prove challenging for the colonists.
european colonization of north america 56 2 2 the first french dutch and english colonies european colonization of north america 57 2 2 the first french dutch and english colonies reasons for colonization the settlers of jamestown hoped to make a profit by finding gold or other riches.
they also hoped to discover a water route to asia.
furthermore they wanted to claim the region for england.
the colonists soon discovered that jamestown was located in a swampy area.
the water was unhealthy and mosquitoes spread malaria.
many settlers suffered or died from disease.
historians have long debated the reason why the settlers chose the location they did.
one of the main reasons was security they located their settlement in a place where spanish ships would be unlikely to find them.
if the spanish did discover jamestown its location would make it more easily defensible against spanish ships.
governing the colony also proved difficult.
the virginia company had chosen a council of 13 men to rule the settlement.
members of the council quarreled with one another and did little to plan for the colony s future.
by the summer of 1608 the colony was near failure.
the colonists face further difficulties another major problem the jamestown colonists faced was starvation.
their physical environment offered plenty of resources fish to catch plants to gather and animals jamestown colonists constructed buildings such as thisjn the first permanent english settlement in what is united states.
an colonization of north america 58 to hunt.
however many colonists were not used to living in the wilderness and did not know how to take advantage of these resources.
furthermore the colonists did not spend enough time producing food.
captain john smith a young soldier and explorer f observed that the colonists were not planting enough crops.
he complained that people wanted only to dig gold wash gold refine gold load gold.
as they searched in vain for gold the colony ran out of food.
smith helped to save the colony.
he set up stern rules that forced colonists to work if they wished to eat.
he also visited nearby indian villages.
powhatan pow uh tan the most powerful chief in the area agreed to supply corn to the english.
peaceful relations with native americans did not last however.
whenever the indians refused to supply food the colonists used force to seize what they needed.
once smith aimed a gun at powhatan s brother until the indians provided corn to buy his freedom.
such incidents led to frequent and bloody warfare.
peace was restored briefly when the colonist john rolfe married pocahontas daughter of powhatan.
however problems arose soon after john smith returned to england in 1609.
desperate settlers cooked dogs cats snakes and toadstools to survive.
to keep warm they broke up houses to burn as firewood.
the colonists gradually learned to use the sources available in their environment to survive.
tobacco crops help jamestowns economy finally improved after 1612 when colonists began growing tobacco.
europeans had learned about tobacco from native americans.
king james called pipe smoking a vile custom still the new fad caught on quickly.
by 1620 england was importing more than 30 000 pounds of tobacco a year.
at last virginians had found a way to make their colony succeed.
english immigrants to virginia interacted with their environment by cutting down forests and planting the land with tobacco.
their interaction with the environment was different from that of other groups of immigrants to north america such as the dutch and the french whose trading activity led to the near elimination of beaver populations in some areas.
id identify what early difficulties did the jamestown colonists face.
v elps elps 1 c 1 read the entire text under this heading.
create a venn diagram to help you compare and contrast key words in the text.
2 2 the first french dutch and english colonies an improved form of government for a time the governors sent by the virginia company ran the colony like a military outpost.
each morning a drumbeat summoned settlers to work at assigned tasks.
harsh laws imposed the death penalty even for small offenses like stealing an ear of corn.
such conditions were unlikely to attract new colonists.
as john smith commented after his return to england no man will go to have less freedom there than here the house of burgesses to attract more settlers the virginia company took steps to establish a more stable government.
in 1619 it sent a new governor with orders to consult settlers on all important matters.
male settlers were allowed to elect burgesses or representatives to the government.
the burgesses met in an assembly called the house of burgesses.
together with the governor and his council they made laws for the colony.
the first session met in the jamestown church in july and august 1619.
in steamy weather the burgesses sat in the church pews while the governor and council took their places in the choir stalls.
the house of burgesses marked the beginning of representative government in the english colonies.
in a representative government voters elect representatives to make laws for them.
political rights and responsibilties the idea that people had political rights was deeply rooted in english history.
in 1215 english nobles had forced king john to sign the magna carta or great charter.
this document said that the king could not raise taxes without first consulting a great council of nobles and church leaders.
over time the rights won by nobles were extended to other people.
the great council grew into a representative assembly called parliament.
parliament was divided into the house of lords made up of nobles and an elected house of commons.
only rich men had the right to vote.
still the english had established the principle that even monarchs had to obey the law.
some virginia settlers can vote at first free virginians had even greater rights than citizens in england.
they did not have to own property in order to vote.
in 1670 however the colony restricted the vote to free white male property owners.
despite these limits representative government remained important.
the idea took root that settlers should have a say in the affairs of the colony.
colonists european colonization of north america 59 2 2 the first french dutch and english colonies the house of burgesses in jamestown virginia was the first elected legislative assembly in the english colonies.
infer how was government in the english colonies different from that in the spanish or french colonies.
came to refer to the virginia companys 1619 frame of government as their own great charter identify main ideas why was the house of burgesses created in virginia.
the jamestown colony grows during the early years of the jamestown colony only a few women chose to make the journey from england.
nor did enough workers come to raise tobacco and other crops.
women in jamestown the colonys first women arrived in 1608 a mistress forrest and her maid anne burras.
few others followed until 1619 when the virginia company sent about 100 women to help make the men more settled this shipload of women quickly found husbands.
the virginia company profited from the marriages because it charged each man who found a wife 150 pounds of tobacco.
life for women was a daily struggle.
women had to make everything from scratch food clothing even medicines.
many died young from hard work or childbirth.
by 1624 there were still fewer than 300 women in the jamestown colony compared to more than 1 000 men.
africans arrive in virginia enslaved africans were brought to virginia early on.
recently discovered records show that at least 15 black men and 17 black women were already living there by 1619.
that same year a dutch ship arrived with about 20 africans.
the dutch sold the africans to virginians who needed laborers to grow tobacco.
the colonists valued the agricultural skills that the africans brought with them.
from their perspective the arrival of africans meant the arrival of a labor force.
from the enslaved africans perspective this was a journey into a brutal life of forced labor.
about 300 africans lived in virginia by 1644.
some were slaves for life.
others worked as indentured servants or people who were pledged to work for a master for a period until they paid off the cost of their voyage and expected one day to own their own farms.
some africans did become free planters.
anthony johnson owned 250 acres of land and employed five servants to help him work it.
for a time free africans in virginia also had the right to vote.
these newcomers from africa helped colonial settlers origins estimated ethnicity of american colonies 1 in 2 english 1 in 5 african in io scotch irish 1 in 10 german 1 in 25 dutch to transform the environment of virginia by cutting down forests and planting tobacco fields.
bacons rebellion meanwhile english settlers continued to arrive in virginia attracted by the f promise of profits from tobacco.
wealthy planters however controlled the best lands near the coast.
many newcomers were indentured servants.
when they finished their period of service they looked for farmland.
because the best lands along the coast were taken these and other newcomers had to push farther j inland onto indian lands.
j as in new england conflicts over land led to fighting between some white settlers and indians.
after several bloody clashes settlers called on the governor to take action against native americans.
the governor refused.
he was unwilling to act in part because he profited from his own fur trade with indians.
frontier settlers were furious.
finally in 1676 nathaniel bacon an ambitious young planter organized angry men and women on the frontier including both black and white indentured servants.
he raided native american villages regardless of whether the indians there had been friendly to the colonists or not.
then he led his followers to jamestown and burned the capital.
estimated population in 1700 89 white 11 black e southfcrn white 81 non ii 6 e wilhr 93 7 98 i i 2 estimated population in 1770 78 white 21 black the uprising known as bacons rebellion lasted only a short time.
when bacon died suddenly the revolt fell apart.
the governor hanged 23 of bacons followers.
still he could not stop english settlers from moving onto indian lands along the frontier or the edge of the settlement.
wealthy virginians generally supported governor berkeley.
they were alarmed that black and white indentured servants had joined together in a rebellion.
in response virginia set up a system of laws replacing indentured servitude for africans with a condition of lifelong slavery that would be passed on to enslaved africans children.
as slavery expanded free african americans also lost rights.
by the early 1700s free african american property owners could no longer vote.
h identify supporting details why did many africans come to virginia.
assessment 1.
summarize what did john cabot giovanni da verrazano jacques cartier and henry hudson all have in common.
support ideas with evidence what evidence in this lesson supports the idea that native americans were not opposed to early interactions with french settlers.
support ideas with examples what examples can you give to show that contacts between european colonists and native americans had negative consequences.
governor william berkeley of virginia confronts a mob of angry colonists in jamestown during bacons rebellion.
interpret what attitude is the artist trying to convey through berkeleys posture and facial expression.
generate explanations why did the jamestown colony have so little food in its early years.
predict consequences what do you think happened after virginia law established lifelong enslavement for people of african origin.
southern vvliitc 59 black 41 wino 94 rut 6.
97 kkc 3 the population of the english colonies in america included a variety of european ethnic groups.
analyze charts what might account for the dramatic increase in the black population of the southern colonies between 1700 and 1775.
european colonization of north america 60 2 2 the first french dutch and english colonies european colonization of north america 61 2 2 the first french dutch and english colonies male passengers on the mayflower sign the mayflower compact which established a government for the colony at plymouth.
after two hard months at sea the colonists on board the small sailing ship were relieved to see the shores of new england.
still there were no european colonies for hundreds of miles.
interactive flipped video i.
a 1 c 2 a 3 b 3 c 10 a ii.
a 20 a 23 a 23 c 23 d objectives explain how the desire for religious freedom led to the settlement of the new england colonies.
identify the significance of the mayflower compact.
describe how conflicts over religion and politics were resolved in colonial new england.
identify reasons for conflict between settlers and native americans.
describe the daily life and the economy in the new england colonies.
key terms pilgrim sabbath established church persecution mayflower compact precedent thanksgiving puritans general court fundamental orders of connecticut religious tolerance town meeting pearson 1 realize the new england colonies seeking religious freedom one of the voyagers.
william bradford vividly remembered the situation being thus passed the vast ocean.
they had now no friends to welcome them nor inns to entertain or refresh their weatherbeaten bodies no houses or much less towns to repair to.
and for the season it was winter and they that know the winters of that country know them to be sharp and violent.
bradford of plymouth pldwmou unlike the jamestown colonists or the spanish these newcomers sought neither gold nor silver nor great riches.
what they wanted most was to practice their religion freely.
years later the founders of plymouth became known to history as the pilgrims.
access your digital lesson.
62 religion in europe it was not easy for people to practice religion freely in europe during the 1500s.
as you have read after the protestant reformation christians in western europe were divided into protestants and roman catholics.
this division led to fierce religious wars.
in france for example protestants and catholics fought each other for nearly 40 years.
thousands upon thousands of people were killed because of their religious beliefs.
most european rulers believed that they could not maintain order unless everyone followed the rulers religion.
the religion chosen by the ruler was known as the established church.
in england for example the established church was the anglican church or church of england.
in the 1530s parliament passed laws making the english monarch the head of the church of england.
in england and other nations people who did not follow the established religion were often persecuted.
persecution is the mistreatment or punishment of certain people because of their beliefs.
sometimes members of persecuted groups had to worship secretly.
if they were discovered they might be imprisoned or even executed by being burned at the stake.
the pilgrims one religious group in england that faced persecution were the people we now call the pilgrims.
at the time they were known as separatists.
they were called that because although they were protestant they wanted to separate from the church of england.
the english government bitterly opposed the separatists.
william bradford remembered what some separatists had suffered.
were hunted and persecuted on every side.
for some were taken and clapped up in prison others had their houses beset and watched night and day.
and the most were glad to flee and leave their houses.
william bradford of plymouin plantanon in the early 1600s a group of separatists left england for leyden a city in the netherlands.
the dutch allowed the newcomers to worship freely.
still the pilgrims missed their english way of life.
they were also worried that their children were growing up more dutch than english.
identify main ideas why did the pilgrims want to establish their own colony.
the pilgrims crossed the atlantic in search of religious freedom in ships such as this.
a quaker in england stands trial for violating the religious practices of the anglican church.
quakers were also persecuted in new england for their religious beliefs.
european colonization of north america 63 2 3 the new england colonies plymouth colony a group of separatists decided to return to england.
along with some other english people who were not separatists they won a charter to set up a colony in the northern part of virginia.
like the colonists who followed them the pilgrims enterprise was started and funded privately in the hopes that it would earn a profit.
in september 1620 more than 100 men women and children set sail aboard a small ship called the mayflower.
the journey was long and difficult.
at last in november 1620 the mayflower landed on the cold bleak shore of cape cod in present day massachusetts.
the passengers had planned to settle farther south along the hudson river but the difficult sea voyage exhausted them.
the colonists decided to travel no farther.
they called their new settlement plimoth or plymouth because the mayflower had sailed from the port of plymouth england.
a new pledge to govern the colony before going ashore the pilgrims realized that they would not be settling within the boundaries of virginia.
as a result the terms of their charter would not apply to their new colony.
in that case who would govern them.
the question was important because not all colonists on the mayflower were pilgrims.
some of these strangers as in november 1620 english separatists on the mayflower shown here arrived at present day massachusetts to start new lives free of religious oersecution.
pean colonization of north america the pilgrims called them said they were not bound to obey the pilgrims for none had power to command them in response the pilgrims joined together to write a framework for governing their colony on november 11 1620 the 41 adult male passengers both pilgrims j and non pilgrims signed the mayflower compact.
they pledged themselves to unite into a civil body politic or government.
they agreed to make and abide by laws that insured the general good of the colony the mayflower compact established an important tradition.
when the pilgrims found themselves without a government they banded together themselves to make laws.
in time they set up a government in which adult male colonists elected a governor and council.
thus like virginias great charter the mayflower compact strengthened the english tradition of governing through elected representatives.
these representatives were in turn expected to show the religious virtues that the pilgrims valued and to make decisions for the common good.
the colony at plymouth thought that this type of representative government rather than the monarchy that they knew in england would best protect their religious freedom.
religious motivation and religious freedom the i pilgrims were the first of many immigrants who came to north america in order to worship as they pleased.
that did not mean that religious freedom spread quickly through englands colonies.
many settlers who wished to worship as they pleased still believed that only their own religious beliefs should be observed.
most of the english colonies set up their own established churches.
1 still the pilgrims desire to worship freely set an important precedent or example for others to follow in the future.
in time the idea of religious freedom for all would become a cornerstone of american democracy.
0 describe what was the mayflower compact.
i elps 1 d 1 read the section titled a new pledge to govern the colony.
discuss why the mayflower compact is important.
when you cannot think of a word for an idea describe what you mean using other words or point to the part of the text that supports your idea.
elps overcoming hardships in plymouth the pilgrims built their settlement on the site of a native american village that had been abandoned because of disease.
the colonists even found baskets filled with corn that they were able to eat.
64 2 3 the new england colonies i a cold winter in plymouth however the corn was not enough to get the pilgrims through their first winter.
the pilgrims had failed to bring enough food with them and it was too late in the season to plant new crops.
the harsh season was also difficult to survive because the pilgrims had not had enough time to build proper shelters.
during the winter the men worked to build houses onshore while most spent nights aboard the mayflower.
nearly half the settlers had perished of disease or starvation by spring.
among those who died that winter was the colonys first governor.
william bradford was chosen to take his place.
bradfords able leadership helped the colony survive.
reelected many times he would lead plymouth for most of the next 36 years.
despite the great suffering of that winter the pilgrims religious faith remained strong.
they believed that it was gods will for them to remain in plymouth.
what could now sustain them wrote bradford but the spirit of god and his grace native americans offer assistance in the spring the pilgrims began to clear land and plant crops.
they also received help from neighboring native americans.
a pemaquid indian samoset had learned english from earlier explorers sailing along the coast.
he introduced the pilgrims to massasoit mas uh soit chief of the local wampanoag wahm puh noh ahg indians.
the wampanoag who helped the pilgrims most was named squanto.
as a young man squanto had been captured by an english expedition led by john smith.
squanto lived for a time in england where he learned to speak the language.
as a result he could communicate easily with the pilgrims.
squanto brought the pilgrims seeds of native plants corn beans and pumpkins and showed them how to plant them.
he also taught the settlers how to catch eels from nearby rivers.
by treading water he stirred up eels from the mud at the river bottom and then snatched them up with his hands.
the grateful pilgrims called squanto a special instrument sent of god in the fall the pilgrims had a very good harvest.
because they believed that god had given them this harvest they set aside a day for giving thanks.
in later years the pilgrims celebrated after each harvest season with a day of thanksgiving.
americans today celebrate thanksgiving as a national holiday.
identify supporting details how did native americans help the pilgrims.
european colonization of north america if 65 squanto teaches a group of pilgrims how to plant corn using dead fish as fertilizer.
forming massachusetts bay colony the migration to massachusetts bay during the 1630s was led by a religious group known as the puritans.
unlike the pilgrims the puritans did not want to separate entirely from the church of england.
instead they hoped to reform the church by introducing simpler forms of worship.
they wanted to do away with many practices inherited from the roman catholic church such as organ music finely decorated houses of worship and special clothing for priests.
reasons for immigration to massachusetts the puritans were a powerful group in england.
although some were small farmers many were well educated and successful merchants or landowners.
charles i who became king in 1625 disapproved of the puritans and their ideas.
he canceled puritan business charters and even had a few puritans jailed.
by 1629 some puritan leaders were convinced that england had fallen on evil and declining times they persuaded royal officials to grant them a charter to form the massachusetts bay company.
the companys bold plan was to build a new society based on biblical laws and teachings.
john winthrop a lawyer and a devout 2 3 the new england colonies puritan believed that the new colony would set an example to the world.
some settlers joined the massachusetts colonists for economic rather than religious reasons.
in wealthy english families the oldest son usually inherited his father s estate.
with little hope of owning land younger sons sought opportunity elsewhere.
they were attracted to massachusetts bay because it offered cheap land or a chance to start a business.
a greater say in government in 1629 the puritans sent a small advance party to north america.
john winthrop and a party of more than 1 000 arrived the following year.
winthrop was chosen as the first governor of the massachusetts bay colony.
once ashore winthrop set an example for others.
although he was governor he worked hard to build a home clear land and plant crops.
there was discontent among some colonists though.
under the charter only stockholders who had invested money in the massachusetts bay company had the right to vote.
most settlers however were not stockholders.
they resented taxes and laws passed by a government in which they had no say.
winthrop and other stockholders saw that the colony would run more smoothly if a greater number of settlers could take part.
at the same time puritan leaders the new england colonies ijwi this chart offers a snapshot of the people and economy of the new england colonies.
analyze graphs what does the graph of imports and exports tell you about the economy of the new england colonies during the 1700s.
exports imports 1630 agriculture 1623 1636 1636 wished to keep non puritans out of the government.
as a result they granted the right to vote for governor to all men who were church members.
later male church members also elected representatives to an assembly called the general court.
under the leadership of winthrop and other puritans the massachusetts bay colony prospered.
between 1629 and 1640 some 15 000 men women and children journeyed from england to massachusetts.
this movement of people is known as the great migration.
many of the newcomers settled in boston which grew into the colonys largest town.
j h check understanding why was the right to vote expanded in the massachusetts bay colony.
new colonies form over i religious differences the puritan leaders did not like anyone to question their religious beliefs or the way the colony was governed.
usually discontented colonists were forced to leave.
some colonists who left massachusetts founded other colonies in new england.
a new colony with limited government in may 1636 a puritan minister named thomas hooker led about 100 settlers out of massachusetts bay.
pushing west they drove their cattle goats and pigs along indian trails that cut through the forests.
when they reached the connecticut river they built a town which they called hartford.
hooker left massachusetts bay because he believed that the governor and other officials had too much power.
he wanted to set up a colony in connecticut with strict limits on government.
the settlers wrote a plan of government called the fundamental orders of connecticut in 1639 it created a government much like that of massachusetts which relied on the virtue of the people to obey the law and seek the common good.
there were however two important differences.
first the fundamental orders gave the vote to all men who were property owners including those who were not church members.
second the fundamental orders limited the governors power.
in this way the fundamental orders expanded the idea of representative government in the english colonies.
connecticut became a separate colony in 1662 with a new charter granted by the king of england.
by then 15 towns were thriving along the connecticut river.
a new relationship between religion and government another puritan who challenged the leaders of massachusetts bay was roger williams.
a young minister in the village of salem williams was gentle and good natured.
william bradford described him as zealous but very unsettled in judgment some puritan leaders probably agreed with this.
most people including governor winthrop liked him.
williamss ideas however alarmed puritan leaders.
williams believed that the puritan church in massachusetts had too much power.
in williamss view the business of church and state should be completely separate since concern with political affairs would corrupt the church.
the role of the state said williams was to maintain order and peace.
it should not support a particular church.
finally williams did not believe that the puritan leaders had the right to force people to attend religious services.
because of these political reasons williams sought to establish a new colony.
williams also believed in religious tolerance.
religious tolerance means a willingness to let others practice their own beliefs.
in puritan massachusetts non puritans were not allowed to worship freely.
puritan leaders viewed williams as a dangerous troublemaker.
in 1635 the general court ordered him to leave massachusetts.
fearing that the court thomas hooker and his followers congregate at the spot in the forest they have chosen for the new settlement of hartford in 1636.
interactive chart would send him back to england williams fled to narragansett bay where he spent the winter with indians.
in the spring of 1636 the indians sold him land for a settlement.
after a few years the settlement became the english colony of rhode island.
in rhode island williams put into practice his ideas about tolerance.
he allowed complete freedom of religion for all protestants jews and catholics.
he did not set up a state church or require settlers to attend church services.
he also gave all white men the right to vote.
before long settlers who disliked the strict puritan rule of massachusetts flocked to providence and other towns in rhode island.
the creation of a colony with freedom of religion thus offered a way to resolve conflicts between people from different religious groups.
a womans voice calls for religious freedom among those who fled to rhode island was anne hutchinson.
a devout puritan hutchinson regularly attended church services in boston where she first lived.
after church she and her friends gathered at her home to discuss the ministers sermon.
often she seemed to question some of the ministers teachings.
hutchinson was very persuasive and neighbors flocked to hear her.
opean colonization of north america 66 2 3 the new england colonies european colonization of north america 2 3 the new england colonies puritan leaders grew angry.
they believed that hutchinsons opinions were full of religious errors.
even worse they said a woman did not have the right to explain gods law.
in november 1637 hutchinson was ordered to appear before the massachusetts general court.
at her trial hutchinson answered the questions put to her by governor winthrop and other members of the court.
each time her answers revealed weaknesses in their arguments.
they could not prove that she had broken any puritan laws or that she had disobeyed any religious teachings.
then after two long days of hostile questioning hutchinson made a serious mistake.
she told the court that god spoke directly to her by the voice of his own spirit to my soul members of the court were shocked.
puritans believed that god spoke only through the bible not directly to individuals.
the court ordered her out of the colony.
in 1638 hutchinson along with her family and some friends went to rhode island.
the puritan leaders had won their case.
for later americans anne hutchinson was tried in puritan massachusetts for disagreeing with church teachings and forced to leave the colony.
analyze information why might the treatment of hutchinson be seen as a violation of human rights today.
however hutchinson became an important symbol of the struggle for religious freedom.
q check understanding what relationship did i roger williams want to see between government and religion.
i war erupts between puritans and native americans from massachusetts bay settlers fanned out across new england.
some built trading and fishing villages along the coast north of boston.
port towns with good harbors were ideal for the fishing industry and also lured trading ships building the areas economy.
in 1680 the king would make some of these coastal settlements into a separate colony called new hampshire.
mistrust and more settlers leads to conflict the i first meetings between english settlers and native j americans did not foreshadow the conflict that would j eventually occur between them.
some colonial leaders such as roger williams tried to treat native americans fairly.
as more colonists settled in new england they began to take over more native american lands.
by 1670 nearly 45 000 english settlers were living in the towns in new england.
land was a resource but as more people lived in the region it became increasingly scarce.
fighting soon broke out between white settlers and indian nations of the region.
king phillips war the largest conflict came in 1675.
metacom also known by his english name king phillip was chief of the wampanoag indians.
he watched for years as english towns were built on wampanoag lands.
i am resolved not to see the day when i have no i country he told an english friend.
metacoms people attacked villages throughout new england.
other indian groups from rhode island to maine soon allied themselves with the wampanoags.
they were determined to drive the english settlers off their land.
metacom and his allies destroyed 12 towns and killed more than 600 european settlers.
after more than a year of fighting however metacom was captured and killed.
the english sold his family and about 1 000 other indians into slavery in the west indies.
other indians were forced from their homelands.
the pattern of english expansion followed by war was repeated between colonists and indians the new england colonies key ml new england colonies 23 area claimed by new york and new hampshire newport rhode island most of new englands major towns were located on harbors along the coast.
analyze maps what does this location suggest about their economies.
100 mi 0 100 km lambert conformal conic projection interactive map lake ontario throughout the colonies.
it would continue for many years to come.
fel identify what was a significant cause of king phillips war.
the towns of new england puritans believed that people should worship and tend to local matters as a community.
as a result new england became a land of tightly knit towns.
at the center of many towns was the common an open field where cattle grazed.
nearby stood the meetinghouse where puritans worshiped and held town meetings.
religious practice the puritans took their sabbath or holy day of religious observance and rest very seriously.
on sundays no one was allowed to play games or visit taverns to joke talk and drink.
the law required all citizens to attend sunday church services which would last all day.
during the 1600s women sat on one side of the church and men on the other.
blacks and indians stood in a balcony at the back.
children had separate pews where an adult watched over them.
the importance of local government at town meetings which were normally held in meeting houses where the settlers worshipped settlers discussed and voted on many issues.
what roads should be built.
how much should the schoolmaster be paid.
town meetings gave new englanders a chance to speak their minds.
puritan congregations also discussed and voted on church issues.
they chose their own ministers and members and answered to no other authority.
these early experiences encouraged the growth of democratic ideas in new england.
values such as self government individual choice and the common good took root and thrived.
still puritan laws were strict.
about 15 crimes carried the death penalty.
one crime punishable by death was witchcraft.
in 1692 puritans in salem village executed 20 innocent men and women as witches.
the environment influences economic activity new england was a difficult land for colonists.
the rocky soil was poor for farming and required much labor.
after a time however native americans taught english settlers how to grow many crops such as indian corn pumpkins squash and beans.
still some communities relocated to take advantage of better lands.
in the mid 1630s cattle and dairy farmers who had settled in dorchester massachusetts moved to the connecticut river valley.
the rich river valley at european colonization of north america 68 2 3 the new england colonies european colonization of north america 69 2 3 the new england colonies this image shows whalers capturing a whale.
whaling grew into a big business in new england in the 1700s.
oil for lamps and other products.
in the 1700s and 1800s whaling grew into a big business.
puritan communities and their governments often supported the development of important industries such as shipbuilding and ironworking.
they found ways to work together for long term goals that might benefit the general population.
for example sometimes they limited the sale of wood to make more available to shipbuilders.
the puritans leave a lasting legacy during the 1700s the puritan tradition declined.
fewer families left england for religious reasons.
ministers had less influence on the way colonies were governed.
nevertheless the puritans had stamped new england with their distinctive customs and their ideal of a religious society.
the ideas of pilgrims and puritans their virtues of hard work and thrift their high regard for education and their contributions to democratic thought still influence american values and american identity today.
b identify supporting details what values did puritans associate with town meetings.
by 1700 england had four colonies in the region just south of new england.
these colonies became known as the middle colonies because they were located between new england and the southern colonies.
the middle colonies had a greater mix of people than either new england or the southern colonies.
interactive flipped video assessment windsor connecticut provided lush meadows and pastures better suited to their cattle than the sandy soils and rocky hills of dorchester.
although much of the soil was poor the forests were full of riches.
settlers hunted wild turkey and deer.
settlers also cut down trees floating them down rivers to sawmills near seaports such as boston massachusetts or portsmouth new hampshire.
with miles of coastline and nearby raw materials these and other new england towns grew into major shipbuilding centers.
because abundant timber meant that ships could be built more cheaply in new england than in england new england sold many ships to english buyers.
new englands wooden ships and boats were used by a thriving fishing industry and for overseas trade.
new englanders fished for cod and halibut.
in the 1600s people began to hunt whales.
whales supplied 1.
identify central issues why did settling in plymouth in late 1620 pose significant problems for the pilgrims.
compare and contrast the pilgrims and the puritans.
support ideas with examples what examples from the text show that colonists adapted their local economy to the environment in which they lived.
identify cause and effect what effect did population growth have on the conflict between colonists and native americans.
cite evidence to support the claim that the new england colonies promoted the ideals of democracy and self government.
the middle colonies 2 b 14 b 20 a 23 a 23 d a dutch colony becomes english each of the colonies along the atlantic coast had been established by different people for different purposes.
sometimes colonies were formed to escape political oppression or social tensions back home in europe.
the new england colonies served as a refuge for people who faced religious persecution.
many were also created to profit a european company across the ocean as many colonies to the south were.
in the case of new netherland however the conditions back home for the dutch were stable and fairly prosperous.
new netherland was founded simply to take advantage of economic opportunities in north america.
new amsterdam the dutch set up the colony of new netherland along the hudson river.
they developed the fur trade and built settlements where fur bearing animals were abundant.
in the colonys early years settlers traded with indians and built the settlement of new amsterdam into a thriving port.
located near good farmland and with a safe harbor for ships new amsterdam quickly became a center for commerce and trading valuable beaver skins.
although less interested in farming dutch officials did promote agriculture by granting some large parcels of land to a few rich families.
a single land grant could stretch for miles.
indeed one grant was as big as rhode island.
owners of these huge estates were objectives explain the reasons for the establishment of the colonies of new york and new jersey.
explain the reasons for the establishment of the colonies of pennsylvania and delaware.
describe the economy of the middle colonies including the relationship between the economy and the physical environment.
key terms patroon proprietary colony royal colony quakers pennsylvania dutch cash crop william penn pearson 1 realize access your digital lesson.
european colonization of north america 70 2 3 the new england colonies 71 called patroons.
in return for the grant each patroon promised to settle at least 50 european farm families on the land.
few farmers wanted to work for the patroons however.
patroons had great power and could charge whatever rents they pleased.
england gains control many settlers lived in the trading center of new amsterdam which by 1664 had a population of about 1 500 people.
they came from all over europe.
most of them came for the economic opportunities working as merchants or farmers or in trades and crafts.
many were also attracted by the chance to practice their religion freely.
african slaves were in demand as well.
in the early years they made up more than a quarter of the population of the town.
dutch colonists were mainly protestants who belonged to the dutch reformed church.
still they permitted members of other religions and ethnic groups including roman catholics french protestants and jews to buy land.
people do not seem concerned what religion their neighbor is wrote a shocked visitor from virginia.
indeed they do not seem to care if he has any religion at all in fact peter stuyvesant sty vuh sunt the governor of new netherland had been ordered not to interfere with other religions as long as they did not disturb the peace or restrict commerce.
ample farmland and fertile soil form the backdrop to the first quaker meetinghouse built in burlington new jersey in 1683.
the relationship between the english and the dutch was complicated by their common interest in creating new colonies and expanding trade.
in north america the dutch wanted to continue benefiting from new amsterdams economic growth.
however the english r wanted new amsterdam for themselves.
by 1664 the rivalry between england and the netherlands for trade and colonies was at its height.
in august of that year english warships entered new amsterdams harbor.
governor stuyvesant swore to defend the city.
however he had few weapons and.
little gunpowder.
also stuyvesant had made himself j so unpopular with his harsh rule and heavy taxes that the colonists refused to help him.
in the end he surrendered without firing a shot.
king charles ii of england then gave new netherland to his brother the duke of york.
he renamed the colony new york in the dukes honor.
u describe why did many people come to new amsterdam.
new jersey forms out of new york at the time of the english takeover new york stretched as far south as the delaware river.
the duke of york decided that the colony was too big to govern easily.
he gave some of the land to friends lord berkeley and sir george carteret.
they set up a proprietary proh pry uh tehr ee colony which they called new jersey in 1664.
a proprietary colony and free enterprise in setting up a proprietary colony the king gave land to one or more people in return for a yearly payment.
these proprietors were free to divide the land and rent it to others.
they made laws for the colony but had to respect the rights of colonists under english law.
this new system of colonization was different from most that had come before.
proprietary colonies placed vast lands and power in the hands of a few men loyal to the monarch.
earlier colonies had been financed by stock companies made up of a number of investors.
like new york new jersey had fertile farmland and a wealth of other resources that attracted people from many lands.
thousands of european settlers immigrated to new jersey as a haven from war and poverty.
settlers came from finland ireland scotland germany and sweden.
there were also english and dutch settlers who moved there from the colony of new york.
in addition some new england colonists hoping to find better farmland chose to relocate to new jersey.
the proprietors of the new jersey encouraged the free enterprise system which meant that government played a limited role in the economy.
the free enterprise system benefited colonists.
they could farm or run businesses without much control by the local government.
facing financial losses themselves however the proprietors eventually returned the colony of new jersey to the english crown.
a royal colony in 1702 new jersey became a royal colony which is a colony under the direct control of the english king or queen.
the colonys royal charter protected religious freedom and the rights of an assembly that voted on local matters.
this charter could be viewed as a legal agreement between the monarch and settlers binding to both.
it was a step toward a more democratic form of government.
despite these improvements direct english rule tended to be harsh toward colonists.
new jerseys independent minded settlers struggled to gain more influence over decisions that affected them.
h define what was a proprietary colony.
pennsylvania becomes a colony west of new jersey william penn founded the colony of pennsylvania in 1681.
penn came from a wealthy english family and was a personal friend of king charles ii.
at age 22 however penn shocked family and friends by joining the quakers one of the most despised religious groups in england.
the quakers seek religious freedom like pilgrims and puritans quakers were protestant reformers.
their reforms went further than those of other groups however.
quakers believed that all people men and women nobles and commoners were equal in gods sight.
they allowed women to preach in public and refused to bow or remove their hats in the presence of nobles.
quakers spoke out against all war and refused to serve in the army.
to most english people quaker beliefs seemed wicked.
in both england and new england quakers were arrested fined or even hanged for their ideas.
penn became convinced that the quakers must leave england.
he took steps to found a new colony.
together with others penn purchased parts of new jersey from their proprietors.
then he turned to the king for help.
charles ii issued a royal charter naming penn proprietor of a large tract of land in north america.
the european colonization of north america 73 king named the new colony pennsylvania or penns woodlands.
during his time as proprietor penn took steps that aided the development of self government in pennsylvania.
he proposed a constitution and a general assembly.
later he agreed to changes in the constitution and greater powers for the colonial assembly.
showing fairness to all penn thought of his colony as a holy experiment he wanted it to be a model of religious freedom peace and christian living.
protestants catholics and jews went to pennsylvania to escape persecution.
later english officials forced penn to turn away catholic and jewish settlers.
penns quaker beliefs led him to speak out for fair treatment of native americans.
penn believed that the land in north america belonged to the indians.
he insisted that settlers should pay for the land.
native americans respected him for this policy.
as a result pennsylvania colonists enjoyed many years of peace with their indian neighbors.
one settler remarked as penn treated the indians with extraordinary humanity they became civil and loving to us pennsylvania expands penn sent pamphlets describing his colony all over europe.
soon settlers from england scotland wales the netherlands 2 4 the middle colonies lropean colonization of north america 72 2 4 the middle colonies france and germany began to cross the atlantic ocean to pennsylvania.
among the new arrivals were large numbers of german speaking protestants.
they became known as pennsylvania dutch because people could not pronounce the word deutsch doich which means german.
many pennsylvania dutch had faced religious persecution in europe including the amish and mennonites.
because of their experiences in europe these german speaking people were naturally attracted to the ideals of penns colony in which people of different ethnicities and religions could live peaceably together.
the ethnic diversity of pennsylvania contributed to a developing american identity based on ethnic diversity.
pennsylvania like most other colonies was created for a mix of political economic religious and social reasons.
pennsylvania was like the new england colonies in the religious reasons for its creation.
like new york its political roots lay in a proprietors ties to the king.
pennsylvanias social goals of harmony among different groups were similar to those of rhode island.
like most proprietors penn hoped to profit from his colony.
enslaved africans were also brought to the growing pennsylvania colony.
they made up about one third settlers in the middle colonies altered the land to suit their physical and economic needs chopping trees to build homes and plowing fields to farm.
of north america of all new arrivals between 1730 and 1750.
enslaved africans were present in new york new jersey and the new england colonies as well but in smaller numbers than in the southern colonies.
because of philadelphia s location along the delaware river many worked as laborers in manufacturing and shipbuilding.
delaware is born for a time pennsylvania included some lands along the lower delaware river.
the region was known as pennsylvanias lower counties.
later in 1704 the lower counties would break away to form the colony of delaware.
b identify central ideas why did quakers want to establish their own colony.
daily life in the middle colonies the majority of colonists made their living by farming.
farmers found more favorable conditions in the middle colonies than in new england.
the broad hudson and delaware river valleys were rich and fertile.
winters were milder than in new england and the growing season lasted longer.
a thriving economy on such promising land farmers in the eastern counties of the middle colonies cleared their fields.
they mostly chose to raise wheat barley and rye as a way to earn money.
wheat barley and rye were cash crops or crops that were sold for money on the market and not consumed by the farmers family in fact the middle colonies exported so much grain that they became known as the breadbasket colonies.
the pennsylvania dutch tended to settle the fertile interior lands.
they altered the environment by clearing land and starting farms turning these regions into rich fields that are still productive today.
farmers of the middle colonies also raised herds of cattle and pigs.
every year they sent tons of beef pork and butter to the ports of new york and philadelphia.
from there the goods went by ship to new england and the south or to the west indies england and other parts of europe.
farms in the middle colonies were generally larger than those in new england.
landowners hired workers to help with the planting harvesting and other tasks.
enslaved african americans worked on a few large farms.
however most workers were farmhands who worked alongside the families that owned the land.
aside from farmers there were also skilled artisans in the middle colonies.
encouraged by william penn skilled german crafts workers set up shop in 74 2 4 the middle colonies comparing the new england and middle colonies new england middle colonies main reason for settlement business and trade agriculture ethnic diversity settlement structure culture and society avoid religious persecution shipbuilding shipping fishing forestry mostly limited to the needs of the colonies mainly english close knit towns religious uniformity small family farms and businesses with few servants or slaves economic gain agriculture skilled trades shipping fertile farmland produced export crops english dutch german and scotch irish more scattered settlements ethnic and religious diversity larger farms and businesses need indentured servants religious economic geographic and ethnic differences distinguished the middle colonies from new england.
analyze charts which colonial region would you rather live in.
pennsylvania.
in time the colony became a center of manufacturing and crafts.
one visitor reported that workshops turned out hardware clocks watches locks guns flints glass stoneware nails and paper settlers in the delaware river valley profited from the regions rich deposits of iron ore.
heating the ore in furnaces they purified it and then hammered it into nails tools and parts for guns.
home life because houses tended to be far apart in the middle colonies towns were less important than in new england.
counties rather than villages became centers of local government.
the different groups who settled the middle colonies had their own favorite ways of building.
swedish settlers introduced log cabins to the americas.
the dutch used red bricks to build narrow high walled houses.
german settlers developed a wood burning stove that heated a home better than a fireplace which sent heat up the chimney and pulled cold air in through cracks in the walls.
everyone in a household had a job to do.
households were largely self sufficient which meant that most things needed for survival food clothing soap candles and many other goods were made at home.
as one farmer said nothing to wear eat or drink was purchased as my farm provided all expanding beyond philadelphia in the 1700s thousands of german and scotch irish settlers arrived in philadelphia.
from there many traveled west into the backcountry the area of land along the eastern slopes of the appalachian mountains.
settlers followed an old indian trail that became known as the great wagon road.
although settlers planned to follow farming methods they had used in europe they found the challenge of farming the backcountry more difficult than they had thought it would be.
to farm the backcountry settlers had to clear thick forests.
from indians settlers learned how to use knots from pine trees as candles to light their homes.
they made wooden dishes from logs gathered honey from hollows in trees and hunted wild animals for food.
german gunsmiths developed a lightweight rifle for use in forests.
sharpshooters boasted that the pennsylvania rifle could hit a rattlesnake between the eyes at 100 yards.
many of the settlers who arrived in the backcountry moved onto indian lands.
the indians.
are alarmed at the swarm of strangers one pennsylvania official reported.
we are afraid of a fight between them for the colonists are very rough to them however officials did not step in to protect indian rights.
on more than european colonization of north america 75 2 4 the middle colonies one occasion disputes between settlers and indians resulted in violence.
id identify main ideas why was so much of the middle colonies economy based on farming.
assessment 1.
analyze information how did dutch policies in new netherland undermine support for dutch rule.
compare and contrast new jersey as a proprietary colony and as a royal colony.
apply concepts what did the term free enterprise system mean in new jersey while it was a proprietary colony.
cite evidence that william penns quaker beliefs were heartfelt and solid.
apply concepts how did the free enterprise system encourage the cultivation of cash crops in the middle colonies.
in 1632 sir george calvert persuaded king charles i to grant him land for a colony in the americas calvert had ruined his career in protestant england by becoming a roman catholic.
now he planned to build a colony where catholics could practice their religion freely.
the settlement of charleston was established where two rivers met the atlantic ocean.
interactive flipped video the southern colonies lord baltimores colony he named the colony maryland in honor of queen henrietta maria the kings wife.
calvert died before his colony could get underway.
his son cecil lord baltimore pushed on with the project.
settlers come to maryland in the spring of 1634 about 200 colonists landed along the upper chesapeake bay across the potomac river from englands first southern colony virginia.
maryland was truly a land of plenty.
chesapeake bay was full of fish oysters and crabs.
across the bay virginians were already growing tobacco for profit.
marylands new settlers hoped to do the same.
remembering the early problems at jamestown the newcomers avoided the swampy lowlands.
they built their first town st marys in a drier location.
as proprietor of the colony lord baltimore owned maryland.
it was his responsibility not that of a company to start the colony.
he used private funds to do it.
he appointed a governor and a council of advisers.
he gave colonists a role in government by creating an elected assembly.
at first settlers had to pay rent to lord baltimore.
few settlers came to maryland because most wanted to own their 2 b 11 a 11 c 12 b 12 d 23 a objectives explain the reasons for the establishment of maryland.
explain the reasons for the establishment of the carolinas and georgia.
describe the relationship between different environments different settlement patterns and different economic systems in the southern colonies.
explain the development of the slave trade and the spread of slavery in the southern colonies.
key terms act of toleration indigo debtor slave codes racism access your digital lesson.
european colonization of north america 76 2 4 the middle colonies 77 land.
eager to attract settlers lord baltimore decided to make generous land grants to anyone who brought over servants women and children.
later he offered smaller farms as well as great estates to attract more settlers.
a few women took advantage of lord baltimore s offer of land.
two sisters margaret and mary brent arrived in maryland in 1638 with nine male servants.
in time they set up two plantations of about 1 000 acres each.
later margaret brent helped prevent a rebellion among the governors soldiers.
the maryland assembly praised her efforts saying that the colonys safety at any time was better in her hands than in any mans acceptance of other religions to make sure maryland continued to grow lord baltimore welcomed protestants as well as catholics to the colony.
later lord baltimore came to fear that protestants might try to deprive catholics of their right to worship freely.
in 1649 he asked the assembly to pass an act of toleration.
the law provided religious freedom for all christians.
as in many colonies this freedom did not extend to jews.
b identify how did lord baltimore found the maryland colony.
st marys city was the first town built in maryland.
settlement in the carolinas and georgia south of virginia and maryland english colonists settled in a region that they called the carolinas.
in 1663 a group of eight english nobles received a grant of land from king charles ii.
settlement took place in two separate areas one in the north and the other in the south.
the carolinas develop differently in the northern i part of the carolinas settlers were mostly poor tobacco farmers who had spread south from virginia.
they tended to have small farms.
eventually in 1712 the colony became known as north carolina.
farther south the group of eight english nobles set up a larger colony.
the largest settlement charles town sprang up where the ashley and cooper rivers met the atlantic ocean.
later charles towns name was shortened to charleston.
this colony became known as south carolina in 1719.
most early settlers in charleston were english people who had been living in barbados a british colony in the caribbean.
later other immigrants arrived including germans swiss french protestants and spanish jews.
around 1685 a few planters discovered that rice grew well in the swampy lowlands along the coast.
however they were unable to grow rich crops until africans from rice growing areas of africa arrived in the colony.
before long carolina rice was a profitable crop traded around the world.
settlers farther inland in south carolina later learned to raise indigo a plant used to make a valuable blue dye.
georgia offers a second chance the last of englands southern colonies was carved out of the southern part of south carolina.
james oglethorpe a respected english soldier and energetic social reformer helped to found georgia in 1732.
he and the other trustees started and funded the colony privately.
they hoped it would solve an english social problem as well as defend the english colonies to the north from spanish florida to the south.
oglethorpe wanted the new colony to be a place where debtors or people who owed money they could not pay back could make a fresh start.
penn had established pennsylvania as a refuge for people of different religions.
similarly oglethorpe established georgia mainly for social reasons as a refuge for debtors.
under english law the government could imprison debtors until they paid what they owed.
if they ever got out of jail debtors often had no money and no place to live.
oglethorpe offered to pay for debtors and other poor people to travel to georgia.
in america he said there are enough fertile lands to feed all the poor of england in 1733 oglethorpe and 120 colonists built the colonys first settlement at savannah along the savannah river.
oglethorpe set strict rules for the colony.
farms could be no bigger than 500 acres and slavery was forbidden.
at first georgia grew slowly.
later however oglethorpe changed the rules to allow large plantations and slave labor.
after that the colony grew more quickly.
h check understanding why did south carolinas economy come to depend on rice crops.
two regions develop differently the plantation system developed in the southern colonies because of the headright.
the headright was a grant of land for each settler who came to a colony or for the person who paid to bring a settler.
wealthy settlers saw a chance to gain even more wealth by paying for farm workers and thus gaining ownership of large amounts of fertile coastal farmland.
although the plantation system developed first in virginia south carolina planters turned to it as well.
they wanted large numbers of workers for rice plantations.
few white settlers were willing to work in rice paddies.
as in virginia planters turned to africa for slave labor.
by 1700 most people coming to charleston were african men and women brought against their will.
each time a planter bought an enslaved african the planter gained more land.
this system led to the expansion of slavery across the south.
tidewater plantations on the coast the southern colonies enjoyed warmer weather and a longer growing season than the colonies to the north.
parts of virginia maryland and north carolina near the coast all became major tobacco growing areas.
settlers in lowland south carolina and georgia raised rice indigo and cotton.
in these regions physical characteristics of the environment such as flat landscapes and fertile soils resulted in a relatively dense population during the 1600s and 1700s.
colonists soon found that it was most profitable to raise tobacco and rice on large plantations.
as you recall a plantation is a large estate farmed by many workers.
the earliest planters settled along rivers and creeks of the coastal plain.
because these rivers and enslaved africans such as these unloading rice barges made up the largest racial group in south carolina.
interactive illustration creeks rose and fell with ocean tides the region was known as the tidewater.
the tidewaters gentle slopes and rivers offered rich farmland for plantations.
farther inland planters settled along rivers.
rivers provided an easy way to move goods to market.
planters loaded crops onto ships bound for the west indies and europe.
on the return trip the ships carried english manufactured goods and other luxuries for planters and their families.
most tidewater plantations had their own docks along the river and merchant ships picked up crops and delivered goods directly to them.
for this reason few large seaport cities developed in the southern colonies.
large tidewater plantations often consisted of brick or framed mansions with nearby storehouses and quarters for enslaved workers.
the mansions overlooked fields or paddies and often the nearest river.
on these southern plantations anywhere from 20 to 100 enslaved africans and african americans did most of the work.
most of these enslaved workers worked in the fields.
others were skilled workers such as carpenters barrel makers or blacksmiths.
still other enslaved africans and african americans worked in the main house as cooks servants or housekeepers.
only a small percentage of white southerners owned large plantations.
yet planters set the style of southern european colonization of north america 78 2 5 the southern colonies is european colonization of north america 2 5 the southern colonies living.
life centered around the planters house or the great house.
there the planters family lived in elegant quarters including a parlor for visitors a dining room and guest bedrooms.
during the growing season planters decided which fields to plant what crops to grow and when to harvest the crops.
planters wives kept the household running smoothly.
they directed enslaved cooks maids and butlers in the house and made sure daily tasks were done such as milking cows.
in contrast to the lives of the planters enslaved workers faced daily hardship.
they were impoverished and denied basic rights.
their diets were often inadequate for the work they did.
their dwellings were rough and open to the weather.
they faced diseases and other dangers.
yet enslaved africans played a crucial role on plantations.
they used farming skills they had brought from west africa.
with their help english settlers learned how to grow rice.
africans also knew how to use wild plants unfamiliar to the english.
they made water buckets out of gourds and they used palmetto leaves to make fans brooms and baskets.
the backcountry farther inland west of the tidewater life and the local economy was very this print shows a southern plantation during the 1700s with enslaved workers assisting the lady of the house.
here at the base of the appalachians rolling hills and thick forests covered the land.
these physical characteristics of the environment would in turn influence population distribution settlement patterns and economic activity in the region during the 1600s and 1700s.
as in the middle colonies this inland area was called the backcountry.
attracted by rich soil settlers followed the great wagon road into the backcountry of maryland virginia and the carolinas.
among the settlers who moved into the backcountry were scotch irish and germans including german moravians.
the scotch irish tended to be presbyterian farmers and craftspeople.
many were escaping famine and harsh treatment under english rule in northern ireland or were the children of such immigrants.
they built churches and started schools in their backcountry settlements.
these immigrant groups transformed the environment by clearing the forests and creating fields where they grew crops such as wheat and fields and pens where they raised cattle and pigs.
the german immigrants to the backcountry mostly lutherans sought good land at low cost.
they often settled together in the same areas speaking german and retaining german culture.
the german moravians were members of a protestant group that sought to convert indians to christianity.
they allowed women to preach and were pacifists.
the moravians kept careful records of backcountry life including everything from the weather to fashions that historians still use today.
the backcountry was more democratic than the tidewater.
settlers there were more likely to treat one another as equals.
men tended smaller fields of tobacco or garden crops such as beans corn or peas.
they also hunted game.
the distance of the backcountry from the coastline made trade difficult and prevented the development of a plantation economy.
instead backcountry farmers had to be mostly self sufficient.
surplus goods were sold at local markets.
women cooked meals and fashioned simple rugged clothing out of wool or deerskins.
another major difference between the backcountry and the tidewater was slavery.
farms were smaller in the backcountry in part because of the hills and thick forests.
fewer enslaved africans worked on these smaller farms and most people were of european descent.
the hardships of backcountry life brought settlers closer together.
families gathered to husk corn or help one another build barns.
clustered in fertile valleys along the edge of the appalachians these hardy settlers felled trees and grew crops.
by changing the european colonization of north america 2 5 the southern colonies environment for the better they in turn encouraged further economic development in the region.
b identify supporting details why was there less slavery in the backcountry than the tidewater region.
debs elps 3 h 3 read the section titled tidewater plantations on the coast.
describe the plantations to a partner using as much detail as possible.
the slave trade expands in the early years africans in the english colonies included free people and indentured servants as well as enslaved persons.
during the 1600s even africans who were enslaved enjoyed some privileges.
the first enslaved africans arrived in virginia in 1619.
for the next fifty years since the african population was small the status of africans in the colony was not clearly established.
some enslaved africans purchased their freedom.
several africans during the 1600s such as anthony johnson became successful property owners.
in south carolina some enslaved africans worked without supervision as cowboys herding cattle to market.
by 1700 plantations in the southern colonies had come to rely heavily on slave labor.
eventually enslaved africans made up the majority of the population in south carolina and georgia.
they cleared the land worked the crops and tended the livestock.
in order to maintain the supply of enslaved africans southern planters relied on a system of slave trading that stretched halfway across the globe.
africans are enslaved in africa as you have learned as elsewhere around the world slavery had been part of the social and economic system since ancient times.
usually slaves were people who had been captured in war.
muslim merchants sometimes brought enslaved africans into europe and the middle east.
over a period of about 300 years as the transatlantic slave trade grew millions of africans were enslaved.
slave traders from european nations set up posts along the west african coast.
they offered guns and other goods in exchange for enslaved africans.
as the demand for cheap labor increased africans who lived along the coast made raids into the interior seeking captives to sell to the europeans.
they marched their captives to the coast.
there the africans were loaded aboard european ships headed for forced immigration to the americas.
planters in the southern colonies relied on the slave trade to maintain a supply of plantation labor.
summarize how does this poster present enslaved africans.
sailing across the middle passage in the 1700s english sailors began referring to the passage of slave trading ships west across the atlantic ocean as the middle passage.
below the decks of these ships enslaved africans were often crammed tightly together on shelves.
one observer noted that they were chained to each other hand and foot and stowed so close that they were not allowed above a foot and a half for each in breadth the captives were allowed above deck to eat and exercise in the fresh air only once or twice a day.
many enslaved africans resisted but only a few escaped.
some fought for their freedom during the trip.
they would stage a mutiny or revolt.
the slave traders lived in fear of this and were heavily armed.
other slaves resisted by refusing to eat or by committing suicide by jumping overboard to avoid a life of enslavement.
records of slave trading ships show that about 10 percent of africans loaded aboard a ship for passage to the americas died during the voyage.
many died of illnesses that spread rapidly in the filthy crowded conditions inside a ship s hold.
others died of mistreatment.
this slave trade lasted about 300 years.
during that time it may have caused the deaths of as many as 2 to 3 million africans.
european colonization of north america 81 2 5 the southern colonies economics of the colonial regions 13 wood products exports 1 7 indigo new england middle southern i e38 physical wealth 51 137 for the most part colonists enjoyed more social equality than people in england where a persons opportunities in life were largely determined by birth.
still class differences existed.
like europeans colonial americans thought it was only natural that some people rank more highly than others.
a persons birth and wealth still determined his or her social status.
the economies of the three colonial regions depended on different resources.
analyze charts what two resources did the southern colonies possess in great abundance that increased their wealth over that of the new england and middle colonies.
human rights are often ignored as the importance of slavery increased during the 1600s and particularly after bacons rebellion in virginia greater limits were placed on the rights of enslaved africans and african americans.
colonists passed laws that set out rules for slaves behavior and denied enslaved people basic human rights.
these slave codes treated enslaved africans and african americans not as human beings but as property.
most english colonists did not question the justice of owning enslaved africans.
they believed that black africans as a racial group were inferior to white europeans.
the belief that one race is superior to another is called racism.
some colonists believed that they were helping enslaved africans by teaching them christianity.
a handful of colonists spoke out against the evils of slavery.
in 1688 quakers in germantown pennsylvania became the first group of colonists to call for an end to slavery.
u check understanding why did many colonists believe there was nothing wrong with slavery.
assessment 1.
contrast the ownership of the colony of maryland with the ownership of colonies that were founded earlier.
cite evidence what evidence supports the claim that the planters in the southern carolinas could not make rice a profitable crop on their own.
analyze information how did oglethorpes idea to found georgia help solve a social problem in england.
generate explanations why was south carolina the only english colony in 1700 where the majority of the population was made up of enslaved africans.
summarize what the middle passage was like for most enslaved africans.
colonial society society in colonial times the upper and middle social classes at the top of society stood the gentry.
the gentry included wealthy planters merchants ministers successful lawyers and royal officials.
they could afford to dress in the latest fashions from london.
below the gentry were the middle class.
the middle class included farmers who worked their own land skilled craft workers and some tradespeople.
nearly three quarters of all white colonists belonged to the middle class.
they prospered because land in the colonies was plentiful and easy to buy and because skilled work was in high demand and paid relatively well.
the lower social classes the lowest social class included hired farmhands indentured servants and enslaved africans and african americans.
indentured servants signed contracts to work without wages for a period of four to seven years for anyone who would pay their ocean passage to the americas.
when their term of service was completed indentured servants received freedom dues a set of clothes tools and 50 acres of land.
because there were so few european women in the colonies female indentured servants often shortened their terms of service by marrying.
1 a 25 b 26 b 28 a objectives outline the structure of colonial society.
describe colonial art music and literature and the impact of ideas on colonial society.
describe the causes of the great awakening and its effects on colonial society.
explain the growth of educational institutions.
key terms gentry middle class gullah great awakening apprentice dame school enlightenment libel access your digital lesson.
european colonization of north america 82 2 5 the southern colonies 83 most colonists lived and worked on small family farms.
in colonial cities and towns men and women often worked together as in this silk workshop in jamestown virginia.
draw conclusions what does this illustration suggest about the colonists desire to succeed.
interactive gallery thousands of men women and children came to north america as indentured servants.
after completing their terms some became successful and rose into the middle class.
i working life in the countryside from new hampshire to georgia most colonists survived by farming.
men worked long hours planting crops tending the fields and raising livestock pigs cows and other farm animals.
anything beyond what the family needed to live was taken to markets to sell.
families also traded crops and livestock with their neighbors for additional goods.
while men typically did much of the agricultural work women often worked within the home.
they worked hard taking care of the household and the family.
by the kitchen fire they cooked the family s meals.
they milked cows tended chickens and a vegetable garden watched the children cleaned did laundry by hand and made candles cheese and i clothes.
life was different in the backcountry out beyond more settled lands.
life was difficult and wives and husbands often worked side by side in the fields at harvest time.
with so much to be done no one worried whether harvesting was proper womans work one surprised visitor described a backcountry woman s activities she will carry a gunn in the woods and kill deer turkeys c shoot down wild cattle catch and tye hoggs knock down cattle with an ax and perform the most manfull exercises as well as most men working life in cities in cities women sometimes worked outside the home.
a young single woman from a poorer family might work for one of the gentry as a maid a cook or a nurse.
other women were midwives who delivered babies.
still others sewed fine hats or dresses to be sold to women who could afford them.
learning such skills often required years of training.
some women learned trades from their fathers brothers or husbands.
they worked as butchers shoemakers or silversmiths.
quite a few women became printers.
a woman might take over her husbands business when he died.
men often worked in trades for example as coopers who made and repaired wooden barrels blacksmiths and silversmiths.
most large towns in the colonies were seaports where merchants and traders brought goods to and from europe.
as this trade grew more men also took on jobs as bankers lawyers and businessmen.
some educated men in the colonies became politicians.
others were pamphleteers who wrote and distributed small booklets informing people on a subject.
there were many doctors in the colonies where illness was common.
however medical training varied.
a surgeon might be a barber with little real medical training.
african influences in the colonies by the mid 1700s the culture of africans and african americans in the colonies varied greatly.
on rice plantations in south carolina enslaved africans used methods from west africa for growing and harvesting rice.
for example flat baskets holding the grains were shaken in the wind to separate the grains from leaves and other particles.
then a wooden mortar and pestle were used to clean the grains.
language is another area where african influences were strong.
in some coastal areas enslaved africans spoke a distinctive combination of english and west african languages known as gullah gull uh.
parents often chose african names for their children such as quosh or juba or cuff.
in charleston and other south carolina port towns some africans worked along the dock making rope or barrels or helping to build ships.
skilled crafts workers made fine wooden cabinets or silver plates and utensils.
many of their designs reflected african artistic styles.
although most africans in these towns were enslaved many opened their own shops or stalls in the market.
some used their earnings to buy their own and their familys freedom.
in the middle colonies and new england the african and african american population increased during the 1700s.
africans and african americans in the northern colonies included both free and enslaved people.
their numbers were much lower than in the southern colonies.
however they were still an important part of the population.
in some of the middle colonies such as new york there were even plantations that relied on slave labor.
often these plantations produced grains and meat for sale to feed enslaved workers in the southern colonies or the west indies.
define what was an indentured servant.
colonial art literature and music colonists brought with them the artistic traditions of their homelands.
new artistic styles also developed that reflected colonial society.
wealthy gentry decorated their homes with paintings of landscapes and religious art.
furniture houses and clothing were often decorated with intricate carvings or designs.
enslaved african amercians introduced new methods of harvesting and preparing different grains.
art reflects colonial society paintings that celebrated important people of the time were especially popular works of art.
those who could afford it hired artists to paint portraits of their family members.
these portraits showed off the familys importance and provided a valuable keepsake to be passed on for generations to come.
portraits also honored famous individuals and key events.
one of the oldest surviving colonial portraits is of new netherland governor peter stuyvesant painted in the 1660s.
prints were also popular in colonial families.
these were small engravings scratched into metal or carved into wood.
printmakers used the metal or wood with ink paper and a press to make a picture that could be easily reproduced.
many people had prints of famous figures such as politicians or clergymen.
many artists were self taught.
few became wealthy from their work.
they often traveled from town to town in search of people who wanted portraits done.
the paintings they left behind are like time capsules.
much like photographs do today they show how people dressed what their tastes were like and how their families lived.
american literature emerges literature also developed in the colonies.
the first colonial printing press was built in massachusetts in 1640.
it printed colonization of north america 84 2 6 colonial society european colonization of north america 85 2 6 colonial society religious books and books for harvard college.
with the spread of printing more colonists began to read.
colonists read reprints of european books and books by american writers.
one of the most popular and particularly american types of stories was the captivity tale.
in these stories a white settler was captured by native americans and had to overcome hardships in order to escape.
colonial music music was another popular art form in the colonies.
colonists brought popular folk music from europe.
they sang and danced at weddings and other celebrations.
enslaved africans brought musical traditions with them from africa.
these traditions combined with european traditions in musical forms such as work songs and spirituals or religious songs.
music was closely tied to religious life for many colonists.
new organs appeared in churches.
the hymns people sang grew especially popular during the great awakening.
b identify supporting details what clues can we find about colonial lives in artwork such as paintings.
with his fiery sermons jonathan edwards a new england preacher helped spark the religious movement known as the great awakening.
a new religious movement in the 1730s and 1740s a religious revival or movement known as the great awakening swept through the colonies.
it is sometimes also known as the first great awakening to distinguish it from later religious revivals.
its drama and emotion touched women and men of all races ethnic backgrounds and classes.
enthusiastic preachers a new england preacher jonathan edwards helped set off the great awakening.
in powerful sermons edwards called on colonists especially young people to examine their lives.
he preached of the sweetness and beauty of god.
at the same time he warned listeners to heed the bibles teachings.
otherwise they would be sinners in the hands of an angry god headed for the fiery torments of hell.
the powerful sermons of preachers such as edwards were one of the main causes of the great awakening.
in 1739 when an english minister named george whitefield arrived in the colonies the movement spread like wildfire.
whitefield drew huge crowds to outdoor meetings.
an enthusiastic and energetic preacher his voice would ring with feeling as he called on sinners to repent.
after hearing whitefield speak jonathan edwardss wife reported i have seen upwards of a thousand people hang on his words with breathless silence broken only by an occasional half suppressed sob the great awakenings impact the colonies were made up of many different religious groups.
there were quakers puritans catholics presbyterians and more.
each group had its own ideas about the proper relationship with god.
some groups like the anglicans disagreed strongly with whitefield.
others like the baptists and methodists found new opportunities to expand during the great awakening as people revisited their faith.
the great awakening aroused bitter debate.
people who supported the movement often split away from their old churches to form new ones.
opponents warned that the movement was too emotional.
still the growth of so many new churches forced colonists to become more tolerant of people with different beliefs.
also because the great awakening appealed to people in all of the colonies from different classes and ethnic backgrounds it brought colonists together for the first time.
ties formed during the great awakening helped form the groundwork for future bonds among the colonies.
in the colonies members of most churches controlled their parishes.
the role parishes played in local communities made people think about the importance of self rule a key factor in the development of american democracy.
the great awakening contributed in another way to the spread of democratic feelings in the colonies.
many of the new preachers were not as well educated as most ministers.
they argued that formal training was less important than a heart filled with the holy spirit.
such teachings encouraged a spirit of independence.
many believers felt more free to challenge authority when their liberties were at stake.
people began to think differently about their political rights and their governments.
they felt if they could figure out how to worship on their own and how to run their own churches then they could govern themselves with those same virtues.
eventually many of these colonists would challenge the authority of colonial governors and the english king.
b identify central ideas how did the great awakening change how people thought about themselves and their political rights.
colonial schools and colleges among the colonists new englanders were the most concerned about education.
puritans taught that all people had a duty to study the bible.
if colonists did not learn to read how would they fulfill this duty.
public schools in new england in 1642 the massachusetts assembly passed a law ordering all parents to teach their children to read and understand the principles of religion they also required all towns with 50 or more families to hire a schoolteacher.
towns with 100 or more families also had to set up a grammar school to prepare boys for college.
in this way massachusetts set up the first public schools or schools supported by taxes.
public schools allowed both rich and poor children to receive an education.
the first new england schools had only one room for students of all ages.
parents paid the schoolteacher with corn peas or other foods.
each child was expected to bring a share of wood to burn in the stove.
students who forgot would find themselves seated in the coldest corner of the room.
private education in other colonies in the middle colonies churches and individual families set up crowds of people gathered to hear sermons by english minister george whitefield as shown in a later print.
infer what does the artist suggest about the attitude of whitefields audience.
in colonial new england instructors taught students of all ages in a single classroom.
interactive chart f north america 86 2 6 colonial society european colonization of north america 87 2 6 colonial society mothers and special girls schools taught girls and young women the skills needed to run a household.
in the southern colonies family members and private tutors often provided children with their education.
private schools.
because pupils paid to attend only wealthy families could afford to educate their children.
in the southern colonies people often lived too far from one another to bring children together in one school building.
some planters hired tutors or.
private teachers.
the wealthiest planters sent their sons to school in england.
as a rule enslaved african americans were denied education of any kind.
apprenticeships and dame schools boys whose parents wished them to learn a trade or craft served as apprentices uh pren tis ez.
an apprentice worked for a master to learn a trade or a craft.
for example when a boy reached the age of 12 or 13 his parents might apprentice him to a master glassmaker.
the young apprentice lived in the glassmakers home for six or seven years while learning the craft.
the glassmaker gave the boy food and clothing.
he was also supposed to teach his apprentice how to read and write and provide him with religions training.
in return the apprentice worked without pay in the glassmakers shop and learned the skills he needed to set up his own shop.
boys were apprenticed in many trades including papermaking printing and tanning making leather.
in new england most schools accepted only boys.
however some girls attended dame schools or private schools run by women in their own homes.
other girls though usually learned skills from their mothers who taught them to cook make soap and candles spin wool weave sew and embroider.
a few learned to read and write.
the growth of colleges in 1633 puritan john eliot spoke of the need for massachusetts to establish an official college.
institutions of higher learning were held up as a way to promote european culture in the americas.
as eliot cautioned if we no u rish not l e arning both church common wealth will sinke harvard college opened in 1638 with 10 students.
the goal of the college was to educate future ministers.
it was modeled after english schools where students studied six days a week in latin and greek.
it was open only to men.
by the late 1600s however harvard graduates were moving away from the ministry.
some became physicians public servants or teachers.
the college of william and mary opened in virginia to prepare men for the anglican ministry.
yale college in connecticut aimed to educate clergymen.
gradually however nine colleges opened over the following century and expanded their areas of study.
students could learn other subjects such as medicine and law.
b recall why were there private schools in many colonies.
a new world of ideas during the 1600s european scientists began to use reason and logic instead of superstition to understand the world.
they developed theories and then performed experiments to test them.
in doing so they discovered many of the laws of nature.
the english scientist isaac newton for example explained the law of gravity.
the ideas of the enlightenment european thinkers of the late 1600s and 1700s believed that reason and scientific methods could be applied to the study of society.
they tried to discover the natural laws that governed human behavior.
because these thinkers believed in the light of human reason the movement that they started is known as the enlightenment.
john locke an english philosopher wrote works that were widely read in the colonies.
he said people could gain knowledge of the world by observing and by experimenting.
in the english colonies the enlightenment spread among better educated colonists.
they included wealthy merchants lawyers ministers and others who had the leisure to read the latest books from europe.
urban craftsmen also heard and discussed these ideas.
benjamin franklin influences daily life the best example of the enlightenment spirit in the english colonies was benjamin franklin.
franklin was born in 1706 the son of a poor boston soap and candle maker.
although he had only two years of formal schooling he used his spare time to study literature mathematics and foreign languages.
at age 17 franklin made his way to philadelphia.
there he built up a successful printing business.
his most popular publication was poor richard s almanack.
published yearly it contained useful information and clever quotes such as early to bed early to rise makes a man healthy wealthy and wise like other enlightenment thinkers franklin wanted to use reason to improve the world around him.
he invented practical devices that helped improve daily life.
for example franklin suffered from poor eyesight so he invented bifocal glasses to help himself and countless others see better.
franklin also invented a new kind of iron stove.
it was set in the middle of a room instead of in a wall and it kept houses warmer without filling them with smoke.
another one of franklins isaac newton analyzes the colors in a ray of light shining through his door.
newton was an important figure in the enlightenment a movement that emphasized reason logic and individualism.
founded in 1693 the college of william and mary educated young men to join the anglican clergy.
european colonization of north america 88 2 6 colonial society european colonization of north america 89 colonial society 1 this illustration shows the acquittal of john peter zenger on a charge of libel which helped establish the american principle of freedom of the press.
dwellers found entertainment at singing societies traveling circuses carnivals and horse races.
in 1704 john campbell founded the boston news letter the first regular weekly newspaper in the english colonies.
within 50 years each of the colonies except new jersey and delaware had at least one weekly paper.
john peter zengers libel trial the growth of colonial newspapers led to a dispute over freedom of the press.
john peter zenger published the weekly journal in new york city.
in 1734 he was arrested for publishing stories that criticized the governor.
zenger was put on trial for libel the act of publishing a statement that may unjustly damage a persons reputation.
zengers lawyer argued that since the stories were true his client had not committed libel.
the jury agreed and freed zenger.
at the time the case did not attract a great deal of attention.
however freedom of the press would become recognized as a basic american right.
u identify how did some of benjamin franklins inventions influence the daily lives of colonists.
like other european nations at the time england believed that its colonies should benefit the home country.
this belief was part of an economic theory known as mercantilism mur kun til iz um.
interactive flipped video assessment inventions the lightning rod protected buildings from catching fire in a storm because of lightning strikes.
as a community leader franklin persuaded philadelphia officials to pave streets organize a fire company and set up the first lending library in the americas.
franklins inventions and his public service earned him worldwide fame.
the influence of colonial cities and towns while most colonists lived on farms towns and cities strongly influenced colonial life.
through the great ports of philadelphia new york boston and charleston merchants shipped products overseas.
towns and cities also served as centers of a busy trade between the coast and the growing backcountry.
culture flourished in the towns.
by the mid 1700s many colonial towns had their own theaters.
infer women did not have access to certain jobs in the colonies.
how was womens access to employment was restricted.
analyze information how did the great awakening lead to greater religious tolerance.
support ideas with evidence what evidence can you find in the reading to support the idea that educational opportunities were not equal between many of the colonies.
generate explanations why do you think enslaved african americans were generally denied an education.
make generalizations what generalization can you make about education in the 1700s based on the fact that newspapers were becoming increasingly popular throughout the colonies.
colonial trade and government mercantilism and the english colonies according to this theory a nation could become strong by keeping strict control over its trade.
as one english gentleman put it whosoever commands the trade of the world commands the riches of the world imports and exports mercantilists thought that a country should export more than it imported.
exports are goods sent to markets outside a country.
imports are goods brought into a country.
if england sold more goods than it bought abroad gold would flow into the home country as payment for those exports.
the navigation acts affect the colonies beginning in the 1650s the english parliament passed a series of navigation acts that regulated trade between england and its colonies.
the purpose of these laws was to ensure that only england benefited from trade with its colonies.
under the new laws only colonial or english ships could carry goods to and from the colonies.
colonists were banned from trading directly 3 a 15 a 20 a objectives explain the development of mercantilism and colonists response to it.
outline the relationship of the slave trade to other kinds of trade.
describe the development of governments and legal systems in the colonies.
key terms mercantilism export navigation acts yankees triangular trade legislature glorious revolution bill of rights english bill of rights imports william blackstone legislature pearson 1 el realize access your digital lesson.
european colonization of north america 9q 2 6 colonial society 91 with other european nations or their colonies.
all trade had to go through england.
the navigation acts also listed certain products such as tobacco and cotton that colonial merchants could ship only to england.
in this way parliament created jobs for english workers who cut and rolled tobacco or spun cotton into cloth.
the navigation acts helped the colonies as well as england.
for example the law encouraged colonists to build ships for their own use and for sale to england.
as a result new england became a prosperous shipbuilding center.
also because of the acts colonial merchants did not have to compete with foreign merchants because they were sure of having a market for their goods in england.
still many colonists resented the navigation acts.
in their view the laws favored english merchants.
colonial merchants often ignored the navigation acts or found ways to get around them.
h identify central ideas why did england pass the navigation acts.
trading across the atlantic the colonies produced a wide variety of goods and merchant ships sailed up and down the atlantic coast.
merchants from new england dominated colonial trade.
they were known as yankees a nickname that implied they were clever and hardworking.
yankee traders earned a reputation for profiting from any deal.
the triangular trade colonial merchants developed many trade routes.
one route was known as the triangular trade because the three legs of the route formed a triangle.
on the first leg ships from new england carried rum guns gunpowder cloth and tools from new england to west africa.
in africa yankee merchants traded these goods for slaves.
on the second leg of the journey ships carried enslaved africans to the west indies.
it was because enslaved africans traveled on the second leg of a three leg voyage that this leg was known as the middle passage.
with the profits from selling the enslaved africans yankee traders bought molasses a dark brown syrup made from sugar cane and sugar.
on the final leg ships then sailed back to new england where colonists used the molasses and sugar to make rum for sale in africa or europe.
the triangular trade shows the routes of the triangular trade.
analyze maps which he first destination for many enslaved africans.
sil interactive map in colonization of north america 92 2 7 colonial trad.
and government merchants disregard the navigation acts many new england merchants grew wealthy from the triangular trade.
in doing so they often disobeyed the navigation acts.
traders were supposed to buy sugar and molasses only from english colonies in the west indies.
however the demand for molasses was so high that new englanders smuggled in cargoes from the dutch french and spanish west indies too.
bribes made customs officials look the other way.
b check understanding why did many traders ignore the navigation acts and buy sugar and molasses from non english colonies in the west indies.
the foundations of representative government although each colony developed its own government the governments had much in common.
a governor directed the colonys affairs and enforced the laws.
most governors were appointed either by the king or by the colonys proprietor.
in rhode island and connecticut however colonists elected their own governors.
representative government and institutions spread in the colonies for several reasons.
elected assemblies as you learned the virginia company decided to establish an elected assembly to attract more settlers.
for this reason and inspired by the english tradition of representative government outlined in the magna carta all of the colonies gained a legislature soon after they were founded.
a legislature is a group of people usually elected who have the power to make laws.
in most colonies the legislature had an upper house and a lower house.
the upper house was made up of advisers appointed by the governor.
the lower house was an elected assembly.
it approved laws and protected the rights of citizens.
just as important it had the right to approve or reject any taxes or budget items the governor asked for.
this power of the purse or right to raise or spend money was an important check on the governors power.
any governor who ignored the assembly risked losing his salary.
as colonial settlers spread inland and founded new cities and towns representative government and institutions grew.
most colonial cities and towns had their own city and town councils.
john archdale a governor of the early carolina colony addresses the carolina assembly in 1696.
each colony gained its own legislature or group of lawmakers.
interactive chart the right to vote each colony had its own rules about who could vote.
by the 1720s however all of the colonies had laws that restricted the right to vote to white christian men over the age of 21.
in some colonies only protestants or members of a particular church could vote.
all colonies restricted the vote to men who owned a certain amount of property.
colonial leaders believed that only property owners knew what was best for a colony.
william blackstone and common law the colonies followed english common law.
under common law laws develop from the past rulings of judges.
in applying laws courts followed the principle that like cases should be tried alike colonists brought the tradition of common law with them from england.
in the 1760s william blackstone published a four volume book commentaries on the laws of england.
in it blackstone reviewed the entire history of english law.
as a member of parliament and a judge in england he believed common law was the highest and best form of law.
blackstone supported parliament and opposed colonists moves toward self rule.
however his ideas about common law took hold in the colonies.
common european colonization of north america 93 2 7 colonial trade and government this illustration shows a colonial woman in court.
while unmarried women and widows had some legal rights married women were legally dependent on their husbands.
law was a body of laws that was valid independent of parliaments acts.
as such it provided a basis for self rule and an independent legal system once the colonies began to move toward independence.
the english bill of rights supports freedoms colonists took great pride in their elected assemblies.
they also valued the rights that the magna carta gave them as english subjects.
colonists won still more rights as a result of the glorious revolution of 1688.
parliament removed king james ii from the throne and asked william and mary of the netherlands to rule.
in return for parliaments support william and mary signed the english bill of rights in 1689.
a bill of rights is a written list of freedoms the government promises to protect.
the english bill of rights protected the rights of individuals and gave anyone accused of a crime the right to a trial by jury.
just as important the english bill of rights said that a ruler could not raise taxes or an army without the approval of parliament.
the bill of rights also strengthened the position of representative government and institutions in the colonies.
liberties are restricted english colonists in the americas often enjoyed more freedoms than did the f english themselves.
however the rights of english citizens did not extend to all colonists.
women had more rights in the colonies than in england but far fewer rights than did free white males.
a woman s father or husband was supposed to protect her.
a married woman could not start her own business or sign a contract unless her husband approved it.
in most colonies unmarried women and widows had more rights than married women.
they could make contracts and sue in court.
in maryland and the carolinas women settlers who headed families could buy land on the same terms as men.
african americans and native americans in the colonies had almost no rights.
while so many colonists enjoyed english liberties most african americans were bound in slavery.
the conflict between liberty and slavery would not be resolved until the 1860s.
m describe how did the english bill of rights promote freedom.
assessment 1.
compare points of view compare how the english and the colonists viewed the navigation acts.
cite evidence what evidence is there in the reading to suggest that molasses was critical to the success of the triangular trade.
summarize the rights of women in colonial america.
predict consequences colonial traders profited greatly from the triangular trade partly because they disregarded the navigation acts and traded with colonies of european nations other than england.
how do you think they might have responded if england started to strictly enforce the navigation acts.
summarize how did english laws contribute to the development of freedom and self government in the american colonies.
teks assessment 1.
describe causes of spanish colonization describe the causes of spanish colonization in new spain.
write a paragraph about the reasons the spanish had for colonizing new spain.
explain the quotation below in relation to colonization.
in your paragraph consider what historians mean by gold god and glory.
1 a sometimes historians summarize the spanish exploration and settlement of the americas as motivated by gold god and glory.
explain the founding of jamestown explain the significance of 1607 the founding of jamestown.
write a paragraph explaining the significance of the founding of jamestown in 1607.
answer these questions what is a charter.
what rights did the royal charter give the virginia company and guarantee colonists.
what were the goals of the colonists who arrived in 1607.
what is the significance of the founding of jamestown.
analyze importance of virginia house of burgesses explain the reasons for the growth of representative government during the colonial period and analyze the importance of the virginia house of burgesses to the growth of representative government.
write a paragraph analyzing the importance of the virginia house of burgesses to the growth of representative government in the colonial period.
answer the following questions what is a representative government.
why did the virginia company establish the house of burgesses.
which settlers could be elected as burgesses.
what was the purpose of the house of burgesses.
why was the establishment of the house of burgesses important.
describe religious motivation for immigration describe religious motivation for immigration of the puritans and the establishment of the massachusetts bay colony.
write a paragraph describing the role that religion played in the puritans decision to immigrate to new england and establish the massachusetts bay colony.
consider how the puritans felt about church of england why the puritans persuaded royal officials to grant them a charter to form the massachusetts bay company and how religion influenced what the puritans hope to do in massachusetts.
2 b 25 b 5.
describe contribution of religion and virtue to representative government describe how religion and virtue contributed to the growth of representative government in the american colonies.
write a paragraph describing how religion and virtue contributed to the growth of representative government.
consider the role of religious virtue and the common good in representative government and how belief in religious freedom led to greater representation over time.
3 c create a model describe the positive consequences of human modification of the physical environment of the united states by creating a model representing plymouth plantation.
use the photographs above and other sources to create a model of plymouth plantation.
show how the colonists modified their environment in positive ways to help in their survival and use captions or labels to describe the positive modifications.
include houses roads crops and a mill.
see photographs above.
11 b 29 i 7.
analyze mercantilism identify reasons for european colonization of north america including mercantilism.
using the quotation below and other sources to write a paragraph analyzing how the theory of mercantilism influenced englands relationship with its colonies.
answer the following questions how does the quotation below reflect the economic theory of mercantilism.
what role did imports and exports play in mercantilism.
how did the navigation acts support the theory of mercantilism.
why did many colonists resent the navigation acts.
2 a whosoever commands the trade of the world commands the riches of the world.
english gentleman european colonization of north america 2 7 colonial trade and government european colonization of north america 95 the new england colonies the location of jamestown o 20 mi 0 20 km lambert azimuthal equidistant projection analyze effects of physical geographic factors locate places of importance in the united states during the seventeenth century and analyze the effects of physical geographic factors on major historical events in the united states such as the founding of jamestown.
examine the physical geography of the place that the colonists chose for jamestown.
then locate jamestown on the map above and use what you learned about the physical geography of the area to write a paragraph that answers the following questions where was jamestown located.
what about the physical geography made the location difficult for colonists.
what advantages did the location provide for security.
a 10 c identify ways religious conflicts are resolved identify ways conflicts between people from various religious groups were resolved.
write a paragraph identifying the conflict between anne hutchinson and the puritans in massachusetts bay colony and how it was resolved.
describe why anne hutchinson was ordered to appear before the massachusetts general court recount her testimony and describe what the court ruled.
23 c explain william penns role on development of self government explain the role of significant individuals such as william penn in the development of self government in colonial america.
write a paragraph explaining the role william penn played in the development of self government in colonial america.
explain how penn aided self government in pennsylvania and advanced self government in the lower counties.
compare political and economic reasons for colonization compare political and economic reasons for the establishment of the 13 english colonies.
write a paragraph comparing the economic reasons for the establishment of what became the colony of new york with the political reasons for the founding of new jersey.
compare the reasons for founding each colony and describe how a proprietary colony differed from earlier methods of establishing colonies.
explain development of free enterprise system explain why a free enterprise system of economics developed in the new nation including minimal government intrusion.
write a paragraph describing why a free enterprise system developed in new jersey when it was a proprietary colony.
explain why a free enterprise system was able to develop in new jersey and why the system that developed can be consider free enterprise.
describe characteristics of free enterprise system describe the characteristics of the u s free enterprise system during the eighteenth century.
write a paragraph describing how the cultivation of cash crops in the middle colonies illustrates the characteristics of a free enterprise system.
describe what cash crops are and why their cultivation can be considered free enterprise.
14 b key eu middle colonies area claimed by new york and new hampshire virginia.
loetemre 150 km lambert conformal conic projection 14.
pose and answer questions about geographic distributions and patterns locate regions of importance in the united states during the seventeenth century by posing and answering questions about geographic distributions and patterns shown on maps.
locate important regions in colonial american on the maps above and pose and answer questions about geographic patterns and distributions.
consider questions such as the following which region has the greatest number of coastal cities.
what geographic factor might account for this pattern.
what pattern is evident on both maps about the location of inland cities.
what might explain this pattern.
see maps above.
10 a 29 j 15.
analyze economic effect of physical characteristics analyze how physical characteristics of the environment influenced economic activities during the eighteenth century.
write a paragraph analyzing the impact of the physical environment on economic activities in the middle colonies.
consider the climate the soil the effect of these physical factors on farming and the effect of farming on the economy.
compare human characteristics compare places of the united states in terms of human characteristics.
write a paragraph comparing massachusetts and pennsylvania in terms of human characteristics.
consider settlement patterns and religious and ethnic diversity.
trace development of religious freedom trace the development of religious freedom in the united states.
write a paragraph describing how the act of toleration contributed to the development of religious freedom in colonial north america.
consider why lord baltimore welcomed protestants to maryland why he asked the maryland assembly to pass the act of toleration what the act protected and whom the act did not protect.
identify ethnic groups identify selected ethnic groups that settled in the united states including those who settled in the backcountry during the colonial era.
write a paragraph identifying the ethnic groups that settled in the backcountry of the southern colonies.
identify the groups and explain why they came.
identify economic contributions of women identify the economic contributions of women to american society.
write a paragraph identifying the economic roles women played in colonial society.
identify the contributions of planters wives farmers wives backcountry wives women in cities and women in trades.
23 e european colonization of north america 96 european colonization of north america 97 38 physical wealth 20.
analyze economic differences create charts representing various aspects of the united states to analyze the causes and effects of economic differences among different regions of the united states at selected times in u s history.
use the graph above and other sources to create a chart analyzing the causes and effects of economic differences among the three colonial regions.
create a cause and effect chart with a row for each colonial region.
in the effects column summarize what the graph shows about the sources of physical wealth for each colonial region.
in the cause column use your text to summarize the causes of the effects.
analyze the information in the chart and write a sentence explaining why the amount and sources of wealth are so different for the southern colonies.
see graph above.
12 d 29 1 21.
describe interaction with environment describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the united states during the eighteenth century.
write a paragraph describing how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment of the southern colonies in the 1700s.
consider english settlers in the tidewater enslaved africans and backcountry immigrants.
explain transatlantic slave trade explain reasons for the transatlantic slave trade.
write a paragraph explaining the reasons for the transatlantic slave trade.
consider reasons related to the southern colonies and reasons related to colonial trade.
12 b 137 23.
identify economic differences identify economic differences among different regions of the united states by creating a thematic map representing colonial exports.
use maps graphs and information from various sources to create a thematic map showing the major exports for each colonial region.
use symbols to represent the exports include a key to identify the symbols and write a caption for the map identifying what economic differences the map shows.
12 a 29 i 24.
analyze contributions of racial groups analyze the contributions of people of various racial groups to our national identity.
write a paragraph analyzing the contributions of africans and african americans to colonial society.
consider influences related to the introduction of african farming techniques and african language and culture.
compare effects of scientific discoveries compare the effects of scientific discoveries that have influenced daily life in the colonial era including those of benjamin franklin.
write a paragraph comparing different ways that benjamin franklins inventions improved daily life.
describe benjamin franklins inventions and compare their effects on daily life.
describe developments in american art describe developments in art that are unique to american culture and identify examples of american art that reflect society in the colonial era.
write a paragraph describing art in colonial america and identifying how the art reflects colonial society.
consider the artistic traditions colonists brought with them the popularity of portraits and prints and how the art forms reflect life and society in colonial times.
26 a 26 b 27.
explain significance of mayflower compact explain the significance of 1620 arrival of the pilgrims and signing of the mayflower compact and analyze the importance of the mayflower compact to the growth of representative government.
using the quotation below and other sources write a paragraph explaining why the pilgrims signed the mayflower compact when they arrived in plymouth in 1620 and analyzing why the document is important to the growth of representative government.
recount where the pilgrims were headed and where they actually landed in 1620 explain why the pilgrims believed they needed to write and sign the mayflower compact use the quotation to summarize what the signers agreed to do and analyze why the mayflower compact was an important step toward the u s system of representative government.
1 c 3 b 15.
a in the name of god amen.
we whose names are underwritten.
do by these presents solemnly and mutually in the presence of god and one another covenant and combine ourselves together into a civil body politick for our better ordering and preservation.
and by virtue hereof do enact constitute and frame such just and equal laws ordinances acts constitutions and officers from time to time as shall be thought most meet and convenient for the general good of the colony unto which we promise all due submission and obedience.
1c l vt i r i 28.
describe developments in american music describe developments in music that are unique to american culture and identify examples of american music that reflect society in the colonial era.
write a paragraph describing music in colonial america and identifying how the music reflects colonial society.
consider european and african musical traditions the blending of these traditions and the importance of religious music in colonial society.
26 a 26 b 29.
analyze contributions of religious groups analyze the contributions of people of various religious groups to our national identity by creating a visual presentation.
create a concept web showing how different religious leaders contributed to our national identity as a country of religious tolerance.
consider the actions and ideas of such religious leaders as thomas hooker roger williams william penn lord baltimore and the ministers of the great awakening.
decorate your concept web with images that illustrate religious tolerance in the nation today.
23 d 30 d 30.
explain growth of representative government explain the reasons for the growth of representative government during the colonial period.
write a paragraph explaining how the colonial governments laid the foundations for representative government.
consider the role of governors the role of assemblies and the right to vote.
reflect on the essential question write an essay on the essential question why do people move.
use evidence from your study of this topic to support your answer.
european colonization of north america 98 european colonization of north america 99 t l ju iu a access additional practice questions j what factor in spains ability to conquer the empires of the aztecs and incas is best illustrated in the image above.
a the aztecs and incas had been weakened by diseases.
b the spanish had superior military equipment and horses.
c the subjects of the aztec and inca rulers betrayed them to the spanish.
d the aztecs and incas revered the spanish as gods and were afraid to fight them.
3 the colonists who established the plymouth colony mainly wanted to a create a north american stronghold for england b find wealth and gain huge profits in north america c establish an english shipping port in north america d avoid religious prosecution and practice their religion freely 4 comparing the new england and middle colonies new england i middle colonies main beason fob settlement bdsinebsairainum ll agriculture ethnic di ver ity settlement structure culture and society i avoid religious persecution shipbuilding shipping fishing forestry mostly limited to the needs of the colonies mainly english close knit towns religious uniformity small family farms and businesses with few servants or slaves economic gain agriculture skilled trades shipping fertile farmland produced export crops english dutch german and scotch irish more scattered settlements ethnic and religious diversity larger farms and businesses need indentured servants 2 one of the main reasons that the french began explorations in north america was to f create wealth through fishing trapping and trading g capture native americans and take them to france as slaves h establish large permanent cities along the north american seacoast j engage in war with spain to take over the spanish holdings in north america based on this table how did the reason for settlement relate to the economic situation of these colonies.
f colonies started for economic gain are poor and colonies started for religious reasons are wealthy.
g colonies started for economic gain export more crops and have larger farms than do colonies started for religious reasons.
h whether started for religious reasons or for economic gain all of the colonies on the table were just barely able to meet their own needs.
j colonies started for religious reasons have no businesses outside of agriculture while colonies started for economic gain are split between business and farming.
if you have trouble with question i 1 t k see lesson 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 teks 1 a 2 a j 2 b 12 d european colonization of north america 100 european colonization of north america 101 5 life in the colonial tidewater and backcountry early english settlers and enslaved africans large scale plantation farming of cash crops for export flat plain coastal plains backcountry appalachian mountains and their foothills hilly mountainous scotch irish poorer english migrants germans small scale subsistence farming fur trade take note of the land descriptions in the table.
why was the tidewater attractive to wealthy settlers who wanted to start plantations.
a the flat land offered much better views.
b the foothills provided richer croplands.
c the plains were better for successful farming.
d the mountains offered more exciting leisure activities.
6 although he opposed the colonies ruling themselves englands william blackstone wrote a book that helped form the basis for the colonies f legislative body g independent legal system h structure of town government j system of checks and balances european colonization of north america 102 access additional practice questions dug irrigation ditches created a network of roads used adobe to build large buildings which native american group modified their environment in the ways listed above.
a inuit b anasazi c natchez d hopewell 8 which of the following best explains why the introduction of the horse was one of the positive changes to the environment that resulted from the columbian exchange.
f the spanish converted pastures to grasslands to feed the horses.
g native americans learned to ride horses and use them to carry loads.
h native americans relied on horses as a source of food and to plow fields.
j the spanish used horses to conquer native americans in north and south america.
if you have trouble with.
question 5 6 7 8 see lesson 2 5 2 7 1 1 1 3 teks 11 a 20 a 10 b 11 b european colonization of north america 103 h the revolutionary era in this topic you will learn about the revolution era in the united states.
you will also find lots of ways to investigate the ideas of this topic and to master the teks.
your study will help you master these teks teks lesson outline 3 1 the french and indian war 29 c g 29 h a 3 2 tensions with britain 4 a 4 b 3 3 taking up arms 1 a 4 a 4 b 4 c 10 a 20 c 3 4 declaring independence 1 a 1 c 4 b 4 c 15 c 19 a 3 5 winning independence 4 b 4 c 10 a 22 b 23 d 1 a 1 c 4 a 4 b 4 c 10 a 10 c 14 a 15 c 19 a 20 b 20 c 22 b 23 d 23 e 29 b 29 c 29 c g 29 h 29 h a 30 a 30 b 30 d 31 b connect my story video and topic essential question see how they connect to your past experience or to what you have already learned.
the essential question for this topic is when is war justified.
j begin your study by trying the i following i nbc learn watch my story video benjamin franklin and the fight for independence launch your project write a blog on the american revolution 9 investigate a group of lessons will help you investigate the topic further.
each lesson has interesting text readings and fascinating interactivities.
together they will bring the topic to life and help you master the teks for this topic.
and keep working on your project.
youre almost ready to show what you have accomplished by presenting t your blog.
q go back notable people of the american revolution q mary ludwig hays the revolutionary heroine molly pitcher mary hays earned the nickname molly pitcher by bringing water to soldiers in the field.
when her husband fell during the battle of monmouth she took his place in the gun crew for the remainder of the battle.
later mary received a pension for her services during the war.
digital interactivity from the online course synthesize i youll see that this topic is about i even more than fascinating texts and i fun interactivities.
it s really about how those things help you think about big ideas like the essential question for this topic.
1 of 3 demonstrate teks in topic 3 i topic review and assessment questions teks in topic 3 topic review and assessment questions completing this topic is like practicing all your soccer skills or rehearsing the scenes in a play.
now you get a chance to pull it all together for the final game or the live performance.
you can do this on the topic review and assessment pages.
or you can complete work on your project write a blog on the american revolution 1 a 5 10 11 13 18 20 c 6 8 1 c 11 22 b 9 4 a 4 23 d 17 4 b 7 11 23 e 16 4 c 14 29 b 2 10.
a 1 29 c 1 6 10 c 2 3 29 h 17 14.
a 15 30 a 12 15 c 13 15 30.
a 12 30 d 5 20.
b 12 31 b 10 i p.
105 a 104 3 the revolutionary era 1750 1783 texas essential knowledge and skills 1 a 1 c 4 a 4 b 4 c 10 a 10 c 14 a 15 c 19 a 20 b 20 c 22 b 23 d 23 e 29 b 29 c 29 h 30 a 30 b 30 d 31 b enduring understandings great britains victory over france in the french and indian war increased british power and territory in north america.
following the french and indian war britain imposed taxes on the colonists without consent or representation causing conflict.
conflict between the colonists and britain eventually led to fighting in massachusetts uniting the colonies and starting the american revolution.
the continental congress issued the declaration of independence to cut ties with britain and form the united states of america.
americans gained their independence from britain after winning an eight year war with assistance from france.
pearson 1 e realize nbc learn access your digital lessons including topic inquiry interactive reading notepad interactivities assessments pearson 1 realize 107 interactive flipped video by the mid 1700s the major powers of europe were locked in a worldwide struggle for empire.
britain france spain and the netherlands competed for trade and colonies in far flung corners of the globe.
the british colonies in north america soon became caught up in the contest.
objectives explain how the rivalry between britain and france and conflict over the ohio valley led to the french and indian war in north america.
identify how mistakes and lack of unity led to british defeats early in the war.
summarize how the tide of the war turned in britains favor.
explain how the british won the war.
describe the power shift that occurred after the war.
key terms french and indian war albany plan of union plains of abraham treaty of paris george washington access your digital lesson.
the french and indian war europeans fight over north american land the most serious threat came from france.
it claimed a vast area that circled the english colonies from the st lawrence river west to the great lakes and south to the gulf of mexico.
to protect their land claims the french built an extensive system of forts.
these forts blocked the british colonies from expanding to the west.
the importance of the ohio river valley at first most settlers in the british colonies were content to remain along the atlantic coast.
by the 1740s however traders were crossing the appalachian mountains in search of furs.
pushing into the forests of the ohio valley which supported an abundance of wildlife settlers tried to take over the profitable french trade with the indians.
france was determined to stop the british from expanding westward.
the ohio river was especially important to the french because it provided a vital link between their claims along the great lakes and their settlements along the mississippi river.
ohio valley native americans choose allies native americans had hunted animals and grown crops in the ohio valley for centuries.
they did not want to give up the land to european settlers french or british.
one native american protested to a british trader you and the french are like the two edges of a pair of shears.
and we are the cloth which is to be cut to pieces between them still the growing conflict between britain and france was too dangerous to ignore.
some native americans decided that the only way to protect their way of life was to take sides in the struggle.
the french expected the indians to side with them.
most french in north america were trappers and traders.
generally they did not destroy indian hunting grounds by clearing forests for farms.
also many french trappers married native american women and adopted their ways.
as a result france had built strong alliances with such native american groups as the algonquins and the hurons.
many british settlers were farmers.
these settlers usually ignored indian rights by felling trees and clearing land for crops.
however an english trader and official william johnson helped gain iroquois support for britain.
the iroquois respected johnson.
he was one of the few british settlers who had an indian wife molly brant.
she was the sister of the mohawk chief v z o t pacific ocean 16cav x 140 w key 1 i i claimed by britain b claimed by spain i claimed by france n french fort j thayendanegea known to the british as joseph brant.
both joseph and molly brant became valuable allies for the british.
the british also won native american allies in the ohio valley by charging lower prices than the french for trade goods.
in the end britain managed to convince the powerful iroquois nations to join with them.
the british alliance was attractive to the iroquois because they were old enemies of the algonquin and the huron peoples.
the war reignited old conflicts in the ohio valley between the iroquois and the algonquins and hurons.
some tribes like the shawnees delawares and mingos formed alliances to push europeans off their lands.
more often however the alliances native americans formed with the british and the french pitted tribes against each other in the fighting to come.
identify which native american groups sided with the british and which sided with the french as the war began.
north america in 1753 by 1753 the french had claimed a vast area of north america.
analyze maps why were the french determined to prevent british colonies from expanding westward.
108 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 theodore de brys 1619 engraving the chickahominy become new englishmen from his book america portrays treaty negotiations between virginia indians and the english.
captain samuel argall the englishman negotiating the treaty sits on a mat with a tribal elder.
another tribal leader addresses his people informing them about the terms of the treaty which was meant to promote trade and peace between the english and the virginia indians.
as the engraving title which refers to the chickahominy as new englishmen suggests the english insisted that indian tribes submit to english rule and accept the english king as their lord.
by contrast the indians believed that negotiating a treaty with the english did not mean that they had given up control of their own political affairs.
these differing visions of diplomacy led to conflict between native americans and english settlers throughout the seventeenth century.
at the dawn of the 1600s england trailed far behind spain and france in the race to exploit the wealth of the americas.
by 1700 however england had become a formidable colonial power in both north america and the caribbean.
in contrast to spain and france whose colonization efforts relied on active support from the monarchy and church englands first efforts to colonize america relied on joint stock companies which were privately financed commercial ventures.
the two great early english experiments in colonization in virginia and new england faced many challenges in their early years including how to deal with local indian populations.
the solution for the english was not simply rendering the indians politically subservient to the king but also segregating themselves from the indians whenever possible.
relations between settlers and indians complicated colonial politics for most of the seventeenth century.
bacons rebellion 1676 a popular uprising in virginia triggered by colonists conflict over indian policy shook the foundations of the colony.
in new england persistent conflict between indians and settlers exacerbated existing social and economic tensions and contributed to the worst outbreak of witchcraft accusations in colonial america the salem witchcraft hysteria 1692.
the reassertion of political control by england whose glorious revolution 1688 contributed to the emergence of a new more stable colonial world helped facilitate the resolution of the witchcraft crisis.
in the years to come colonists would often invoke the political and constitutional ideas of the glorious revolution to defend their liberties.
our first work is expulsion of the savages to gain the free range of the country.
for it is infinitely better to have no heathen among us who at best are but thorns in our side than to be at peace and league with them virginia governor francis wyatt 1623 1624 chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 the chesapeake colonies the failure of the roanoke colony in virginia see chapter 1 between 1585 and 1590 was only a temporary setback for english colonial projects in america.
less than two decades later a new group of english settlers established a colony jamestown in the chesapeake bay area of what is now virginia.
although the early history of jamestown was fraught with problems the colony eventually began to prosper.
tobacco agriculture provided a strong financial incentive to expand into the wider chesapeake region.
by the 1630s lord baltimore had developed an ambitious plan to found another colony in the region maryland.
the founding of jamestown joint stock companies charted by king james i r 1603 1625 funded the english colonial enterprises.
investors bought shares in the company and at the end of a specified period received their investment back plus a percentage of the profits.
in april 1606 the king issued a charter to the virginia company of london to create a colony in america.
in late december 1606 three ships set sail for the chesapeake arriving off the coast of virginia in may 1607.
the first settlers were a motley assortment of men no women traveled on this first voyage.
the settlers named the new settlement jamestown in honor of king james.
our men were destroyed with cruel diseases as swellings fluxes burning fevers and by wars and some departed suddenly but for the most part they died of mere famine george percy colonist 1607 the colonists scouted a location secure from possible spanish attack but still accessible to the sea.
they built a fortified palisade to protect them from possible attacks by hostile indians and spanish ships.
unfortunately the site they chose turned out to be a public health disaster.
on the edge of a swamp jamestown was a fertile breeding ground for mosquitoes and the pathogens they carried including malaria.
salt water from the nearby estuary contaminated the wells the colonists dug to supply fresh drinking water.
in addition poor drainage meant the why did jamestown turn out to be such a poor choice for a permanent settlement.
colonists own waste occasionally contaminated the water supply.
many settlers died within a year of disembarking.
the virginia companys promotional pamphlets 2 1 deceptively cast virginia as an earthly paradise that would offer opportunities for the settlers to become rich.
almost one third of the early settlers were gentlemen who were unprepared for the arduous life in virginia and who viewed manual labor as undignified.
believing that vast troves of mineral wealth existed in the region settlers wasted time searching for gold and silver instead of planting crops or repairing fortifications.
dissension and a lack of firm political leadership also undermined the colony.
relations between the settlers and the powerful powhatan indian confederacy began amicably.
chief powhatan the ruler of the confederacy was eager to trade with the english and acquire manufactured goods especially firearms and metal tomahawks a type of hatchet.
powhatan had also hoped to use the english as allies against rival indian tribes.
however once the indians realized that the english were not temporary visitors merely interested in trade but were intending to settle permanently in the region relations between the two peoples deteriorated.
in dealing with the indians virginians applied the same principles that the english had developed in the conquest of ireland expelling the local population and limiting contact with them as much as possible.
the english failed to grasp basic rituals of hospitality and gift giving essential to establishing cordial relations with indian peoples.
whereas the french and spanish encouraged marriage between male settlers and indian women the english discouraged such unions.
this marriage taboo not only deprived the colony of a means of establishing friendly relations between the two peoples but view the closer look the chickahominy become new englishmen the chesapeake colonies also deprived the colonists of cultural go betweens who could have smoothed out conflicts and misunderstandings.
among the most enduring myths associated with jamestown and the english settlers relations with the indians is the tale of pocahontas.
settler soldier john smiths tale of how a beautiful indian girl saved his life is a foundational myth in american history one that later writers often cast in romantic terms an american romeo andjuliet story of love at first sight between a beautiful indian princess a term straight from english aristocratic culture and a dashing english officer.
smiths published account of his time in virginia helped create this mythology.
smith took considerable liberties with the truth highlighting his role as a romantic hero who saved jamestown from disaster.
the events smith described in his account almost certainly did not take place as he described them.
however smith was likely captured and eventually adopted into the tribe and pocahontas then a young girl may indeed have taken part in the adoption ritual.
among some eastern woodland indian tribes capture and in some cases ritual torture followed by adoption into the tribe was one means of conducting diplomacy.
once adopted into the tribe prisoners became political intermediaries.
although prone to inflate his achievements smith an experienced soldier who had fought with the french and dutch against spain in the 1590s and then against the muslim turks in the early 1600s played a decisive role in helping the colony avert disaster.
in 1608 he negotiated an exchange of goods for food with indians that helped stave off starvation.
smiths reforms may have staved off immediate catastrophe but they did not prevent enormous suffering and high mortality during the difficult winter of 1609 1610 known as the starving time the colonists were so pressed for food that some even resorted to cannibalism to survive the winter.
in his history of virginia smith wrote about the starving time smith reported with a macabre sense of humor that one man did kill his wife powdered her and had eaten part of her before it was knowne adding but of such a dish as powdered wife i never heard of in 1609 smith returned to england.
after his departure the hostility between the english and the indians intensified.
in 1613 captain samuel argall led a party of virginians on a mission to capture view the image powhatan in longhouse 2 1 virginia promotional literature the virginia company produced pamphlets that promoted the riches to be had by planting in virginia.
pocahontas whom indians and englishmen now knew by her adult name of matoaka.
the english hoped that by holding her hostage they could force her people to sign a peace treaty.
for more on this episode see choices and consequences the ordeal of pocahontas page 38.
tobacco agriculture and political reorganization jamestown had barely survived the starving time when the population dropped from between 500 and 600 to 60.
although the colony held on it had not yet found a profitable commodity that could make it economically viable.
john rolfe solved this problem by introducing tobacco into the virginia colony.
experimenting with various strains of tobacco rolfe finally settled on a variety that had been successfully cultivated in the caribbean.
tobacco was all the rage what was the starving time.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 choices and consequences the ordeal of pocahontas desperate to force the local powhatan indians to negotiate a peace treaty english settlers embarked on an audacious plan.
they abducted a local powhatan indian woman they knew as pocahontas whose adult indian name was matoaka hoping to force her people to accept a peace treaty.
her kidnappers took her to henrico a heavily fortified settlement upriver from jamestown.
the plan was to isolate her from her people.
the english placed matoaka in the household of a minister who instructed her in the english language and customs and began indoctrinating her in christianity.
at the weekly prayer meetings hosted by the minister she met john rolfe an influential englishman recently widowed.
within a year of her abduction matoaka was baptized a christian and had adopted a new english name rebecca.
john rolfe proposed marriage to the newly christianized woman.
matoaka now faced three options.
choices reject the offer of marriage and remain a captive among the english until her people rescued her or negotiated for her freedom.
attempt to escape.
marry rolfe and through that marriage help her people forge an alliance with the virginians.
decision matoaka chose the third option she married john rolfe.
two years after their marriage the couple journeyed to england where she became something of a celebrity and was even introduced at court.
consequences marrying rolfe gained matoaka rebecca her freedom.
in her new role as the wife of a high status englishman she became a mediator between her people and the english.
indeed had she not become ill and died within a year after arriving in england she might have been able to expand this important role.
continuing controversies how do indian conceptions of gender roles help explain pocahontass decision to marry.
scholars have suggested different explanations for her decision.
some have seen it as an expression of romantic love others as sheer expedience.
the most recent and perhaps most persuasive explanation of her conversion and marriage to john rolfe acknowledges the key role of women as cultural intermediaries in indian what role did women play in indian diplomacy.
by creating ties of kin to bind potentially warring nations in a blood bond marriage served an important diplomatic function.
with this explanation rather than viewing her decision as a slight to her indian heritage one can see her decision as likely having increased her status with her tribe by allowing her to assume an important diplomatic role the chesapeake colonies in europe a fact reflected in this humorous painting showing a group of monkeys in a tavern eagerly consuming tobacco 2 2.
playing on the popular notion that monkeys have a great capacity for imitation the artist ridicules the consumption of tobacco as a bad habit all too easily emulated.
smoking tobacco for pleasure became popular among all classes in european society.
tobacco was also believed to have many medicinal uses it was recommended as a cure for colds and an aid to digestion.
rolfe sent his first consignment of tobacco to england in 1613.
tobacco proved to be the colonys economic salvation profits from its sale created a boom in the colony which then led its inhabitants to devote nearly every acre of land to the sot weed exports increased dramatically in the decades following the introduction of the crop.
although tobacco agriculture made some virginians wealthy the pursuit of profits diverted time and other resources from basic tasks such as planting food crops and repairing buildings.
as a result of this neglect settlers in boom time virginia continued to die at an alarming rate.
establishing political order in virginia proved far more difficult than the founders of the colony had expected.
in 1618 sir edwin sandys became the virginia company of londons treasurer and instituted reforms to make the government of the colony more effective.
a key reform was the creation of a representative body to make laws.
the privilege of voting for representatives was extended to free men of property who were to elect representatives who would then enact laws for the colony.
virginias new legislative body the house of burgesses representatives first convened in july 1619.
rather than take orders from company officials the colonists gained some control over their own political affairs a milestone in the evolution of representative government in america.
because laborers continued to be scarce in virginia sandys also introduced a new system to 2 2 the smoking room with monkeys artist abraham teniers mocked the popularity of smoking substituting monkeys for humans.
in european art monkeys often symbolized the baser instincts of humankind.
what important reforms did sir edwin sandys implement in 1618.
chapter 2 2 3 theodore de bry engraving of the massacre of 1622 this engraving of the 1622 indian attack on virginia residents contains inaccuracies.
to exaggerate the difference between indian savagery and english civilization the artist included a european style city in the background.
models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 provide incentives to attract settlers.
the headright system encouraged additional immigrants by giving 50 acres to anyone who would pay his own fare to virginia and 50 additional acres for each person he brought with him.
the year 1619 also marked the arrival of the first africans in virginia.
an english pirate vessel flying under a dutch flag sold the africans captured from a portuguese slaving ship in the caribbean to the virginia colonists.
immigrants continued to arrive in virginia despite the high mortality rates.
approximately two thirds of the settlers died in the next three years.
deteriorating relations with local indian communities reached a crisis point in 1622 when powhatans successor launched an assault on the colony that killed 347 colonists.
the sensational attack inspired this engraving 2 3 which appeared in england six years later.
to contrast the imagined civility of the colonists and the alleged barbarism of the indians the engraver included inaccurate details including tablecloths and a european style walled city in the distance.
what was a proprietor.
two years after the attack king james revoked the colonys charter.
now the king not the virginia company of london would appoint the governor.
eventually the king recognized the house of burgesses giving his royal sanction to the colonists efforts at self rule.
virginia had become englands first royal colony.
lord baltimores refuge maryland james i died in 1625 and his son charles i r 1625 1649 came to the throne.
having married the french catholic princess henrietta maria charles i resolved to make good on his marriage promise to ease the plight of englands catholics.
most of englands aristocracy was protestant but a few had remained catholic.
one catholic nobleman george calvert lord baltimore realized that he might be able to help his fellow catholics and increase his own wealth by obtaining a royal charter for land in virginia making it a haven for english catholics.
after calverts death in 1632 his son cecil the second lord baltimore obtained a charter for a colony from king charles.
maryland began as a proprietary colony under the legal authority of lord baltimore.
the legal title of proprietor gave its possessor almost king like authority over his domains.
this early map of maryland 2 4 not only contains the familys coat of arms in the top corner but the text underneath proclaims lord baltimore absolute lord and proprietor calvert learned an important lesson from jamestown the lure of profits from tobacco agriculture could drive colonists to starve themselves to death to get rich quickly.
to avoid this danger he ordered that settlers first obtain a sufficient quantity of corn and other provisions of victual before producing tobacco or other commodities for export.
although he envisioned his colony as a haven for catholics calvert knew that its the chesapeake colonies economic success depended on attracting laborers so the colony would need to be equally hospitable to protestants.
maryland therefore afforded religious freedom to all christians.
from the start the proprietors and the freemen battled over control of the colony.
colonists challenged lord baltimore.
the maryland assembly routinely voted down bills he introduced baltimore responded by blocking acts passed by the assembly.
exacerbating the discord was the continuing religious tension between the catholic proprietor and the overwhelmingly protestant assembly.
eventually the two sides accommodated each other and by the 1640s maryland had a functional legislature.
life in the chesapeake tobacco and society the demands of an expanding tobacco economy in the chesapeake an area that included parts of virginia and maryland bordering chesapeake bay produced a society that was driven by the profit motive.
tobacco production rose dramatically in the mid seventeenth century with exports from virginia to england growing from over 10 000 pounds in the first years of production and export to well over a million pounds by the end of the 1630s.
attracting laborers to work in the tobacco fields proved difficult.
indentured servants individuals who contracted to be servants for a specified number of years usually four to seven years provided an important source of labor.
employers paid for the voyage of their indentured servants to the colonies and clothed and fed them while they remained bound to their employer.
at the end of the term of service employers usually gave their indentured servants clothes and tools and allowed them to set out on their own.
african slaves provided another source of labor but slavery was not yet the dominant labor system in the region and slavery had not yet hardened into a fixed status.
a few slaves did eventually obtain their freedom.
most planters preferred men for the arduous work of growing tobacco so immigrants to the chesapeake society were overwhelmingly male.
scholars estimate that before 1640 men 2 4 early map of maryland this early map of maryland included the coat of arms of the calvert family a visible reminder that proprietor lord baltimore enjoyed almost monarchical authority over colonists.
out numbered women by as much as six to one.
the lopsided sex ratio meant that the few women who migrated to the region and managed to survive the high mortality rates enjoyed considerable control over their decision to marry.
since women often outlived their husbands a fortunate woman could make several favorable matches during her life and create a sizeable estate.
by 1700 as food supplies sanitation and shelter all improved more children were born in the region more women migrated there and sex ratios became less lopsided.
tobacco agriculture shaped the distinctive pattern of settlement in the chesapeake.
rather than organize themselves into towns colonists spread out in search of arable land to plant.
they prized locations close to navigable rivers that fed into one of the major waterways in the area because that made shipping tobacco easier and cheaper.
a few wealthy planters monopolized these choice locations.
the demands of tobacco agriculture led to an almost insatiable need for additional land which exacerbated the tensions with local indians determined to prevent further encroachments on their territories.
how did the unbalanced sex ratio of the chesapeake affect gender roles in this colonial region.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 new england the same year that the virginia company of london obtained a charter to settle what is now virginia another group of investors organized a rival company the virginia company of plymouth intending to settle north of virginia.
their charter included lands as far north as modern bangor maine.
in 1607 the company established a small plantation at the sagadahoc river known now as the kennebec.
the fierce maine winter however proved too much for the colonists who abandoned the settlement and returned to england.
although the regions severe winters seemed to have doomed the prospects of settling this region a group of protestant religious dissenters known as puritans expressed interest in migrating to new england.
the ascension of queen elizabeth i 1558 1603 who had embraced the protestant faith and supported the ideals of the reformation helped further the progress of the english reformation.
the queens support for protestantism the name puritan is very aptly stopped well short of what the most zealous reformers had sought.
elizabeth given to these men.
because opted to chart a middle path between they think themselves.
more traditional catholicism and the pure than others.
and separate most radical wing of the protestant reformation.
those who urged further themselves from all other reform earned themselves the name churches and congregations puritans because of their desire to purify as spotted and defiled the church of england of all vestiges of john whitgift catholic belief and practice.
elizabeth never married and produced elizabethan clergyman 1573 no heir so the royal line passed to her cousin king james vi of scotland who became james i of england when elizabeth died in 1603.
although eager to assert his power james was not particularly interested in pursuing the ideals of the protestant reformation.
when his son charles i ascended the throne in 1625 and took a french catholic woman for his wife proponents of reform feared the worst a revival of catholicism.
in response to religious developments in england two factions emerged within the reformation movement.
puritans continued to believe that reform was possible within the church of england.
separatists bent on further reformation argued for complete separation from the established church.
plymouth plantation in 1608 a large group of separatists fled to holland renowned for its religious toleration and a haven for protestant dissenters including other calvinists from france and england.
life there proved difficult for the english separatists.
the problem was not persecution but rather the corrupting influences of the affluent urban culture of the dutch republic.
describing the separatists experience in the dutch university town of why were english reformers called puritans.
leiden william bradford recalled the manifold temptations of the place and expressed particular concern that the separatists children would be drawn away by evil examples into extravagant and dangerous courses jan steen a dutch painter who explored the theme of corruption in many of his paintings captured these fears in his portrayals of dutch urban life.
images as history corruption versus piety examines one of steens moralizing paintings about the temptations of dutch life.
new england images as history corruption versus piety in his painting the topsy turvy world jan steen conjures up a chaotic household that seems to be the exact opposite of the ideals of domestic tranquility godliness and order.
the painting depicts a multitude of sins.
the seated couple in the middle represents unbridled sensuality.
the duck on the shoulder of the piously dressed man mocks the couples commitment to religion.
neither man nor woman seems aware of the lewd behavior around them.
what moral lessons does this painting teach and how does the artist represent the vices of city life in holland.
a small child unattended smokes a pipe while another unsupervised youth steals a coin from a purse in the cupboard against the wall.
the duck on the shoulder of the man mocks his false piety.
the man hides his face in his book rather than restore order to the chaos around him.
jan steen the topsy turvy world the immodestly dressed woman in the center of the painting leers at viewers.
she rests a wine glass suggestively in the lap of the drunken man seated next to her.
the animals represent vice and disorder.
instead of sitting obediently in the background the dog scavenges for food on the table while a pig roots around on the floor for a meal.
read the document mayflower compact what does jan steens painting tell us about the world english separatists encountered in holland.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 english separatists living in leiden decided that life in tolerant worldly holland posed too many temptations.
a group of the leiden separatists resolving to leave sinful holland returned to england briefly before setting out for what they believed to be the unspoiled new world.
later called pilgrims a term traditionally used to describe christians on a spiritual quest for salvation they set sail for virginia.
after a harrowing two month journey aboard their ship the mayflower the pilgrims found themselves not off virginia but rather off the coast of cape cod in what is now massachusetts in late fall 1620.
william bradford their leader described the experience of arriving safely in america in emotional terms.
being thus arrived at safe harbor and brought safe to land the pilgrims then fell upon their knees and blessed the god of heaven who had brought them over the vast and furious ocean realizing that their company charter was not legally binding on a settlement outside virginia they drew up a new political document the mayflower compact 1620 that stated the principles that would govern their community.
the document asserted that its signers did solemnly and mutually in the presence of god and one another covenant and combine ourselves together into a civil body politick for our better ordering and preservation and furtherance of the ends aforesaid the agreement also bound those non pilgrims traveling to america including many servants who promised to abide by the decisions of the community.
the pilgrims named their colony plymouth after the english port they departed from.
their goal was not religious tolera for we must consider that we shall be as a city upon a hill.
the eyes of all people are upon us.
so that if we shall deal falsely with our god in this work we have undertaken and so cause him to withdraw his present help from us we shall be made a story and a by word through the world john winthrop puritan leader 1630 why did john winthrop describe new england as a city upon a hill tion but rather protestant purity.
the pilgrims fled england to create a community purged of all taints of unreformed catholic practice.
tolerance for what they considered religious error was inconsistent with the goal of creating a pure form of christian worship.
the world the pilgrims encountered in massachusetts had been inhabited by indians for millennia but european contact had already irrevocably altered this world.
the indian population of the area had been largely wiped out by the end of the sixteenth century.
contact with european traders and fishing fleets had exposed the indians of this region to smallpox and other devastating pathogens.
life in america was hard for the pilgrims.
half of their complement of just over one hundred men and women died within the first year.
the pilgrims would have all perished had not squanto a local indian from the patuxet a tribe decimated by european diseases befriended them.
english traders had kidnapped squanto years before and taken him to england where he lived as a slave.
through harrowing events involving two further kidnappings squanto eventually returned to new england.
his skills as an interpreter and knowledge of indian agricultural practices proved to be indispensible to the pilgrims.
a godly commonwealth in 1629 charles i dissolved parliament and continued his plans to restore elements of catholic ritual to the english church a move that alarmed the puritans.
his disregard of parliament which included many puritan leaders and his elevation of anti puritan bishops in the church of england struck many reformers as ominous.
the same year that charles i dismissed parliament john winthrop a member of the puritan gentry wrote to his wife that i am verily persuaded god will bring some heavy affliction upon this land a year later winthrop led a group of puritans to new england where they hoped to create a church and community freed from the corruption winthrop saw everywhere in england.
by the early 1630s another twenty thousand puritans would leave england for america.
by 1650 the settlers from the massachusetts bay colony had spread out into the connecticut valley.
read the document john winthrop a model of christian charity new england john winthrop who became the first governor of the massachusetts bay colony captured the puritan vision of the world when he reminded immigrants to america that they must become a city upon a hill an example of true reformation that would guide others toward this holy ideal.
winthrop contrasted the holy purpose of new englands puritans with earlier colonial efforts in virginia which had been driven more by a lust for gold than by love of god.
the hardships and failures of virginia were according to winthrop a direct result of their goals which were carnal and not religious choosing the right type of colonists was also important.
rather than transport a multitude of rude and misgoverned persons the puritans in new england would ensure their success by selecting godly persons and establishing a right form of government that would promote their religious mission.
the settlement of puritan new england differed significantly from that of the chesapeake.
for one in contrast to the settlers of virginia many immigrants to puritan new england were married.
for another unlike many first virginians who were gentlemen the puritans came largely from the middling ranks of society including farmers.
in some cases whole puritan congregations followed their ministers to america during the great migration 1630 1642.
when these settlers arrived they did not scatter in search of better lands or access to navigable waters as did the colonists in the chesapeake but remained clustered in towns.
putting a premium on building stable communities puritans settled in towns and villages so that communities would remain cohesive.
typically a puritan village included a central meetinghouse and a town green.
the geographical distribution of population explored in envisioning evidence patterns of settlement in new england and the chesapeake compared shows the difference between puritan patterns of settlement and those of the chesapeake.
in new england homes clustered close to the center of town and fields were arranged at the outskirts of these town centers.
the meetinghouse literally the nucleus of the community served both a religious and a civic function.
a 1635 law required that new houses be built within half a mile of the meetinghouse.
rather than expand the size of towns and allow settlers to spread out and weaken the bond of community puritans created new towns and villages.
new englands town structure served two read the document profile john winthrop critical functions it enhanced the colonists ability to defend themselves against indian attack and it facilitated the enforcement of communal norms and beliefs.
deviance and misbehavior were easier to control in the small tight knit towns of new england than in the chesapeake.
in 1630 new england boasted 11 towns.
by 1647 the number had tripled to 33 and would rise to more than 100 by 1700.
the family was another building block of puritan society.
puritans migrated to new england as families and their conception of the family was designed to further their religious ideals.
john winthrop expressed this view when he noted that a family is a little common wealth and a common wealth is a greate family the foundation for this set of beliefs was the fifth commandment which enjoined believers to honor their father and mother.
puritans saw this commandment extending well beyond the requirement of honoring parents.
minister john cotton reminded his parishioners that the fifth commandment applied to all our superiors whether in family school church and commonwealth in cottons view honor meant more than reverence it also mandated obedience.
taking these words to heart in 1648 the massachusetts colonists made disobedience to parents a crime punishable by death.
although this penalty was never applied it signaled the seriousness with which the puritans took the idea of patriarchal authority.
the government of the massachusetts colony evolved out of the joint stock company used to raise money to fund the puritans voyage to the new world.
the charter for the company did not require the governing body to remain in england so puritan leaders simply set up their own governing body in america.
in contrast to england where property determined the right to vote massachusetts allowed all male church members this privilege.
since many of the first generation of settlers were church members the franchise in massachusetts was much more inclusive than that in england.
historians estimate that 40 percent of men may have qualified to vote in the 1630s.
puritan law encouraged sobriety and a strong work ethic and discouraged frivolity.
folk customs that had been traditional parts of religious observances were banned from new england worship.
christmas too was purged of all non religious what does john cottons interpretation of the fifth commandment reveal about puritan society.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 envisioning evidence patterns of settlement in new england and the chesapeake compared puritan towns were clustered around a meeting house.
these buildings served as places of worship and as the political center of the community.
the strong pull inward toward a town center with the meeting house at the core is illustrated in the diagram of a typical new england town and the map of sudbury massachusetts below left.
town ordinances actually forbade settlers from establishing homesteads too far from the meeting house.
settlement in towns helped puritans preserve their religious mission by enhancing the ability of neighbors to watch one another and report anti social or religiously disruptive behavior to legal or church authorities.
settlement in the chesapeake followed a different model.
here the profit motive and the desire to find the most fertile lands and access to navigable rivers pulled settlers outward.
the diagram of settlement in the chesapeake and the map of st marys county in maryland shows how settlers in the chesapeake scattered across the area in search of good land and access to waterways they could use to export their cash crops.
the pursuit of wealth pushed chesapeake settlers outward in search of fertile lands and access to navigable waterways which made it easier to get tobacco to market.
b a sud b new englands strong religious values and laws restricted settlement too far from the center of towns.
this strong pull inward encouraged the creation of towns.
st marys county swamp wi c basford manor om ic charles county er east str ee t riv pond swamp meeting house mill sand hill st clements manor merchant or official household 1 4 miles 1 4 kilometers 2 miles sudbury mass.
17th century commonly held land c privately held lots residences what were the most important differences in the settlement patterns typical of the chesapeake and new england.
4 additional households not located by tract d new england 2 5 puritans chase away father christmas this anti puritan woodcut pokes fun at the puritans opposition to traditional christmas celebrations which included drunkenness and too much mad mirth trappings.
in this anti puritan woodcut 2 5 a puritan chases away father christmas a cultural figure similar to santa claus.
indeed in the 1650s puritans outlawed many popular christmas customs.
challenges to puritan orthodoxy massachusetts sought to enforce orthodoxy through its laws the layout of its towns and the messages preached by its clergy.
yet despite these efforts to enforce conformity the reformation vision that animated puritanism contained radical ideas that threatened the survival of the city upon a hill.
the first great challenge to orthodoxy in massachusetts came in 1635 from the devout separatist minister roger williams.
he attacked the government of massachusetts bay for using the power of the state to enforce religious orthodoxy.
for williams the goal of creating a purified church led to the conclusion that government ought not to meddle in religious affairs.
williams advocated the complete separation of church and state.
whereas many modern supporters of the separation of church and state seek to prevent government from being influenced by religion williams sought the opposite to protect religion from possible corruption by government.
for additional discussion see competing visions antinomianism or toleration the puritan dilemma.
williams also attacked the colonists for unjustly seizing indian lands a position that proved almost as unpopular as his novel religious views.
although governor john winthrop of massachusetts greatly respected williams for his intellect and piety massachusetts bay could not tolerate his direct challenge to the states authority to enforce religious orthodoxy.
before he could be arrested williams fled the colony and headed south.
he purchased land from the narragansett indians and settled in what is now rhode island.
thankful that god had rescued him from his enemies williams named his new settlement providence eventually he returned to england and in 1644 obtained a parliamentary charter for a new colony rhode island.
while the massachusetts bay colony was still reeling from the williams controversy a new challenge to orthodoxy emerged.
in 1634 anne hutchinson the wife of a prominent merchant began holding religious meetings in her home.
a dynamic speaker and forceful personality hutchinson was also a gifted thinker who did not accept the inferior status that puritan theology accorded women.
although she did not directly question the role prescribed for women her actions implicitly challenged accepted ideas about gender roles in puritan society.
hutchinson also openly questioned the theological purity of the colonys leading ministers.
in her view only one minister john cotton was preaching the true calvinist idea that only gods grace alone could bring about salvation.
hutchinson charged the other ministers with sliding backward toward the notion that good works could contribute to salvation.
attacking the religious views of the ministry was bad enough but for a woman to do so especially one who attracted a following among both sexes was too much.
the colonys leaders feared that hutchinson and her followers had succumbed to the antinomian what do new englands laws reveal about its culture.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 heresy.
antinomians took the logic of calvinism to its extreme the elect if possessed of true saving grace need not follow earthly laws.
if good works really had no connection to salvation then why follow earthly laws.
most puritans feared that the antinomian heresy would lead to moral anarchy.
for additional discussion see competing visions antinomianism or tolerance the puritan dilemma.
the puritans also charged hutchinson with violating the fifth commandment by refusing to honor and obey the ministers who were the colonys patriarchs.
in 1637 hutchinson was hauled before a special court and subjected to a grueling examination.
during this ordeal she brilliantly parried virtually all of the questions posed.
at the end of her examination however she made a serious mistake.
when asked how she could be so sure of her actions she claimed that god spoke directly to her by an immediate revelation.
puritans believed that god spoke to his chosen people only by his revealed word the bible not by direct revelations.
for winthrop and others the claim that god spoke directly to hutchinson exposed the dangerous antinomian strain in her thinking.
if this was true anyone including those who acted immorally could simply claim to be acting according to a prophetic voice from god.
hutchinson was convicted and banished from massachusetts bay colony.
she headed south to rhode island where she and several of her followers sought refuge before eventually settling on what is now long island near the dutch town of new amsterdam in the colony of new netherlands.
while puritans in new england continued striving to build their city upon a hill and protect it from heresy puritans on the other side of the atlantic had been locked in a protracted political struggle with king charles i.
this led to civil war in 1642.
emerging victorious parliament tried the king for crimes against his people and executed him in 1649.
the commander of parliamentary forces oliver cromwell assumed the title of lord protector of england with nearly monarchical powers.
while raising an army against the king parliament had decided to lift censorship and allow freedom of the press for the first time in english history.
to gain popular support and recruit soldiers for their army parliament also inaugurated a new policy of religious toleration for all protestants.
with censorship lifted a host of sectarian religious groups emerged during the civil war.
one of these sects the society of friends or quakers believed each individual possessed a divine spark why was ann hutchinson such a threat to the puritan elite.
of grace an inner light that could lead him or her to salvation.
the origin of the word quaker is complex.
the leader of the quakers george fox had earned this name when he reminded a magistrate that the righteous ought to tremble at the word of the lord the name stuck because of the nature of quaker worship.
as one contemporary noted men women and children would fall into quaking fits in response to the workings of grace within themselves.
quakers rejected the need for any ministry at all.
at their meetings anyone who felt the spirit move within them was entitled to preach.
expansion and conflict in contrast to the disease ridden chesapeake new englands environment was reasonably healthy and the population expanded owing to natural increase.
infant mortality in new england was lower than in england.
although exact figures are difficult to obtain historians estimate that just over 10 percent of the children born in colonial new england died before their first birthday.
the comparable figure in england was about 15 percent.
while few people in england lived past middle age about 50 percent of new englanders who survived to age 20 would have lived until their late 60s.
new englands growing population combined with the relative longevity of its inhabitants created enormous pressure to acquire additional land so that children could start their own families.
religious leaders played a prominent role in new englands early expansion.
the puritan minister thomas hooker led a group of massachusetts settlers in 1636 and founded the town of hartford connecticut the reverend john davenport left massachusetts and established the town of new haven connecticut a year later.
in 1638 representatives from connecticut towns drafted a frame of government the fundamental orders of connecticut.
expansion into the connecticut valley brought new englanders into direct conflict with the local pequot indians who refused to submit to english authority.
in the resulting fierce war against the pequots new englanders exploited intertribal rivalries to gain an advantage over the pequots.
new englanders aligned with tribes that sought to take advantage of the colonists firearms to destroy a rival tribe.
the ferocity of english warfare horrified the narragansett and mohegan indians traditional enemies of the pequots who joined forces with the english in the war against the pequots.
new england competing visions antinomianism or toleration the puritan dilemma during the english civil war english puritans embraced the idea of religious toleration for all protestants.
new englanders who continued to oppose such policies gained a reputation for intolerance.
nathaniel ward a massachusetts puritan defended new englands polices against english criticism.
in new england roger williams championed the new idea of toleration.
for williams the religious and secular spheres were entirely separate.
freedom in one sphere had no necessary implications for actions in the other sphere.
in his pamphlet the simple cobbler of aggwam nathaniel ward captured the views of puritan new englanders who opposed religious toleration.
according to ward religious toleration invariably led to ethical relativism and moral anarchy.
without religion to guide behaviour how could one avoid the temptation to indulge the basest passions.
wee have beene reputed.
wild opinionists swarmed into a remote wildernes to find elbow roome for our phanatick doctrines and practises i trust our diligence past and constant sedulity against such persons and courses will plead better things for us.
i dare take upon me to bee the herald of new engiand so farre as to proclaime to the world in the name of our colony that all.
antinomians anabaptists and other enthusiasts shall have free liberty to keepe away from us and such as will come to be gone as fast as they can the sooner the better.
that state that will give liberty of conscience in matters of religion must give liberty of conscience and conversation in their morall laws or else the fiddle will be out of tune and some of the strings crack.
experience will teach churches and christians that it is farre better to live in a state united though a little corrupt then in a state whereof some part is incorrupt and all the rest divided.
the ranters a true antinomian sect that emerged in the chaos of the english civil war believed that salvation exempted one from all earthly law including laws prohibiting sexual misconduct.
read the document john calvin on predestination roger williams followed the logic of puritanism in a different direction.
in his zeal to purify the church williams came to believe it was impossible for any earthly power to rid itself of corruption and false piety.
to avoid contaminating the purity of religion he proposed separating church and state.
williams developed the metaphor of the state as a ship.
although passengers were free to worship as they saw fit this did not exempt them from following the orders of the captain.
is the metaphor of the ship of state an effective rebuttal to those who feared that liberty would become anarchy.
that ever i should speak or write a title that tends to such an infinite liberty of conscience is a mistake and which i have ever disclaimed and abhorred.
to prevent such mistakes i shall at present only propose this case there goes many a ship to sea with many hundred souls in one ship whose weal and woe is common and is a true picture of a commonwealth or a human combination or society.
it hath fallen out sometimes that both papists and protestants jews and turks may be embarked in one ship upon which supposal i affirm that all the liberty of conscience that ever i pleaded for turns upon these two hinges that none of the papists protestants jews or turks be forced to come to the ships prayers of worship nor compelled from their own particular prayers or worship if they practice any.
i further add that i never denied that notwithstanding this liberty the commander of this ship ought to command the ships course yea and also command that justice peace and sobriety be kept and practiced both among the seamen and all the passengers.
why did puritans oppose religious toleration.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 the caribbean colonies louisiana f lo ri from englands point of view the economic jewel in the atlantic world was not the american mainland but the caribbean sugar islands not long after columbus landed in the bahamas in 1492 the spanish established a firm colonial presence in the caribbean.
by the early 1600s spain france england and holland had colonies in the area.
the enormous wealth of the sugar islands encouraged warfare among these rival colonial powers that resulted in a continuous redrawing of the map as islands traded hands between different colonial powers 2 6.
during cromwells rule admiral sir william penn seized jamaica from spain in 1655 and france took part of hispaniola haiti in 1664.
france and england traded islands such as st kitts back and forth for much of the century.
spain conquered the english colony of bahama atlantic ocean islands providence island in 1641.
the most br.
montserrat antigua profitable english sugar colonies were french puerto st kitts 1624 barbados 1627 nevis sugar rico cuba islands st kitts 1628 montserrat 1632 providence hispaniola martinique nevis island 1630 antigua 1632 and st lucia guadeloupe dominica eventually jamaica.
jamaica da gulf of mexico caribbean sea aruba st vincent barbados curacao providence i french possessions spanish possessions english possessions dutch possessions power is sweet although the amount of land that the english cultivated in the caribbean was small the region became the richest in the english atlantic empire.
sugar generated enormous profits for caribbean planters exceeding the value of all exports from the mainland colonies.
because of the enormous wealth of the west indies roughly two thirds of all english migrants headed for the caribbean.
by the mid seventeenth century the population of this region had reached approximately 44 000 while the population of the chesapeake was about 12 000 and new england around 23 000.
the wealth produced by sugar could be substantial.
seventeenth century europe developed an appetite for sugar that seemed limitless.
besides its use in desserts sugar was sprinkled on cooked food as a condiment used to preserve food and used as medicine to treat afflictions.
the use of sugar why did the caribbean become the jewel in the crown of englands colonial empire.
2 6 caribbean colonies the sugar islands of the caribbean became the most profitable region of the atlantic economy.
barbados became a major producer of sugar and an example for how slavery could be accommodated to english law.
could also broadcast wealth social status or power.
wealthy europeans displayed lavish sugar sculptures with intricately carved figurines and scenes on banquet tables for guests to admire.
producing sugar and preparing it for export required a labor force capable of surviving the brutal heat of the caribbean.
sugar production also entailed backbreaking and dangerous agricultural labor.
the multistage process that followed the cutting of the cane required additional labor at every phase.
this french engraving 2 7 shows the multiple stages of sugar production including milling and boiling.
barbados the emergence of a slave society the key island economically in the english caribbean was barbados.
far from the sea routes plied by spanish fleets barbados avoided the european view the closer look sugar and slavery the caribbean colonies i consider the laws concerning negroes to be reasonable for by reason of their numbers they become dangerous being a brutish sort of people and reckoned as goods and chattels property in the island colonial english official 1680 rivalry and warfare that embroiled other parts of the caribbean.
visitors to the island often found it more healthful than any of her neighbors by 1660 26 000 english immigrants had settled there drawn by the promise of wealth through the sugar trade.
because of the harsh conditions for laborers on barbados and the high mortality of workers in the sugar fields maintaining an adequate labor force was a serious problem.
during the first decade of colonization planters in barbados emulated their countrymen in virginia relying heavily on indentured servants as a labor source.
some unfortunate individuals were actually barbadosed to use the seventeenth century phrase that became a synonym for kidnapped but originally meant being abducted and transported to the caribbean to work in the sugar fields.
desperate for workers planters even tried convict labor.
the need for agricultural labor eventually led english planters to emulate the portuguese and spanish and turn to slave labor.
within the first decade of turning to sugar production barbadian planters bought 20 000 african slaves.
within the colonies of the english atlantic world barbados became the primary destination for african slaves who outnumbered whites there by 1660.
spanish and portuguese law had easily accommodated the institution of slavery.
but english law had no precedent upon which to draw in framing a law for slavery.
the first efforts to deal with slavery occurred in a piecemeal fashion.
early laws dealt with slave theft and other practical problems such as slaves wandering off their plantations.
by 1661 barbados had enacted a comprehensive set of laws to govern relations between masters and slaves.
the barbadian slave code created a system of legalized segregation in which race defined servitude.
harsh penalties prevented slaves from challenging the authority of their masters.
the legal code also minimized penalties for masters mistreatment of slaves.
murdering a slave incurred a modest fine while accidentally killing a slave during punishment carried no legal penalty at all.
the barbadian slave code would provide a model for other areas of the english atlantic where slavery took hold including virginia.
2 7 sugar production this engraving of the various steps in the production of west indian sugar shows the centrality of black slave labor for sugar agriculture.
why did barbados turn to slavery as its primary source of labor.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 the restoration era and the proprietary colonies in 1660 charles ii r 1660 1685 reestablished the english monarchy.
the restoration as this period was known inaugurated a new phase in the evolution of english colonial america.
the driving force behind colonization now came from a small group of courtiers aristocrats close to the king who used their influence to secure colonial charters.
in america building on the model pioneered by lord baltimore these new restorationera proprietors sought to increase their wealth while advancing their own particular political and religious ideals.
the new colonies also experienced the same type of conflicts that had plagued maryland.
proprietors struggled to impose their vision of government on settlers who demanded representation.
nevertheless by 1700 england had cemented its control of the eastern seaboard of america from the carolinas to northern new england 2 8.
the english conquest of the dutch colony of new netherland maine er.
2 8 seventeenthcentury english mainland colonies this map shows the restoration colonies of carolina new york new jersey and pennsylvania.
by 1700 england had established its dominance on the eastern seaboard of north america.
english control extended from northern new england to the carolinas.
aw re nc mass.
st l new hampshire u ro n l e ak er new york 1630 r h ke n eo lak io ta r massachusetts on la huds 1630 plymouth colony boston 1620 1664 rhode island 1636 new haven new york ie pennsylvania connecticut 1635 east jersey 1681 1664 philadelphia west jersey oh io r 1664 virginia 1607 maryland 1634 jamestown atl antic ocean carolina 1663 early seventeenth century colonies founded 1607 1640 restoration era colonies founded 1660 1685 what was the restoration.
along with england the other great protestant nation in europe was holland the netherlands which also engaged in trans atlantic trade including sugar and slaves.
although dutch merchants traveled the entire atlantic world the dutch had established only a modest presence in north america.
the dutch exploration of the hudson river 1609 laid the foundation for the colony of new netherland.
the dutch east india company established fur trading outposts in present day albany new york in 1614.
about a decade later the dutch established a settlement at the tip of manhattan island that they called new amsterdam in honor of hollands most important city.
the dutch welcomed traders from across europe and embraced religious toleration.
the small but thriving city of new amsterdam included dutch english scandinavians germans and portuguese.
by the mid century a few sephardic jews portuguese and spanish jews who had fled persecution in portuguese brazil had also joined the community.
the centrality of the fur trade to the economy of new amsterdam emerges in this early image of view the map european empires in 1660 the restoration era and the proprietary colonies the city.
although the image 2 9 does not accurately depict the two indians it shows that the wealth of the city depended on the cooperation of indian trappers.
the hudson river made it easy to ship beaver pelts downriver to new amsterdam from the area around albany.
merchants shipped these pelts to europe where their fur was prized for hats.
this image also features the citys port a key to its economic vitality.
unhappy that dutch merchants in new netherland were getting rich in the fur trade english merchants urged the crown to seize the dutch stronghold.
the thriving longlived communities of new england had faced the prospect of running out of land and splinter communities had sprung up in connecticut and as far south as long island just southeast of new amsterdam.
the expansion of english settlers into the region claimed by the dutch increased friction between england and holland.
the prospect of eliminating the dutch corridor between english settlements in the chesapeake and new england also appealed to charles ii and particularly to his brother james duke of york.
charles ii gave his brother a charter for the area and dispatched a fleet to seize new netherland in 1664.
although peter stuyvesant the dutch governor tried to rally opposition to the english invasion dutch merchants in the city decided that it was better to secure favorable terms from the superior english forces than fight.
after their conquest of the dutch the english divided the region into two new colonies new york and new jersey.
james intended to take firm control of new york.
he believed that his role as proprietor gave him almost absolute power over his dominions.
protesting their lack of adequate representation new yorkers refused to pay taxes.
eventually james relented and the first new york assembly convened in 1683.
a peaceable kingdom quakers in pennsylvania after the capture of new netherland james granted land that would become new jersey to courtiers who attracted settlers by promising representation and religious toleration for all protestants.
one of these men the quaker william penn saw an unprecedented opportunity for creating a religious refuge for members of his faith and others persecuted for their religious beliefs.
penns father admiral sir william penn had helped wrest jamaica from the spanish.
the king also owed him a large debt.
the king paid this debt with a grant for a large tract of land near new jersey that became known as pennsylvania penns woods.
as a result of this enormous gift of land penns ambitious plans for pennsylvania a colony inspired by his quaker vision of religious toleration soon overshadowed his involvement in new jersey.
one of the few radical sects to survive the english civil war quakers had been persecuted for their beliefs in the restoration era.
quakers believed individual congregations could conduct their own worship without priests.
the group also refused to abide by social customs that demanded individuals show deference to those who stood above them in society.
thus quakers refused to doff their hats and refrained from using any form of honorific address such as sir lord or lady.
quakers simply addressed each other as thee and thou terms that sound odd to the modern ear but that signified their belief that everyone was equal before god.
penn intended pennsylvania to be a holy experiment in which quakers would live in harmony with those of other faiths.
penns peaceable kingdom also embraced indians.
true to his quaker principles penn resolved to negotiate for indian lands and submit disputes to arbitration by a committee composed of indians and quakers.
view the map atlas map settlement in north america c 1660 2 9 new amsterdam in this image a europeanizedlooking indian man hands a small furry animal to a similarly unrealistic indian woman.
the image captures the importance of the fur trade to the economy of this region.
how did pennsylvania embody quaker ideals.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 our worthy proprietor treated the indians with extraordinary humanity they became very civil and loving to us and brought in an abundance of venison richard townsend quaker 1682 penn desired to live beside the indians as neighbors and friends penn praised the local leni lenape people for their eloquence and honor and tried to learn their language and customs.
during the first generation of settlement when land was plentiful and the immigrant population small pennsylvania upheld penns promise to treat the indians with respect.
in formulating a government for his colony penn drew on a number of new ideas in english politics including the writings of the english political philosopher james harrington who believed that a stable society depended on a relatively broad distribution of property.
in harringtons view owning property gave individuals a permanent stake in society and also allowed men to be independent voting for representatives without being manipulated or intimidated.
the carolinas influential english courtiers the lords proprietors founded carolina as a joint effort hoping to make money and create a buffer between spanish florida and other english settlements on the eastern seaboard.
although the lords proprietors sought to shape their dominion according to their own vision the settlers who migrated there had other ideas.
from the outset carolinas fortunes were closely tied to those of the west indies barbados in particular.
many of the colonys first settlers emigrated from the west indies.
rather than produce goods for export to england carolina began as a colony of a colony providing naval stores such as pine tar resins to waterproof ships and food such as cattle for the west indian islands.
how did the restoration era colonies differ from earlier colonies on the issue of religious toleration.
the lords proprietors had studied new england and virginia and had concluded that new england style towns were superior to the inconvenience and barbarisme of scattered dwellings that characterized settlement in the chesapeake.
the visions of lords proprietors and the interests and aspirations of the colonists clashed.
rather than settle in the new england style nucleated villages villages with a town center as the proprietors had hoped settlers followed the chesapeake model scattering to find the most productive land and when available access to navigable waterways.
in 1712 the proprietors divided their holdings into two colonies north carolina and south carolina.
the crown took over south carolina in 1719 and north carolina a decade later.
the close economic ties between carolina and barbados meant that its early settlers were well acquainted with slavery.
but the settlers who tried to impose the west indies slave system on the frontier environment of carolina discovered problems they had not anticipated.
the rude conditions of early carolina history its small population and simple economy made it harder to maintain social distance between slaves and their masters.
the carolinas were at the edge of english america.
their proximity to spanish controlled florida and hostile indian tribes meant that slaves and masters had to work closely together including defending settlements against attack.
the location of the carolinas also encouraged a less exploitive form of slavery as slaves in the carolinas had more opportunities to run away and might find refuge with indian tribes.
by contrast apart from a few mountainous regions on islands such as jamaica the west indies afforded few sanctuaries for runaway slaves.
relations with local indian tribes were complex.
conflicts among indian tribes provided early carolina colonists with an unexpected economic boon the sale of indian slaves became a lucrative enterprise.
indians sold prisoners they had taken during intertribal warfare to the english who then exported them to other british colonies.
carolinians also traded with indian tribes for deer hides which were exported to england.
at the start of the eighteenth century these exports were surpassed by a new crop rice which was developed with help from agricultural knowledge brought to america by african slaves.
carolina began as a colony of a colony but soon became an integral part of the atlantic economy exporting slaves deer hides and eventually rice.
view the closer look competing visions lord baltimore and william penn two visions of religious toleration the crises of the late seventeenth century the crises of the late seventeenth century the last quarter of the seventeenth century was a period of unrest in colonial north america.
religious and ethnic tensions sometimes produced political volatility.
in spanish new mexico and in english new england and virginia europeans were pitted against indigenous populations.
in maryland animosities between the catholic proprietor and a largely protestant population caused friction.
in new york divisions between the dutch and the english kept old wounds open.
in new york and maryland the tensions triggered a crisis that led to government reorganization.
other forces were at work as well.
relations between the english and the indians had settled into a pattern of mutual suspicion and antagonism.
colonial governors became entangled in mediating disputes between land hungry settlers and tribes eager to fend them off.
seeing the brutality of anglo indian warfare many witnesses who testified at the salem witchcraft trials envisioned the devil as a tawny skinned tormentor whose tortures resembled those used by indians on their enemies.
finally at the end of the seventeenth century the political realignment associated with the glorious revolution in england helped usher in a new era of political stability in the colonies.
war and rebellion in new england relations with the wampanoag indians who had helped the pilgrims had deteriorated since both groups sat down for their harvest feast in 1621.
the wampanoag leader metacom whom the colonists sometimes called king philip grew frustrated with english expansion and eventually led the wampanoags in king philips war against new englanders.
the fierce fighting spread across new england with hardly a town escaping the conflict.
nearly 3 000 indians died in the conflict and almost 1 000 colonists.
this map shows the devastating impact of the war which ravaged dozens of towns in new england 2 10.
puritans interpreted the ferocity as a sign of gods displeasure.
increase mather a leading puritan minister reported that after the war ended the government of massachusetts appointed a committee to promote a reformation of those evils which hath provoked the lord to bring the sword upon us among the causes of gods displeasure mather listed drunkenness the presence of heretical sects such as the quakers an obsession with material profit and a loss of modesty demonstrated by attention to fashion especially excesses in apparel and hair in the chesapeake tensions between colonists and indians also led to violence.
in virginia bacons rebellion a popular uprising named after its leader nathaniel bacon erupted in 1676.
the royal governor sir william berkeley had long played favorites dealing out lucrative patronage positions and generous land grants to his cronies.
the governor had also made a handsome profit from the fur trade with indians.
frustrated by berkeleys policies bacon a relative newcomer to the colony and a distant relative of the governor decided to challenge berkeleys corruption and favoritism.
finding a common enemy the areas indians bacon attracted a broad range of virginians to his cause.
he drew some support from planters frustrated with berkeleys favoritism and landowners frustrated by the governors refusal to adopt a more expansionist policy and acquire additional indian land for settlement.
he drew the bulk of his supporters however from the bottom ranks of virginia society including indentured servants and slaves.
promising to exterminate indians and distribute land to all bacon exploited the deep class resentments that had smoldered for a long time in the chesapeake region.
the success of bacon forced berkeley to flee to the eastern shore of the chesapeake.
buoyed by popular support bacon torched the colonys capital jamestown.
bacons rising star faded almost as quickly as it rose when he died from fever leaving the rebellion leaderless.
berkeley returning with reinforcements easily defeated the remnants of bacons followers.
a commission investigating the causes of the uprising concluded that the giddy headed multitude what were the main causes of bacons rebellion.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 abe haw r k d hu na s a northfield squakeag e e r f i e l d r may 19 1676.
peskeompscut deerfield poc umt hopewell swamp aug 25 1675 m groton chelmsford millers r bloody brook sept 18 1675 ck ipmu magunkaquog worcester manchage hassanemesit springfield maanexit wabbaquasset quantisset windsor tu hartford ke c wethersfield n an t new london stonington lyme providence middleborough sandwich barnstable dartmouth wickford great swamp fight dec 19 1675 westerly fishers island yarmouth mashpee mt.
hope newport narragansett fort eastham nemasket t setportsmouth agan narr long island sound aug 1 1676 swansea pawtuxet warwick.
saybrook guilford p ly m o u t h taunton rehoboth seekonk pawtucket r nni t qui u new haven branford ic wallingford thames r r norwich c piac n.
ot heg e haddam r pequ co nnecti cut middletown c mo o t noag wampa quinebaug r o gt in.
farmington duxbury mendon bridgewater attleboro she farm r mas sachu set t s co l on y plymouth suffield n marblehead wrentham chabanakongkomun simsbury salem s r brookfield quabaug westfield at l a n t i c ocean deer island b a y malden medford sudbury charlestown cambridge watertown boston hull roxbury hingham dorcester.
dedham cohasset braintree scituate weymouth medfield marshfield punkapoag marlborough n k lynn woburn concord okommakemesit hatfield hadley ac billerica nashobah lancaster northampton im r rowley ipswich andover topsfield wamesit gloucester wenham r er mt.
wachusett uck salisbury newbury amesbury haverhill i nak mo charle b z uz pettaquamscut garrison pocasset swamp july 19 1675 block island d ar s ba y nantucket sound edgartown madaket marthas vineyard nantucket intense warfare in the northeast indian settlement rhode i sl and english settlement attack on english settlement major battles 2 10 king philips war this map suggests the scale of the conflict between indians and puritans during king philips war.
attracted to bacons rebellion was largely composed of men lately crept out of the condition of servants for the colonys leaders an especially troubling aspect of the rebellion was the interracial solidarity among servants including whites serving temporary indentures and africans slaves.
indeed one group of rebels was composed of 80 blacks and 20 whites.
slavery in virginia began as a legally amorphous category.
earlier in the century some slaves had managed to acquire their freedom either through grants from their master or through their own resourcefulness.
one slave who took advantage of the earlier laxity in the law was anthony johnson who became a planter himself.
by the eve of bacons rebellion virginias laws regarding slavery had hardened into an almost impenetrable barrier preventing slaves from what economic and demographic forces contributed to the emergence of slavery in the chesapeake region.
achieving what anthony johnson had attained freedom.
bacons rebellion accelerated these changes driving virginia to invest more heavily in slaves.
the danger posed by a giddy multitude of landless laborers whose frustration so called rabble rousers such as nathaniel bacon could exploit hastened the shift away from use of indentured servants to african slaves who would remain a permanent underclass.
economic and demographic forces also pushed virginia toward a slave based economy.
among these the number of immigrants into the chesapeake declined during the late seventeenth century reducing the available work force.
as the price of slaves decreased and the high levels of mortality in the region including of slaves dropped purchasing slaves became more economical.
previously there had been little in read the document nathaniel bacons declaration 1676 the crises of the late seventeenth century centive to purchase a slave for almost twice the price of an indentured servant if the slave was unlikely to live long enough to make the difference in price economically advantageous.
at mid century a mere 300 slaves resided in the chesapeake.
by 1700 there were 13 000.
englands colonies were not the only ones rocked by unrest at the end of the seventeenth century.
other parts of the atlantic colonial world experienced similar unrest.
in spanish new mexico disputes culminated in the pueblo revolt 1680.
in new spain indians were pitted against the roman catholic church.
dispirited by droughts and attacks by apache and navajo war parties the pueblo people sought solace in their traditional religious practices and turned away from the catholicism of their spanish conquerors.
fearing a challenge to their authority the spanish catholic missionaries in new mexico brought the full force of church and state power against these heretics rather than accept the new wave of repression indians rose up against spanish authority killing most of the missionaries and more than 400 settlers.
the rebellion drove the spanish from new mexico for more than a decade.
however divisions within the pueblo community and continuing drought hampered the ability of the pueblo people to resist spanish power indefinitely.
when the spanish returned 13 years later they easily reconquered new mexico.
the pueblo revolt forced the spanish to be more tolerant at least to indians who accepted christianity.
they could retain elements of their traditional religious practices and culture including the use of shamans or religious healers.
the spanish also reformed the system of forced labor which improved the indians economic situation.
the dominion of new england and the glorious revolution although the pueblo revolt demonstrated that even spains hierarchical colonial empire was not immune from strife many close to king charles ii of england including his brother james envied the spanish model of empire.
in 1685 charles died without a legitimate son and james ii became englands first catholic monarch in 127 years.
as duke of york james had been closely involved in colonial affairs in new york and he hoped to consolidate the english colonies into larger administrative units with powerful governors similar to those in new spain.
he therefore revoked the colonial charters of new york and new jersey folding them into new england as a single new administrative and political entity the dominion of new england.
a powerful english governor and a council appointed by the king would rule this spanish style dominion.
representative assemblies were abolished and a reorganized legal system made it more difficult for colonists to have access to the courts.
to extract additional wealth from the colonists the colonial government raised taxes dramatically and revoked land deeds.
to regain title to their own land colonists would have to obtain new deeds and pay new taxes on land.
james ii had a bold agenda to strengthen royal power at home as well.
he sought to ally england with catholic france.
james supported religious toleration for catholics and dissenters but sought to impose this policy by royal decree thus alienating potential support among dissenters who were sympathetic to these policies.
even more troubling was his attempt to weaken the militia and raise a standing army which included appointing catholic officers loyal to the crown.
finally james attempted to bypass parliament and raise revenues through taxation.
when parliament refused to accept his agenda james dissolved it.
in the autumn of 1688 english opponents of the king allied with the protestant dutch prince william of orange and ousted james from the throne.
william whose english wife mary was jamess daughter reestablished a protestant monarchy.
the relatively bloodless revolution that led to the ascension of william iii and mary ii was proclaimed a glorious revolution and a vindication of english liberty.
indeed the association between the glorious revolution and english liberty was literally cast in metal.
the commemorative medallion 2 11 produced for 2 11 glorious revolution commemorative medal in this medal commissioned to commemorate the ascension of william and mary to englands throne and the glorious revolution britannia symbol of england sits under an orange tree which was the symbol of william of orange.
she grasps a liberty pole firmly in her hand a reminder that william restored english liberty.
what was the glorious revolution.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 the occasion depicts britannia symbol of england.
she sits under an orange tree the symbol of the prince of orange.
britannia grasps a liberty pole and has her hand on the bible.
the latin inscription announces that the prince of orange restores the law to us william and mary accepted parliaments act declaring the rights and liberties of the subject and settling the succession of the crown more generally known as the english bill of rights.
this act excluded catholics from the monarchy affirmed the supremacy of parliament protected basic rights and asserted that excessive bail ought not to be required nor excessive fines imposed nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted it also affirmed that the subjects which are protestants may have arms for their defense suitable to their condition and as allowed by law restricted to protestants this particular right was further limited by social class and ultimately subject to parliaments right to regulate arms.
taken together the various provisions became an important rallying point for those seeking to limit government power and protect liberty.
while official word of the glorious revolution took time to reach the colonies rumors about the ascension of william and mary arrived in spring 1689.
in the colonies the right to have arms for selfdefense was an absolute necessity and the militia was an important local institution.
in april 1689 2 000 militiamen mostly from country towns marched on boston arrested the governor and restored their old charter.
in late may new yorks militia took control of that colony.
in maryland john coode marched with 700 militiamen to vindicate and assert the sovereign dominion and right of king william and mary protestant resentment against the power of the catholic proprietary government also fueled coodes rebellion.
the glorious revolution in america was a victory for representative government and the notion that a well regulated militia under local control was the best protection for liberty.
the salem witchcraft hysteria within a decade of the close of king philips war 1675 new englanders were again at war with their indian neighbors this time in maine new englanders believed that the devil made his minions sign a book or contract for what purpose.
along the northern border of massachusetts.
fighting was fierce and maines proximity to french quebec led english colonists to see their latest troubles as part of a french catholic plot against protestant new england.
colonists in massachusetts even accused the indians of using witchcraft against them.
complicating matters the recent upheavals of the glorious revolution had not yet produced a stable government and a new royal governor had yet to be appointed in massachusetts.
amid this heightened anxiety came the most serious outbreak of witchcraft accusations in colonial america.
the center of the witchcraft hysteria was salem massachusetts but the accusations spread throughout essex the coastal county closest to maine.
before the witchcraft prosecutions ended 19 innocent men and women would be executed and one man who refused to plead either innocent or guilty suffered an archaic penalty heavy stones were piled on his chest to force him to plead.
rather than enter a plea he was crushed to death.
the puritans who inhabited this region thought themselves an especially attractive target for satan who would they believed have been eager to upset their effort to build a city upon a hill.
new englands covenant with god was mirrored in satans own demonic contracts with witches.
to seal these contracts new englanders believed satan made his disciples sign his book a belief reflected in this seventeenth century woodcut which shows the devil offering his disciples his book to sign 2 12.
the witchcraft hysteria began in salem village the outlying part of the port of salem town.
the first purported occurrence of witchcraft occurred in the home of minister samuel parris whose daughter and her cousin abigail williams began acting strangely.
after consulting a physician who could find no explanation for his daughters illness parris concluded that the girls were victims of witchcraft.
when questioned the girls accused two salem women and tituba a caribbean indian slave whom parris owned of practicing witchcraft.
parris forced a confession from tituba.
the accusations eventually engulfed the whole community.
the scope of the witch hunt changed dramatically when the accusations spread to another local minister george burroughs who had recently returned from maine.
much of the testimony from that point forward concerned the devil taking the shape of an american the crises of the late seventeenth century 2 12 signing satans book in this rough woodcut image satan presents his book to a witch.
puritans believed that the devil required individuals to renounce their covenant with god and sign a new contract with satan.
indian creating another theme in the witchcraft hysteria.
the puritans even compared the suffering they believed that satan inflicted on them with how indians tortured settlers in the brutal frontier war in maine.
historians have identified a number of patterns in the web of accusations.
witches in new england were more likely to be women particularly older women who did not live in male headed households.
women who failed to fit the model of the pious submissive female ruled by a benevolent patriarch an ideal that puritans esteemed were particularly at risk.
pressure to stop the trials mounted particularly after accusations were leveled at more prominent individuals from outside salem.
at the start of the trials ministers had approved the use of spectral evidence testimony that witches were using magic to torture victims.
but as rebecca nurse argued during her trial verifying such evidence was impossible.
how she asked the court could one know if spectral evidence was genuine.
could not satan appear at a trial to confound the court and trick them into accusing the wrong person.
doubts began to trouble leading ministers in the colony including increase mather who had been an early supporter of the prosecutions.
mather delivered a sermon stating a principle that became a bedrock of anglo american law it were better that ten suspected witches should escape than that one innocent person should be condemned the new royal governor william phips.
replaced the court that had handled the witchcraft trials with a new court whose guidelines followed more recent english law and disallowed convictions based on spectral evidence.
what was spectral evidence.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 the whig ideal and the emergence of political stability the massachusetts legal system that produced the salem witchcraft trials was out of step with legal developments in england and even more so in light of the events of the glorious revolution 1688.
the english bill of rights adopted by parliament 1689 not only weakened royal power but also provided stronger protections for individual liberty including explicit prohibitions on cruel and unusual punishments and a more robust affirmation of the right to a jury trial.
in the long struggle between parliament and the monarchy parliament had finally emerged as preeminent in the english political and constitutional system.
the group that supported parliamentary power after the glorious revolution became known as whigs.
their opponents the tories were proponents of monarchical authority.
the period after the glorious revolution ushered in relative political stability in anglo american politics.
this new era of stability did not end political debate but it marked clear boundaries for future discussions.
the whig vision of politics whig theory put into place after the glorious revolution put a premium on the ideal of civic virtue placing the public good above personal interest.
to promote such virtue one needed a society in which property ownership was widespread.
an agricultural nation where farming was thought to encourage honesty frugality and independence was less likely to become corrupt than a society dependent on commerce and manufacturing.
in an agrarian society politics would be less fractious because everyones interest would be similar.
in such a society representatives would be equally affected by whatever laws they passed.
this would prevent them from tyrannizing over the people by passing oppressive laws.
the whig view of politics was not democratic.
it assumed that only men who owned property had a sufficient permanent stake in society to be trusted with the vote.
the few women who owned property mostly widows were not allowed to vote.
according to whig thought only the best most virtuous men would serve as representatives.
the notion of frequent elections became a cornerstone of whig politics.
the great danger however lay in the potential for electoral corruption as reflected in this political cartoon 2 13 which shows voters being what religious ideas were associated with the glorious revolution.
bribed outside a tavern.
the fear of corruption became an important feature of whig political culture underscoring the need for a virtuous elite and an electorate that could not be manipulated by unscrupulous politicians.
the glorious revolution also affected english law.
england had no written constitution but the common law the unwritten rules of law worked out over a centuries by english courts embodied many of the essential liberties esteemed by englishmen.
to these protections parliament had added the bill of rights of 1689 which would strongly influence the worldview of colonists in america.
by asserting the ideal of the rule of law the glorious revolution established the principle that no one not even the king was above the law.
the revolution also lodged the right to tax firmly in the representative branch of government parliament and it rejected the practice of raising a standing army which was considered a serious threat to liberty without the consent of the legislature.
among the other provisions protected by the bill of rights were the rights to petition government for redress of grievances trial by jury and bail and a prohibition on cruel and unusual punishments.
a century later the u s constitutions bill of rights codified and expanded these ideals.
read the document english bill of rights 1689 the whig ideal and the emergence of political stability 2 13 english whig cartoon on electoral corruption in this early political satire of an english election the electorate mill about waiting to be bribed by a candidate.
the text below the scene warned of the dangers of flattery and gold which cause men to be corrupted and liberty sold.
mercantilism federalism and the structure of empire in 1651 the parliament passed the first navigation act designed to limit the profitable dutch trade with the english colonies.
the act required that all goods entering or leaving colonial ports be carried on english or colonial ships and that non english goods be carried on english ships or ships of the country from which the goods originated.
parliament passed even more restrictive navigation acts in 1660 1663 1673 and 1696.
these acts required that all goods be transported on american or english carriers which meant goods from other parts of europe had to transit through english ports before arriving in the colonies.
in 1696 parliament also created the board of trade to help coordinate policy toward the colonies.
three years later parliament passed the woolens act to protect the english woolen industry from competition from ireland and the colonies.
the act did not ban americans from making and selling woolens within the colonies but it prohibited them from exporting woolens to england.
the great eighteenth century scottish economist adam smith called this economic system mercantilism.
according to mercantilist theory the wealth of the mother country england would be increased by heavy governmental regulation of imports and exports to the colonies.
colonies existed to generate wealth for their mother country by supplying it with raw materials and purchasing consumer goods from it.
to enforce its mercantile policies parliament used legislation such as the navigation acts to control colonial behavior.
it also created admiralty courts to try violations of the laws governing commerce.
in 1707 the act of union united the kingdoms of scotland and england creating the united kingdom of great britain.
the act also divided power in the new british empire between local and imperial authority.
colonial assemblies continued to legislate on local matters and parliament exercised powers over the whole empire.
in essence british government had created a federal system that divided power between a distant central authority and local governments.
this system of divided authority paved the way for the modern u s division between national authority seated in washington d c and the individual state governments.
the encouragement of exportation and the discouragement of importation of manufactured goods are the two great engines by which the mercantile system proposes to enrich every country adam smith the wealth of nations 1776 what was the theory of mercantilism.
chapter 2 models of settlement english colonial societies 1590 1710 1634 1638 founding of jamestown john rolfe exports first tobacco crop from virginia mayflower compact signed colony of maryland established pilgrims arrive in massachusetts without a legal title to the land and frame their own government first proprietary colony first successful english colony in america the struggling jamestown colony finally finds a cash crop for export roger williams founds providence first colony founded on religious toleration established in colonial america anne hutchinson banished to rhode island chapter review antinomian controversy ends review questions 1.
how do you account for the early failures of jamestown and its eventual successes.
why were the patterns of settlement in the chesapeake and new england so different.
what forces and ideas shaped the spatial organization of each region.
what role did conflicts with native americans play in the crisis of the latter part of seventeenth century.
what ideas and values were most closely associated with whig politics.
why was the term puritan an apt characterization of the calvinists within the english church seeking further reformation.
key terms headright an incentive system to encourage additional immigrants by giving 50 acres to any man who would pay his own fare to virginia and 50 additional acres for each person brought with him.
proprietor this english legal title carried with it enormous political power giving its possessor almost king like authority over his domains.
colonial proprietors carried similar powers.
quakers the society of friends who believed each individual possessed a divine spark of grace an inner light that could lead to salvation.
restoration in 1660 charles ii became king of england restoring the monarchy to power after the civil war and cromwellian rule.
bacons rebellion a popular uprising in virginia in 1676 named after its leader nathaniel bacon.
glorious revolution the relatively bloodless revolution that led to the ascension of william and mary which was widely seen as a vindication for english liberty.
whigs english 17th century the group that supported parliamentary power after the glorious revolution.
mercantilism theory of empire that advocated strict regulation of trade between colonies and the mother country to benefit the latter.
chapter review 1664 1681 english civil war england captures new netherland which is renamed new york glorious revolution in england salem witchcraft trials william and mary ascend to the throne and whig political ideals triumph a witchcraft hysteria engulfs salem village and salem town english puritans under oliver cromwell take up arms against charles i james duke of york gains control of new york and new jersey william penn obtains royal charter for pennsylvania quaker william penn founds pennsylvania myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of models of settlement.
questions for analysis 1.
why did relations between the english and indians deteriorate so quickly in the seventeenth century.
other resources from this chapter read the document mayflower compact p 43 view the closer look the chickahominy become new john winthrop a model of christian charity p 44 englishmen p 36 john calvin on predestination p 49 nathaniel bacons declaration 1676 p 56 2.
what were the most important differences between the chesapeake colonies and new england.
read the document profile john winthrop p 45 view the image powhatan in longhouse p 37 view the map european empires in 1660 p 52 3.
why did the caribbean become the jewel in the crown of englands colonial empire.
view the closer look sugar and slavery p 50 4.
why did the restoration era colonies adopt a more expansive view of toleration.
view the closer look competing visions lord baltimore and william penn two visions of religious toleration p 54 5.
what legal ideas were associated with the glorious revolution.
read the document english bill of rights 1689 p 60 atlas map settlement in north america c 1660 p 53 in what ways did american colonial society become more english in the first part of the eighteenth century.
enlightenment and awakening p 72 chapter culture and society in the eighteenth century p 66 chapter 2 european exploration and settlement how did europeans explore and establish settlements in the americas.
in this statue in barcelona spain christopher columbus points toward the americas.
2 1 introduction europeans had no knowledge of the people of the americas half a world away or the land where they lived.
when europeans looked west they saw only a vast ocean.
europeans were far more interested in the lands that lay to the east.
in the late 1200s a young man named marco polo traveled through asia with his father a merchant and trader from venice italy.
marco polo spent 17 years in china.
when he returned to venice people flocked to hear his stories of the indies as india and east asia were then known.
he was called the man with a million stories eventually a writer helped marco polo put his adventures into a book.
the book described the wonders polo had seen in china.
it told of rich silks and rare spices gold and jewels and luxurious palaces.
when marco polos book was published very few people in europe could read.
those who did read it were fascinated by its description of riches to the east.
merchants and traders were eager to find the fastest way to get there.
the land route polo had traveled was long and dangerous.
his tales inspired explorers to find an alternative route by sea.
some explorers would seek a route to china by going around the southern tip of africa.
but a few brave souls looked to the west for another route.
such a trip took courage because no one knew how far west sailors would have to sail to reach asia or what monsters and terrors might await them far from europes shore.
in this chapter you will learn how christopher columbus faced these dangers and sailed west to find a route to china.
as you will see his unexpected discovery of the american continents led to competition among european nations to explore and profit from these lands.
you will also learn how europeans established settlements in the american continents and in the process changed both europe and the americas.
european explorers confronted many dangers and fears as they voyaged to new lands.
european exploration and settlement 25 on october 12 1492 columbus stepped on land and claimed for spain an island he named san salvador.
the people he encountered were peaceful their only weapons being small wooden spears.
2 2 spain starts an empire marco polos book continued to be read over the next two centuries.
this was a time of great change in europe.
the rediscovered writings of ancient greeks and romans inspired a new interest in learning and art.
this period of lively new thinking has become known as the renaissance a word that means rebirth during this time the invention of the printing press made books including marco polos more available.
as europeans learned about the world beyond europe they became eager to explore these far off lands.
columbus s discoveries one of the people who was inspired by marco polos writings was an italian seaman named christopher columbus.
after studying maps of the world which at that time did not include the americas columbus became convinced that the shortest route to the indies lay to the west across the atlantic ocean.
columbus looked for someone who could pay for the ships and men he needed to test his idea.
eventually he was able to convince king ferdinand and queen isabella of spain to sponsor a voyage.
in august 1492 columbus sailed west with three small ships.
after more than a month at sea his sailors raised the cry of land the land turned out to be a small island in what we now call the caribbean sea.
columbus was thrilled.
in a later letter he wrote 1 write this to tell you how in thirty three days i sailed to the indies with the fleet that the illustrious king and queen gave me where 1 discovered a great many islands inhabited by numberless people mistakenly believing that he had reached the indies columbus called these people indians.
in reality the islanders were native people who spoke a language called taino tie no.
the taino lived in a peaceful fishing community.
never had they seen people like the ones who had suddenly appeared on their shores.
yet they were friendly and welcoming.
columbus wrote they are so unsuspicious and so generous with what they possess that no one who had not seen it would believe it 26 chapter 2 columbus promptly claimed the island for spain and named it san salvador which means holy savior from there he sailed on to other islands.
convinced that china lay nearby columbus sailed back to spain for more ships and men.
columbus made four trips to the caribbean finding more islands as well as the continent of south america.
each time he discovered a new place he claimed it for spain.
columbus died still believing he had found asia.
later explorers quickly realized that he had actually stumbled on a world previously unknown to europe the continents of north and south america.
the columbian exchange the voyages of columbus triggered a great transfer of people plants animals and diseases back and forth across the atlantic ocean.
this transfer which still continues today is called the columbian exchange.
the columbian exchange brought valuable new crops such as corn potatoes and squash to europe.
these foods greatly improved the diet of the average european.
many europeans also found new opportunities by crossing the atlantic to settle in the americas.
they introduced crops such as wheat and rice to these lands as well as domesticated animals like horses cows pigs and sheep.
for american indians however the exchange began badly.
the europeans who came to america brought with them germs that caused smallpox and other diseases deadly to indians.
historians estimate that in some areas european diseases wiped out 90 percent of the native population.
columbian exchange the exchange of plants animals diseases and people across the atlantic ocean between europe and the americas slavery the treatment of people as property.
people who are denied freedom in this way are said to be enslaved.
atfirst spanish settlers relied on the forced labor of american indians to work their sugar plantations.
when disease wiped out this labor force the spanish turned to african slaves to perform the backbreaking task of harvesting and refining sugarcane.
slavery comes to america this high death rate contributed to the introduction of african slaves to the americas.
many laborers were needed because some of the spanish settlers in the caribbean had started gold mines.
others raised sugar a crop of great value in europe.
at first the settlers forced indians to work for them.
but as native people began dying in great numbers from european diseases the settlers looked for a new workforce.
before long africans were replacing indians.
slavery had existed around the world since ancient times.
often people who were on the losing side in wars were enslaved or treated as the property of their conquerors.
the granger collection newyork european exploration and settlement 27 conquistadors spanish soldier explorers especially those who conquered the native peoples of mexico and peru by the late 1400s european explorers in west africa were trading guns and other goods for slaves captured by african traders.
in the 1500s european slave traders began shipping slaves to the caribbean for sale.
over the next three centuries millions of africans would be carried across the atlantic in crowded disease infested ships.
the terrible voyage lasted anywhere from weeks to months.
many died before it was over.
when the africans arrived in the americas they were sold to their new masters at auctions.
many perished from disease and overwork.
those who survived faced a lifetime of forced labor as slaves.
cortes conquers mexico after columbuss voyages spain began sending soldiers called conquistadors kahn kees tah dors across the atlantic.
their mission was to conquer a vast empire for spain.
the conquistadors hoped to get rich along the way.
in 1519 hernan cortes ehr nahn kohr tehz arrived in mexico with horses and 500 soldiers.
there he heard about the powerful aztecs who ruled much of mexico.
when cortes and his men reached the aztec capital of tenochtitlan tay noch teet lan they could not believe their eyes.
a beautiful city seemed to rise out of a sparkling lake.
one spaniard wrote some of our soldiers even asked whether the things that we saw were not a dream ihe aztecs were unsure what to make of the strangers.
they had never seen men dressed in metal armor and riding horses.
some mistook cortes for the great aztec god quetzalcoatl kwet zul kuh wah tul and welcomed him as a hero.
they would soon change their minds.
with the help of indians who hated their aztec rulers and with the spread of smallpox which killed large numbers of aztec warriors cortes shown here with his translator is trying to convince a group of native americans to help him conquerthe aztecs.
with the help of aztec enemies and smallpox cortes captured the aztec capital of tenochtitlan.
the granger collection.
newyork 28 chapter 2 cortes conquered tenochtitlan.
the spaniards pulled the city down and used its stones to build mexico city the capital of a new spanish empire called new spain.
pizarro conquers peru smallpox also helped another spanish conquistador francisco pizarro fran sis co pi zar oh conquer an empire in south america.
in 1532 pizarro led an attack on the powerful inca empire in present day peru.
luckily for pizarro smallpox reached peru many months before him killing thousands of incas and leaving their empire badly divided.
pizarro captured the inca ruler atahualpa ah tuh wahl puh but promised to release him in exchange for gold.
to save their ruler the incas filled three rooms with gold and silver treasures.
pizarro killed atahualpa anyway and took over the leaderless inca empire.
from there spanish conquistadors conquered most of south america.
explorers from several european countries took various routes to the americas.
voyages were long and difficult and often involved travel on both land and sea.
exploration of the americas european exploration and settlement 29 colony a new settlement or territory established and governed by a country in another land 2 3 the spanish borderlands in both mexico and peru conquistadors found gold and silver riches beyond their wildest dreams.
hoping for still more they pushed north into lands that are now part of the united states.
because these lands were located on the far edges of spains north american empire they were known as the spanish borderlands.
florida one of the first spanish expeditions into north america was led by a man named juan ponce de leon wahn pahn suh day lee ohn.
he had sailed with columbus to the caribbean and made his fortune by discovering gold on the island of puerto rico.
despite his wealth ponce de leon couldnt stop thinking about indian rumors of a fountain of youth that made old people young again.
restless for more adventure he set off to find the truth about these tales of everlasting youth.
ponce de leon landed on a sunny peninsula of north america in april 1513.
because he had sighted this lush new land on easter sunday he called it la florida meaning flowery the name is short for flowery easter eight years later he returned to florida with 200 men to establish a spanish settlement or colony.
american indians in the area used poisoned arrows to drive off the invaders.
instead of finding a fountain of youth ponce de leon died from a poisoned arrow in his stomach.
although coronado never found the seven cities of cibola his explorations opened a new area for spanish settlement.
the seven cities of cibola another legend sparked new spanish expeditions into north america.
an old european tale told of the seven cities of cibola see buh luh.
these cities were said to be so fabulously rich that the streets and houses were decorated with gold and jewels.
when the spanish heard indians tell similar tales they became convinced that the seven cities of cibola were somewhere in north america.
spanish explorers first looked for the seven cities in florida and present day texas.
they found plenty of adventure but no golden cities.
then a spanish priest named marcos de niza claimed to have seen a shimmering golden city in what is now new mexico.
he raced back to mexico cit with the news.
30 chapter 2 the coronado expedition in 1540 a famed conquistador named francisco vasquez de coronado vahs kehz day kohr uh nah doh set out from mexico city with a large expedition and de niza as his guide.
their goal was to find the legendary golden cities.
after traveling north more than 7 000 miles the expedition found an american indian pueblo.
a pueblo is a village of apartment like buildings made of stone and adobe rising four and five stories high.
to de niza this might have looked like a golden city.
but to coronado it was a little crowded village crumpled all up together the enraged expedition leader sent the priest back to mexico city.
the coronado expedition continued north onto the great plains before giving up the search for golden cities.
disappointed coronado reported to spain everything is the reverse of what he said except the name of the cities and the large stone houses.
the seven cities are seven little villages settling the borderlands as conquistadors explored new territories they claimed the areas for spain.
by 1600 the spanish borderlands extended west from florida across present day texas new mexico arizona and california.
at first spain did little to encourage settlement in these far flung areas.
but when rival european nations also began to show an interest in the land small bands of soldiers were sent to these regions to protect the claims.
the soldiers lived in walled forts called presidios preh see dee ohs.
in 1565 for example a spanish naval officer named pedro menendez de aviles muh nen dez day ah vuh lace was sent to florida to protect the area from french explorers.
menendez successfully drove the french out of their florida base and built a fort on the peninsulas atlantic coast.
menendez named the fort st augustine.
over the years spanish soldiers based at st augustine successfully defended the fort and spanish claims to florida from both french and english rivals.
today st augustine is the oldest permanent settlement founded by europeans in the united states.
st augustine was originally a presidio or fort built by the spanish to protect their claim to florida.
it is the oldest permanent european settlement in the united states.
v i j r a p lav j settlement 31 i cvii 1 missions were established to convert american indians to christianity and increase spanish control overthe land.
missions included a church and farmland on which the mission inhabitants produced almost all of whatthey needed to survive.
catholic missionaries accompa nied the soldiers to the borderlands.
missionaries are religious people like priests who try to persuade people to convert to their religion.
the missionaries built settlements called missions where they taught local indians new skills and preached the christian faith.
each mission grew its own food and produced most of what the inhabitants of the missions needed to survive far from towns and trading centers.
hardy bands of settlers also moved into the borderlands where they established towns and farms.
juan de onate own yah tay who had made a fortune mining silver in mexico led the settlement of new mexico.
in 1598 onate brought 400 settlers and 7 000 animals from mexico to new mexico.
the long overland journey took a year and a half to complete.
at first the pueblo indians of new mexico welcomed the newcomers.
unfortunately the spanish repaid the indians kindness with cruelty.
indians were made to work for the settlers as slaves.
catholic priests ordered the whipping of pueblo religious leaders who continued to practice their traditional rituals.
such treatment led the pueblo people to rise up in revolt and drive the spanish out.
twelve years would pass before spanish settlers returned to new mexico.
during the 1600s and 1700s settlement of the spanish borderlands proceeded slowly.
but in time the language religion and culture of spain spread across much of the american southwest.
missionaries people who travel to a territory or community in order to make converts to their religion impact on american indians the arrival of spanish settlers had a great impact on the native peoples of the borderlands.
the pueblo people for example learned from the spanish how to use new tools grow new foods and raise sheep for wool.
in turn the indians introduced the spanish to new techniques for growing crops in the desert soil.
from florida to california some american indians converted to the catholic faith.
the converts often lived and worked in and around the missions growing crops and helping to maintain the churches and other buildings.
however even converts often continued to practice their traditional religious rituals as well.
unfortunately wherever the spanish settled they brought with them diseases to which native peoples had no resistance.
smallpox measles and influenza often wiped out entire villages.
before coronado s expedition there had been more than 100 thriving indian pueblos in new mexico.
by 1700 only 19 remained.
32 chapter 2 2 4 new france as spanish colonies sent ships loaded with gold and silver home to spain all of europe watched with envy.
every year spain seemed to become wealthier and more powerful.
other nations wanted their share of riches from the americas.
but none was strong enough to challenge spains american empire.
instead they would have to seek their fortunes in areas not yet claimed by spain.
coureurs de bois french fur trappers who learned many skills from the american indians with whom they worked and lived claiming new france in 1534 france sent jacques cartier zhahk cahr tyay to explore the atlantic coastline of north america.
his goal was to find a northwest passage an all water route through the north american continent to the pacific ocean.
such a passage would provide a shortcut for ships sailing west to asia.
cartier failed to find such a passage.
but he did claim for france the land we know today as canada.
he later named this land new france.
cartier also discovered something almost as valuable as spanish gold beaver fur.
beaver hats were a fashionable item in europe and french hatmakers were willing to pay high prices for beaver pelts.
settling new france the first settlement in new france was founded by samuel de champlain duh sham plane.
in 1608 champlain sailed up the st lawrence river and built a trading post he called quebec kwuh bek.
for the next 150 years quebec would be a base for french explorers soldiers missionaries traders and fur trappers.
from quebec fur trappers pushed west in search of beaver.
they called themselves coureurs de bois kuh rur duh bwah which means wood rangers in french.
catholic missionaries followed the trappers seeking converts among the native peoples.
like the spanish borderlands new france failed to attract large numbers of settlers.
the harsh climate of new france discouraged french farmers from crossing the atlantic.
so did the colonys policy of granting the best land along the st lawrence river to french nobles who then planned to rent it out to farmers.
the few settlers who did come soon got tired of renting and left their farms to search for furs.
coureurs de bois or fur trappers roamed new france in search of beaver pelts.
they learned their trapping skills from the american indians.
european exploration and settlement 33 the french made friends with the american indians in new france and often assisted them in battles with their enemies.
here samuel de champlain in the center helps the huron defeat the iroquois.
american indian business partners because the french were more interested in furs than farming they did not try to conquer the indians and put them to work as the spanish had done.
instead the french made american indians their business partners.
after founding quebec champlain made friends with the nearby indians especially the huron.
fur trappers lived in huron villages learned the huron language and married huron women.
from the huron they learned how to survive for months in the wilderness.
unfortunately the friendship exposed the huron to european diseases which swept through their villages and killed many of them.
champlain even joined the huron in an attack on their enemy the iroquois.
he later wrote i marched some 20 paces in advance of the rest until i was within about 30 paces of the enemy.
when i saw them making a move to fire at us i rested my musket against my cheek and aimed directly at one of the three chiefs.
with that same shot two fell to the ground and one of their men was so wounded that he died some time after.
when our side saw this shot.
they began to raise such loud cries that one could not have heard it thunder.
the astonished iroquois who had never seen or heard gunfire before fled in terror.
from that day on the iroquois would be the bitter enemies of the french.
claiming louisiana the search for furs led the french far inland from quebec.
in 1673 two explorers father marquette mahr ket and louis joliet zhal yay explored the great mississippi river.
they hoped this waterway would be the long sought northwest passage.
but they discovered that instead of flowing west to the pacific ocean the river flowed south toward the gulf of mexico.
disappointed the explorers returned to new france.
nine years later robert cavelier de la salle explored the entire length of the mississippi river.
on april 9 1682 he planted a french ag at the mouth of the river and claimed everything west of the mississippi river for france.
la salle named this vast area louisiana tor the french monarch king louis xiv.
34 chapter 2 2 5 jamestown the first english colony columbuss voyages inspired john cabot an italian living in england to seek his own western route to asia.
in 1497 cabot who had moved to england from venice sailed west across the atlantic.
he landed in newfoundland an island off the coast of canada.
a fellow venetian living in london wrote of cabots brief landing he coasted for three hundred leagues and landed saw no human beings but he has brought here to the king certain snares which had been set to catch game and a needle for making nets he also found some felled trees by which he judged there were inhabitants and returned to his ship in alarm.
the discoverer planted on this newly found land a large cross with one flag of england and another of st mark the patron saint of venice on account of his being a venetian.
john cabot an italian exploring for england sailed to newfoundland and nova scotia off the coast of present day canada.
he believed he had reached asia and claimed the land for england.
like columbus cabot mistakenly believed he had landed in asia.
later however england would claim all of north america because of the flag planted by cabot in 1497.
the lost colony of roanoke nearly a century later an english noble named sir walter raleigh tried to start a colony on roanoke island off the coast of present day north carolina.
indians on the island welcomed the settlers and gave them traps for catching fish.
the newcomers however were more interested in looking for gold than fishing.
when their supplies ran low they returned to england.
in 1587 raleigh sent a second group of colonists to roanoke.
unfortunately they arrived too late in the season to plant crops.
their leader john white sailed back to england for more supplies.
while white was in england however fighting broke out between england and spain.
as a result his return to roanoke was delayed for three years.
when white finally reached the island the colonists had disappeared.
carved on a doorpost was the word croatoan.
to this day both the reason this word was carved and what happened to the lost colony of roanoke remain a mystery.
the granger collection newyork european exploration and settlement 35 the first colonists at jamestown settled in an area they believed would be easy to defend against american indians and the spanish.
however the land was marshy and infested with malaria carrying mosquitoes.
settling jamestown twenty years went by before a permanent english colony was established in america.
in 1607 a group of merchants formed the london company to start a moneymaking colony in virginia.
the company crammed 105 settlers and 39 sailors into three tiny ships and sent them across the atlantic.
the settlers were to ship back valuable goods such as furs and timber.
when they reached virginia the colonists settled on a swampy peninsula they believed could be easily defended against american indians or spanish ships.
they called their new home jamestown after king james i.
what the settlers didnt know was that the spot they chose to settle would soon be swarming with disease carrying mosquitoes.
it was also surrounded by a large and powerful american indian group.
to make matters worse the jamestown settlers were a mix of gentlemen and craftsmen.
none of them knew much about farming.
nor were they willing to work very hard at it.
they thought they were in virginia to look for gold not to provide for themselves.
as the food the settlers had brought with them disappeared they began to trade with the indians bartering glass beads and iron hatchets for corn and meat.
but barter wasnt easy.
many indians decided they would sooner kill the english or just let them starve than trade.
hunger and disease soon took their toll.
every few days another body was carried off to the graveyard.
john smith was one of the members of the jamestown expedition.
a natural leader smith took control of jamestown in 1608.
if any would not work announced smith neither should he eat they were hungry so they worked.
36 chapt er 2 pocahontas the daughter of a powerful indian leader broughtfood to the jamestown settlers and helped them survive.
she later married john rolfe and visited england with him.
this portrait of pocahontas in european dress is the only authentic painting of her.
smith wrote an account of how he met an indian girl whose help saved the colony from starvation.
while scouting for food smith was captured by the indians and brought to a smoky longhouse.
seated at one end he saw powhatan the indians powerful chief.
the indians greeted smith with a loud shout and a great feast.
but when the meal ended the mood changed.
smith was about to be clubbed to death when a young girl leapt out of the shadows.
she got my head in her armes and laid her owne upon mine to save me from death smith later wrote.
smiths savior was pocahontas chief powhatans favorite daughter.
historians disagree about the details of how smith and pocahontas first met.
they do agree however that pocahontas helped smith save jamestown by bringing food and keeping peace with her people.
she next under god smith wrote was the instrument to preserve this colony from death famine and utter confusion the starving time jamestowns troubles however were far from over.
in the fall of 1609 after being injured in a gunpowder explosion smith returned to england.
the following winter was the worst ever so bad that it came to be known as the starving time without the encouragement of smith and pocahontas the indians refused to trade with the settlers.
the english ate dogs rats and even human corpses to survive.
by spring only 60 of the 500 people smith had left in the fall remained alive.
when supply ships came the next spring the survivors were ordered to abandon their colony.
then three more english ships brought food 150 new colonists and 100 soldiers.
jamestown was saved again.
jamestown survives even with more settlers the people of jamestown lived in constant danger of indian attacks.
to end that threat the english kidnapped pocahontas and held her hostage.
for a year pocahontas remained a prisoner but a willing and curious one.
during that time she learned english adopted the christian faith and made new friends.
among those new friends was a widower named john rolfe.
rolfe had already helped the colony survive by finding a crop that could be raised in virginia and sold for good prices in england tobacco.
the happy settlers went tobacco mad planting the crop everywhere even in jamestowns streets.
now rolfe helped again by making a marriage proposal to pocahontas.
both the governor of jamestown and chief powhatan gave their consent to this unusual match.
maybe they hoped the marriage would help end the conflict between their peoples.
the union of pocahontas and john rolfe did bring peace to jamestown.
in 1616 rolfe wrote our people yearly plant and reap quietly and travel in the woods as freely and securely from danger as in england european exploration and settlement 37 newyork peter minuit is shown offering american indians knives beads blankets and trinkets worth about 24 in exchange for manhattan island.
2 6 new netherland the short lived dutch settlement while john smith was struggling to save the colony of jamestown an english sailor named henry hudson was exploring the coastline farther north for the netherlands.
henry hudsons voyage was sponsored by dutch merchants who hoped to find the northwest passage.
the people of the netherlands are called the dutch.
in 1609 hudson discovered a deep river full of fish and thought it might just take him all the way across the continent.
it didnt of course but he claimed the land along its banks for the netherlands.
the river was later named the hudson in his honor and the territory he claimed became known as new netherland.
in 1621 dutch merchants formed the dutch west india company to start a colony in america.
the first dutch colonists settled along the upper hudson where they built fort orange near present day albany new york.
the new colonists quickly found that there were good profits to be made in the fur trade.
they established trading posts along the hudson river.
the largest was on manhattan island at the rivers mouth.
relations with american indians in 1626 the dutch west india company sent peter minuit min yu what to new netherland as the colonys governor.
wanting peaceful relations with the indians the company told minuit that any native peoples on manhattan island must not be expelled with violence or threats but be persuaded with kind words or should be given something following orders minuit offered the islands indians iron pots beads and blankets worth about 24 in exchange for their land.
38 chapter 2 the american indians didnt believe that anyone could own land.
laughing at the foolishness of the white men they made the trade.
dutch traders also made deals with members of the powerful iroquois confederacy an alliance of five indian groups who lived across the northern portion of new netherland.
the french had long supplied the huron the iroquoiss great rivals with guns in exchange for furs.
it made sense for the iroquois to become partners with the dutch who supplied them with the weapons they needed to stand up to the huron.
this partnership also made sense for the dutch.
the french were their main rivals in the european fur trade.
for most of the 1600s the iroquois kept the french from moving into the fur rich ohio valley.
new amsterdam as the fur trade expanded the dutch settlement on manhattan swelled to over 1 000 people.
in 1647 the dutch west india company hired peter stuyvesant sty vuh sunt as the colonys new governor.
when he arrived at manhattan stuyvesant declared that the settlement would be called new amsterdam after the capital city of the netherlands.
european countries established settlements throughout north and south america.
which european country first settled the area in which you live.
european exploration and settlement 39 peter stuyvesant the dutch governor of new amsterdam surrendered the settlement to the british without a shot being fired.
outnumbered and outgunned stuyvesant bowed to the pleas of his people to avoid bloodshed and destruction.
stuyvesant had lost his right leg in battle and he stomped around on a wooden leg decorated with silver nails.
people called him old silvernails or peg leg pete although he was a strong leader old silvernails was generally disliked.
when dutchmen who had been elected as city councilors disagreed with him he called them ignorant subjects and threatened to ship them back to the netherlands in pieces if they gave him trouble.
despite his reputation as a grouch stuyvesant governed new amsterdam for 17 years.
during this time he captured a nearby swedish colony and invited its settlers to live in new amsterdam.
by 1660 the colony had nearly 8 000 people including europeans from many nations as well as enslaved africans.
new amsterdam also provided refuge for jews who were seeking a place to practice their religion freely.
new netherland becomes new york stuyvesants biggest problem was that the english wanted to drive the dutch out of north america.
englands king charles ii refused to recognize dutch claims to new netherland.
in 1664 charles gave his brother james the duke of york ownership of all dutch lands in america if he could conquer them.
james promptly organized a small invasion fleet to take the colony.
when the english arrived they sent stuyvesant a letter demanding his surrender.
stuyvesant tore up the note and refused to consider giving up until new amsterdams chief gunner reported that the citys supply of gunpowder was damp and useless.
without firing a shot the english took over new netherland and renamed the colony new york.
40 chapter 2 chapter summary in this chapter you read about the first european settlements in the americas.
discovery and competition explorers like christopher columbus were looking for a westward route to asia when they stumbled onto the american continents.
european nations competed to claim these new lands and the riches they might contain.
spain spain claimed vast territories including mexico and the southwestern portion of the future united states.
in their search for gold and other treasures spanish conquistadors conquered the aztecs of mexico and the incas of peru.
the spanish also brought enslaved africans to the americas to plant and harvest crops.
in the american southwest spanish missionaries worked to convert american indians to christianity.
france the french staked a claim to much of present day canada as well as louisiana the territory west of the mississippi river.
most french settlers were more interested in trapping and trading furs than in farming or establishing large settlements.
england the english based their claim to north america on john cabots 1497 voyage.
after several attempts the english established their first permanent colony at jamestown in virginia.
the netherlands the dutch established a foothold in north america by founding the colony of new netherland.
the english however drove the dutch out and renamed the colony new york.
effects on american indians for american indians the arrival of europeans brought many changes including new technology and new ideas.
but they also brought deadly diseases that killed great numbers of the first americans.
the granger collection new york the exploration and settlement of the american continents brought amazing changes both to europe and to the americas.
european exploration and settlement 41 reading further no one knows exactly what columbus looked like.
this is the earliest known portrait of him painted 13 years after his death.
who was the real columbus.
few historical figures are more famous than christopher columbus.
yet history has given us many different views of this man.
to some people columbus was a great hero the brave explorer who introduced the americas to europe.
to others he was a greedy conqueror responsible for the deaths of millions of american indians.
why do we have such different views of columbus.
at dawn on a small caribbean island a group of taino people watched from a distance as strange men began to come ashore fhe strangers had arrived on three large ships with cloth sails these ships were very different from the canoes used by the taino.
the men looked very different from the taino too.
they had white skin and hair on their faces.
they wore clothes and spoke a strange language lhe men gathered on the beach and planted flags in the sand.
the date was october 12 1492.
columbus and his men had just taken their first steps on north american soil.
what did the taino think when they saw these strangers.
were they amazed or excited or afraid.
we will never know.
the taino had no written language so they could not record their thoughts.
their views have been lost to history.
columbus did leave a record of this first encounter though.
he kept a ships log or diary of his travels.
of this first meeting with american indians he wrote no sooner had we concluded the formalities of taking possession of the island than people began to come to the beach.
ihey are very well built people with handsome bodies and very fine faces i want the natives to develop a friendly attitude toward us.
i therefore gave red caps to some and glass beads to others they hung the beads around their necks along with some other things of slight value that i gave them.
and they took great pleasure in this and became so friendly that it was a marvel.
ihey traded and gave everything they had with good will but it seems to me that they have very little and are poor in everything.
i warned my men to take nothing from the people without giving some thing in exchange.
liit ouurces oay most of what we know about columbus is based on a lew pruna sources from the his log is one of those sources.
i tells abc columbus s first voyage from spain to the americas.
i describe islands he visited and the people he found there.
i also explain 42 chapter 2 purpose for making the voyage.
he wanted to find a new route to the east indies that would give spain access to the spice trade with asia.
along the way he also hoped to claim new lands for spain and to spread the catholic faith.
in his log columbus portrays himself as a thoughtful man who cared about the native peoples he met.
but the log also shows that he was driven by the search for gold and other riches.
moving from one island to the next he wrote i do not wish to delay but to discover and go to many islands to find gold finding gold would help justify his voyage and bring wealth and glory to spain.
the quest for riches had disastrous effects on the native population however.
the spanish colonists enslaved native peoples and made them work in mines and on farms.
as the first governor of the west indies columbus began this policy.
in the years that followed millions of american indians died from overwork violence and disease.
this dark history is the subject of another primary source the devastation of the indies a brief account.
the author was bartolome de las casas bahr taw law mey day las ka sas who came to the west indies as a colonist in 1502.
like most colonists he hoped to make his fortune in the indies.
but what he saw there changed his mind.
he became a priest instead and spoke out against the cruelty of spanish rule.
he accused the colonists of acting like wild beasts who took pleasure in killing torturing and destroying the native peoples the reason for the spaniards actions he wrote was their greed and ambition the greatest ever seen in the world las casas admired columbus in many ways and did not blame him for all the harm done to the indians.
but he recognized that columbus had helped set these events in motion.
how historians use the sources historians rely on primary sources like columbuss log and the writings of las casas.
they use these sources and other evidence to write a story of the past.
but the stories they tell depend on how they interpret this evidence.
for many years the story of columbus was mostly positive.
he was seen as a man of vision who discovered new lands and expanded european knowledge of the world.
in recent years however views of columbus have grown more negative.
one of the first accounts of columbus as a hero was by washington irving.
in the early 1800s irving went to spain to research the explorers life.
in 1828 he wrote the life and voyages of christopher columbus.
las casas top copied columbus s log preserving itfor history.
his own book told a very different story of the encounter between spanish and indians.
as this 16th century drawing bottom shows the spanish burned or hung indians who resisted them.
european exploration and settlement 43 many paintings like this one portray columbus and his crew as noble heroes this 19th century painting has hung in the u s capitol building since 1847.
in this book irving described columbus as a man of great and inventive genius whose ambition was lofty and noble irving admitted that columbus took actions that brought harm to native peoples.
but he excused those actions as errors of the times over a century later the historian samuel eliot morison offered a more balanced view of columbus.
he portrayed columbus as a real person with strengths and weaknesses.
but he argued that his strengths outweighed his flaws.
above all morison pointed to columbuss skill as a sea captain there was no flaw no dark side to the most outstanding of all his qualities his seamanship.
as a master mariner and navigator columbus was supreme in his generation in morisons view the whole history of the americas began with columbuss voyages.
more recently some historians have offered more critical views of columbus.
one of these writers is howard zinn.
in his 2003 book a peoples history of the united states he focused on the harsh treatment of native peoples by the spanish.
columbuss trip to the americas was not a heroic adventure zinn wrote but the start of a european invasion.
it began a history of conquest slavery and death zinn did not deny the importance of columbus and his achievement.
but he emphasized the negative impact.
44 chapter 2 why history varies why do historians present such different views of columbus.
the answer has to do with the writing of history.
historians look at the past from different perspectives.
in addition historians must use their judgment in analyzing sources and selecting information.
in the process they are also influenced by their own views and the attitudes of their time.
irving for example wrote his biography of columbus when the united states was still a young nation.
the country was growing and expanding.
irving wanted to inspire his readers with a story of a hero who had great adventures and overcame great obstacles.
in irving s account columbus could be seen as an ideal role model for americans building a new nation.
morison on the other hand wanted to present a more realistic view of columbus.
he portrayed him not as a mythic hero but as a man with both good and bad qualities.
his main goal was to show that columbus was a brilliant sea captain who changed the course of history.
zinn had a different idea.
he wanted to show the history of columbus and the spanish conquest from the point of view of native peoples.
he believed that the fate of the indians had been ignored in the making of the columbus legend.
he wanted people to understand that there was another side to the story.
in fact the story of the past is always changing as each new generation adds a new perspective.
perceptions change and so does our understanding of the past notes writer john noble wilford.
accordingly the image of columbus has changed through the years sometimes as a result of new information but most often because of changes in the lenses through which we view him in other words the stories we tell about the past always reflect what we in the present bring to them.
both pride and protest continue to surround the history of columbus.
he is honored at celebrations like this columbus day parade in new york left.
in denver right protesters blocked marchers at a columbus day parade.
european exploration and settlement 45 r continued on his way toward india.
others soon followed and changed the regions name to brazil after the indigenous tree that yielded a valuable red dye for several decades portuguese sailors traded with the tupi indians for brazilwood.
then in the 1530s to secure portugals claim king dom joo iii sent settlers who began the long painstaking process of carving out sugar plantations in the coastal lowlands.
for several decades native americans supplied most of the labor for these operations but african slaves gradually replaced them.
brazil would soon become the worlds leading producer of sugar it would also devour african lives.
by introducing the plantation system to the americas a form of estate agriculture using slave labor that was pioneered by italian merchants and crusading knights in the twelfth century and transplanted to the islands off the coast of africa in the fifteenth century the portuguese set in motion one of the most significant developments of the early modern era.
by the end of the sixteenth century the european colonization of the americas had barely begun.
yet several of its most important elements were already taking shape.
spanish efforts demonstrated that densely populated empires were especially vulnerable to conquest and were also especially valuable sources of wealth.
the portuguese had discovered the viability of sugar plantations in the tropical regions of the americas and pioneered the transatlantic slave trade as a way of manning them.
and contacts with native peoples revealed their devastating vulnerabilities to eurasian diseases one part of the larger phenomenon of the columbian exchange discussed in chapter 2.
summary native american european and african societies developed independently over thousands of years before they experienced direct contacts with one another.
in the americas residents of mesoamerica and the andes were fully sedentary with individual ownership of land and intensive agriculture but elsewhere societies were semisedentary with central fields and villages that were occupied seasonally or nonsedentary hunter gatherers.
west and central africa also had a mix of sedentary semisedentary and nonsedentary settlements.
western europe by contrast was predominantly sedentary.
all three continents had a complex patchwork of political organization from empires to kingdoms and chiefdoms to principalities duchies and ministates everywhere rulership was imbued with notions of spiritual power.
ruling classes relied on part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 warfare trade and tribute or taxes to dominate those around them and accumulate precious goods that helped to set them apart from ordinary laborers but they also bore responsibility for the well being of their subjects and offered them various forms of protection.
as portuguese and castilian later spanish seafarers pushed into the atlantic they set in motion a chain of events whose consequences they could scarcely imagine.
from a coastal trade with africa that was secondary to their efforts to reach the indian ocean from the miscalculations of columbus and the happy accident of cabral developed a pattern of transatlantic exploration conquest and exploitation that no one could have foretold or planned.
in the tropical zones of the caribbean and coastal brazil invading europeans enslaved native americans and quickly drove them into extinction or exile.
the demands of plantation agriculture soon led europeans to import slaves from africa initiating a transatlantic trade that would destroy african lives on both sides of the ocean.
and two of the greatest empires in the world the aztec and incan empires collapsed in response to unseen biological forces that acted in concert with small invading armies.
european map of brazil c 1519 this lavishly illustrated map of brazil is drawn from the miller atlas made by order of king manuel i of portugal around 1519.
it features images of indians harvesting brazilwood macaws and other colorful birds a monkey and improbably a fire breathing dragon.
note too the dense annotations and place names along the coast a reminder that portuguese familiarity with brazil was confined almost entirely to the seaboard.
bibliotheque nationale de france.
chapter 1 c h a p t e r chapter review r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events tribute p 8 matriarchy p 15 animism p 17 patriarchy p 18 primogeniture p 18 peasants p 18 republic p 19 civic humanism p 20 renaissance p 20 guilds p 20 christianity p 21 heresy p 22 islam p 22 crusades p 22 predestination p 22 protestant reformation p 22 counter reformation p 22 trans saharan trade p 23 reconquista p 31 key people hiawatha p 13 martin luther p 22 mansa musa p 23 vasco da gama p 29 christopher columbus p 31 hernn corts p 34 moctezuma p 34 pedro alvares cabral p 35 review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapters main ideas.
how did the rulers of native american european 4.
compare the societies of the eastern woodlands of 2.
what role did religious and spiritual ideas play in thematic understanding and african empires and kingdoms secure and sustain their power.
how did ordinary people benefit from or suffer under their rule.
shaping the experience of ordinary people on the three continents.
why was long distance trade in exotic goods such an important phenomenon in north america europe and africa.
north america with the kingdoms of western europe.
what similarities do you see.
differences.
how do you weigh their relative importance.
review the events listed under peopling and work exchange and technology on the thematic timeline on page 5.
how did contacts among europeans native americans and africans alter the economies of the three continents.
part 1 chapter review making connections recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place the century following the first contacts among europe subsaharan africa and the americas brought some of the most momentous changes in world history a dramatic reconfiguration of human populations across the globe new patterns of trade and warfare and immense challenges to peoples worldviews.
thinking about our contemporary world what monumental changes are currently affecting our lives.
how would you compare them with the events described in this chapter.
more to explore visual evidence return to the image of the last judgment on page 21.
how does the emphasis on universal truth and everlasting punishment and reward make christianity different from animism.
how might faith in such a religious system shape the values and priorities of believers.
start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.
philip d curtin the rise and fall of the plantation complex 2nd ed.
traces the long evolution of plantations and slavery in world history.
david northrup africas discovery of europe 1450 1850 2nd ed.
european african interactions from an african perspective.
peter c mancall ed travel narratives from the age of discovery 2006.
travelers accounts from asia africa the americas and europe.
timothy r pauketat cahokia 2009.
an evocative account of north americas great city and archaeologists efforts to unearth it.
charles c mann 1491 2005 and 1493 2011.
these two books explore the americas before columbus and the global changes unleashed by his voyages.
1492 an ongoing voyage loc gov exhibits 1492 intro html.
offers images and analysis of the native cultures of the western hemisphere.
chapter 1 timeline chapter review ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
c 13 000 3000 b c.
asian migrants reach north america c 6000 b c.
domestication of maize begins in mesoamerica roman emperor constantine converts to christianity c 600 pueblo cultures emerge death of muhammad 632 1100 arab people adopt islam and spread its influence c 800 ghana empire emerges c 1000 irrigation developed by hohokam mogollon and anasazi peoples c 1000 1350 development of mississippian culture c 1050 the founding of cahokia 1096 1291 crusades link europe with arab trade routes c 1150 chaco canyon abandoned c 1200 mali empire emerges 1300 1450 the renaissance in italy c 1325 aztecs establish capital at tenochtitln mansa musas pilgrimage to mecca c 1350 the black death sweeps europe cahokia goes into rapid decline c 1400 songhai empire emerges portuguese trade begins along west and central african coasts christopher columbus makes first voyage to america 1497 1498 portugals vasco da gama reaches east africa and india pedro alvares cabral encounters brazil c 1500 founding of the iroquois confederacy juan ponce de len explores florida martin luther sparks protestant reformation 1519 1521 hernn corts conquers aztec empire 1532 1535 francisco pizarro vanquishes incas john calvin publishes institutes of the christian religion de soto meets the lady of cofachiqui founding of the jesuit order duarte lopez visits the kongo capital key turning points the domestication of maize 6000 b c.
the founding of tenochtitln 1325 and the conquest of the aztec empire 1519 1521.
how did the domestication of maize make the city of tenochtitln possible.
what characteristics of the aztec empire and its capital city made it vulnerable to conquest.
american experiments 1521 1700 c h a p t e r spains tribute colonies a new american world the columbian exchange the protestant challenge to spain plantation colonies brazils sugar plantations englands tobacco colonies the caribbean islands plantation life neo european colonies new france new netherland the rise of the iroquois new england instability war and rebellion new englands indian wars bacons rebellion 1675 1676 b eginning in the 1660s legislators in identify the big idea virginia and maryland hammered in what ways did european out the legal definition of chattel migrants transfer familiar patterns slavery the ownership of human beings and institutions to their colonies in as property.
the institution of slavery the americas and in what ways did which would profoundly affect african they create new american worlds.
americans and shape much of american how did native americans adapt to history had been obsolete in england the growing presence of europeans for centuries and articulating its logic among them.
required lawmakers to reverse some of the most basic presumptions of english law.
for example in 1662 a virginia statute declared all children borne in this country shalbe held bond or free only according to the condition of the mother this idea that a childs legal status derived from the mother rather than the father ran contrary to the patriarchal foundations of english law.
the men who sat in virginias house of burgesses would not propose such a thing lightly.
why would they decide that the principle of patriarchal descent which was so fundamental to their own worlds was inappropriate for their slaves.
the question needed to be addressed according to the statutes preamble since doubts have arisen whether children got by an englishman upon a negro woman should be slave or free one such case involved elizabeth key a woman whose father was a free englishman and mother was an african slave.
she petitioned for her freedom in 1656 based on her fathers status.
her lawyer was an englishman named william greensted.
he not only took keys case but he also fathered two of her children and eventually married her.
key won her case and her freedom from bondage.
elizabeth key escaped her mothers fate a life in slavery because her father and her husband were both free englishmen.
the 1662 statute aimed to close keys avenue to freedom.
the process by which the institution of chattel slavery was molded to the needs of colonial planters is just one example of the way europeans adapted the principles they brought with them to the unfamiliar demands of their new surroundings.
in the showdown between people like elizabeth key and william greensted on the one hand and the members of virginias house of burgesses on the other we see how people in disorienting circumstances some in positions in power others in various states of subjection to their social and political superiors scrambled to make sense of their world and bend its rules to their advantage.
through countless contests of power and authority like this one the outlines of a new world gradually began to emerge from the collision of cultures.
by 1700 three distinct types of colonies had developed in the americas the tribute colonies created in mexico and peru which relied initially on the wealth and labor of indigenous peoples plantation colonies where sugar and other tropical and subtropical crops could be produced with bound labor and neo europes where colonists sought to replicate or at least approximate economies and social structures they knew at home.
power and race in the chesapeake in this 1670 painting by gerard soest proprietor lord baltimore holds a map of maryland the colony he owned and which would soon belong to his grandson cecil calvert shown in the painting as already grasping his magnificent inheritance.
the presence of a young african servant foretells the importance of slave labor in the post 1700 economy of the chesapeake colonies.
enoch pratt free library marylands state library resource center.
all rights reserved.
part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 spains tribute colonies european interest in the americas took shape under the influence of spains conquest of the aztec and inca empires.
there spanish colonizers capitalized on preexisting systems of tribute and labor discipline to tap the enormous wealth of mesoamerica and the andes.
once native rulers were overthrown the spanish monarchs transferred their institutions municipal councils the legal code the catholic church to america the empire was centrally controlled to protect the crowns immensely valuable holdings.
the spanish conquest also set in motion a global ecological transformation through a vast intercontinental movement of plants animals and diseases that historians call the columbian exchange.
and the conquest triggered hostile responses from spains european rivals especially the protestant dutch and english figure 2 1.
a new american world after corts toppled moctezuma and pizarro defeated atahualpa see pages 34 35 leading conquistadors received encomiendas from the crown which allowed them to claim tribute in labor and goods from indian communities.
later these grants were repartitioned but the pattern was set early prominent men controlled vast resources and monopolized indian labor.
the value of these grants was dramatically enhanced by the discovery of gold and especially silver deposits in both mexico and the andes.
in the decades after the conquest mines were developed in zacatecas in guanajuato and most famously at potos high in the andes.
spanish officials co opted the mita system which made laborers available to the inca empire to force indian workers into the mines.
at its peak potos alone produced 200 tons of silver per year accounting for half the worlds supply.
the two great indigenous empires of the americas thus became the core of an astonishingly wealthy european empire.
vast amounts of silver poured across the pacific ocean to china where it was minted into money in exchange spain received valuable chinese silks spices and ceramics.
in europe the gold that had formerly honored aztec and inca gods now flowed into the countinghouses of spain and gilded the catholic churches of europe.
the spanish crown benefitted enormously from all this wealth at least initially.
in the long run it triggered ruinous inflation.
as a french traveler noted in 1603 everything is dear expensive in spain except silver a new society took shape on the conquered lands.
between 1500 and 1650 at least 350 000 spaniards migrated to mesoamerica and the andes.
about twothirds were males drawn from a cross section of spanish society many of them skilled tradesmen.
also arriving were 250 000 300 000 africans.
racial mixture was widespread and such groups as mestizos spaniard indian and mulattos spaniard african grew rapidly.
zambo indian african populations developed gradually as well.
over time a system of increasingly complex racial categories developed the casta system buttressed by a legal code that differentiated among the principal groups.
indians were always in the majority in mexico and peru but profound changes came as their numbers declined and peoples of spanish and mixed race descent grew in number.
spaniards initially congregated in cities but gradually they moved into the countryside creating large estates known as haciendas and regional networks of market exchange.
most indians remained in their native communities under the authority of native rulers and speaking native new netherland portuguese brazil spanish peru new spain new france new sweden english virginia rhode island plymouth colony massachusetts bay connecticut maryland figure 2 1 chronology of european colonies in the americas chapter 2 languages.
however spanish priests suppressed religious ceremonies and texts and converted natives to christianity en masse.
catholicism was transformed in the process catholic parishes took their form from indian communities indigenous ideas and expectations reshaped church practices and new forms of native american christianity emerged in both regions.
the columbian exchange the spanish invasion permanently altered the natural as well as the human environment.
smallpox influenza measles yellow fever and other silent killers carried from europe and africa ravaged indian communities whose inhabitants had never encountered these diseases before and thus had no immunity to them.
in the densely populated core areas populations declined by 90 percent or more in the first century of contact with europeans.
on islands and in the tropical lowlands the toll was even heavier native populations were often wiped out altogether.
syphilis was the only significant illness that traveled in the opposite direction columbuss sailors carried a virulent strain of the sexually transmitted disease back to europe with them.
the movement of diseases and peoples across the atlantic was part of a larger pattern of biological transformation that historians call the columbian exchange map 2 1.
foods of the western hemisphere especially maize potatoes manioc sweet potatoes and tomatoes smallpox victims hans staden a german soldier who was shipwrecked in brazil in 1552 was captured by a tupinamb indian named jeppipo wasu.
shortly thereafter wasu and his family traveled to a neighboring village as smallpox ravaged the population when they returned they were very sick.
wasu recovered but he lost his mother two brothers and two children.
this engraving which depicts wasus return amid his townspeoples grief appeared in the third volume of theodor de brys monumental america published in frankfurt in 1593.
courtesy of the john carter brown library at brown university.
american experiments 1521 1700 significantly increased agricultural yields and population growth in other continents.
maize and potatoes for example reached china around 1700 in the follow place events ing century the chinese popula in context tion tripled from 100 million to how did the ecological 300 million.
at the same time context of colonization many animals plants and germs shape interactions bewere carried to the americas.
tween europeans and european livestock transformed native americans.
american landscapes.
while native americans domesticated very few animals dogs and llamas were the principal exceptions europeans brought an enormous old world bestiary to the americas including cattle swine horses oxen chickens and honeybees.
eurasian grain crops wheat barley rye and rice made the transatlantic voyage along with inadvertent imports like dandelions and other weeds.
the protestant challenge to spain beyond the core regions of its empire spain claimed vast american dominions but struggled to hold them.
controlling the caribbean basin which was essential for spains transatlantic shipping routes was especially difficult since the net of tiny islands spanning the eastern caribbean the lesser antilles provided many safe harbors for pirates and privateers.
fortified outposts in havana and st augustine provided some part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 s pigs wheat rye cattle horasned other diseases smallpox w feve yello ice sugar r tropic of cancer a s i a uts bananas r cocon maize potatoes squash pepper tobacco beans s cacao syphi lis iron bars pigs north america e u r op e fever ia yellow malar suga r pl a g ue rice tea africa equator oc cacao cassava mani south america tropic of capricorn australia n s u g a r rice w 1 000 1 000 2 000 miles 2 000 kilometers e s map 2 1 the columbian exchange as european traders and adventurers traversed the world between 1430 and 1600 they began what historians call the columbian exchange a vast intercontinental movement of plants animals and diseases that changed the course of historical development.
the nutritious highyielding american crops of corn and potatoes enriched the diets of europeans africans and asians.
however the eurasian and african diseases of smallpox diphtheria malaria and yellow fever nearly wiped out the native inhabitants of the western hemisphere and virtually ensured that they would lose control of their lands.
protection but they were never sufficient to keep enemies at bay.
and spain had powerful enemies their animosity sharpened by the protestant reformation and the resulting split in european christendom see p 22.
in the wake of martin luthers attack on the catholic church the protestant critique of catholicism broadened and deepened.
gold and silver from mexico and peru made spain the wealthiest nation in europe and king philip ii r 1556 1598 an ardent catholic its most powerful ruler.
philip was determined to root out challenges to the catholic church wherever they appeared.
one such place was in the spanish netherlands a collection of dutch and flemishspeaking provinces that had grown wealthy from textile manufacturing and trade with portuguese outposts in africa and asia.
to protect their calvinist faith and political liberties they revolted against spanish rule in 1566.
after fifteen years of war the seven northern provinces declared their independence becoming the dutch republic or holland in 1581.
the english king henry viii r 1509 1547 initially opposed protestantism.
however when the pope refused to annul his marriage to the spanish princess catherine of aragon in 1534 henry broke with rome and placed himself at the head of the new church of england which promptly granted an annulment.
although henrys new church maintained most catholic doctrines and practices protestant teachings continued to spread.
faced with popular pressure for reform henrys daughter and successor queen elizabeth i r 1558 1603 approved a protestant confession of faith.
at the same time however elizabeth retained the catholic ritual of holy communion and left the church in the hands of anglican bishops and archbishops.
elizabeths compromises angered radical chapter 2 american experiments 1521 1700 queen elizabeth receiving dutch ambassadors this sixteenth century dutch painting by an anonymous artist depicts a pair of dutch ambassadors being received by englands queen elizabeth i.
the seventeen provinces that constituted the dutch republic were in rebellion against spanish rule in the later decades of the sixteenth century and hoped for elizabeths support.
in 1585 she signed the treaty of nonsuch pledging her support for the dutch cause.
an undeclared war with spain ensued punctuated by the defeat of the spanish armada in 1588.
museumslandschaft hessen kassel the bridgeman art library.
protestants but the independent anglican church was anathema to the spanish king philip ii.
elizabeth supported a generation of english seafarers who took increasingly aggressive actions against spanish control of american wealth.
the most famous of these elizabethan sea dogs was francis drake a rough hewn devoutly protestant farmers son from devon who took to the sea and became a scourge to philips american interests.
in 1577 he ventured into the pacific to disrupt spanish shipping to manila.
drakes fleet lost three ships and a hundred men but the survivors completed the first english circumnavigation of the globe and captured two spanish treasure ships.
when drakes flagship the golden hind returned to england in 1580 it brought enough silver gold silk and spices to bring his investors a 4 700 percent return on their investment.
at the same time elizabeth supported military expeditions that imposed english rule over gaelicspeaking catholic ireland.
calling the irish wild savages who were more barbarous and more brutish in their customs.
than in any other part of the world english soldiers brutally massacred thousands prefiguring the treatment of indians in north america.
to meet elizabeths challenges philip sent a spanish armada 130 ships and 30 000 men against england in 1588.
philip intended to restore the roman church in england and then to wipe out calvinism in holland.
but he failed utterly a fierce storm and english ships destroyed the spanish fleet.
philip continued to spend his american gold and silver on religious wars an ill advised policy that diverted workers and resources from spains fledgling industries.
the gold was like a shewer of raine complained one critic that left no benefite behind oppressed by high taxes on agriculture and fearful of military service more than 200 000 residents of castile once the most prosperous region of spain migrated to america.
by the time of philips death in 1598 spain was in serious economic decline.
by contrast england grew significantly during the sixteenth century its economy stimulated as colonial advocate richard hakluyt noted by a wounderful increase of our people as englands population soared from 3 million in 1500 to 5 million in 1630 its monarchs supported the expansion of commerce and manufacturing.
english merchants had long supplied european weavers with highquality wool around 1500 they trace change created their own outwork tex over time tile industry.
merchants bought why did spains economy wool from the owners of great deteriorate and englands estates and sent it out to land economy improve in the less peasants in small cottages sixteenth century.
to spin and weave into cloth.
the government aided textile entrepreneurs by setting low wage rates and helped merchants by giving them monopolies in foreign markets.
this system of state assisted manufacturing and trade became known as mercantilism.
by encouraging textile production elizabeth reduced imports and increased exports.
the resulting favorable balance of trade caused gold and silver to flow into england and stimulated further economic expansion.
increased trade part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 turn to survive the present and carve out pathways to the future.
with turkey and india also boosted import duties which swelled the royal treasury and the monarchs power.
by 1600 elizabeths mercantile policies had laid the foundations for overseas colonization.
now the english had the merchant fleet and wealth needed to challenge spains control of the western hemisphere.
brazils sugar plantations portuguese colonists transformed the tropical lowlands of coastal brazil into a sugar plantation zone like the ones they had recently created on madeira the azores the cape verdes and so tom.
the work proceeded slowly but by 1590 more than a thousand sugar mills had been established in pernambuco and bahia.
each large plantation had its own milling operation because sugarcane is extremely heavy and rots quickly it must be processed on site.
thus sugar plantations combined backbreaking agricultural labor with milling extracting and refining processes that made sugar plantations look like industrial revolution era factories.
initially portuguese planters hoped that brazils indigenous peoples would supply the labor required to plantation colonies as spain hammered out its american empire and struggled against its protestant rivals portugal england france and the netherlands created successful plantation settlements in brazil jamestown maryland and the caribbean islands map 2 2.
worldwide demand for sugar and tobacco fuelled the growth of these new colonies and the resulting influx of colonists diminished spains dominance in the new world.
at the same time they imposed dramatic new pressures on native populations who scrambled in europe north america boston maryland virginia portugal spain jamestown azores lisbon seville madeira is.
at l a n t i c st augustine florida mexico havana veracruz saint domingue cuba jamaica caribbean sea canary is.
ocean africa st kitts nevis cartegena cape verde is.
martinique barbados mandesp s t a t ee a k i n g s guyana akan states bight of benin so tom quito south america pernambuco peru pac ifi c o c e an brazil bahia kongo recife angola salvador brazil plantation colony rio de janeiro 1 000 1 000 2 000 miles 2 000 kilometers map 2 2 the plantation colonies the plantation zone in the americas extended from the tropical coast of brazil northwestward through the west indies and into the tropical and subtropical lowlands of southeastern north america.
sugar was the most important plantation crop in the americas but where the soil or climate could not support it planters experimented with a wide variety of other possibilities including tobacco indigo cotton cacao and rice.
chapter 2 operate their sugar plantations.
but beginning with a wave of smallpox in 1559 unfamiliar diseases soon ravaged the coastal indian population.
as a result planters turned to african slaves in ever growing numbers by 1620 the switch was complete.
while spanish colonies in mexico and peru took shape with astonishing speed following conquest brazils occupation and development progressed more gradually it required both trial and error and hard work to build a paying colony.
englands tobacco colonies england was slow to embrace the prospect of planting colonies in the americas.
there were fumbling attempts in the 1580s in newfoundland and maine privately organized and poorly funded.
sir walter raleighs three expeditions to north carolina likewise ended in carolina indians fishing 1585 though maize was a mainstay of the indian diet native peoples along the atlantic coast also harvested protein rich fish crabs and oysters.
in this watercolor by the english adventurer john white indians gather fish in their cannow or dugout canoe in the shallow waters of the albemarle sound off present day north carolina.
on the left note the weir used both to catch fish and to store them live for later consumption.
trustees of the british museum art resource ny.
american experiments 1521 1700 disaster when 117 settlers on roanoke island left unsupplied for several years vanished.
the fate of roanoke the lost colony remains a compelling puzzle for modern historians.
the jamestown settlement merchants then took charge of english expansion.
in 1606 king james i r 1603 1625 granted to the virginia company of london all the lands stretching from present day north carolina to southern new york.
to honor the memory of elizabeth i the never married virgin queen the companys directors named the region virginia map 2 3.
influenced by the spanish example in 1607 the virginia company dispatched an all male group with no ability to support itself no women farmers or ministers were among the first arrivals that expected to extract tribute from the regions indian part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 population while it searched out valuable commodities like pearls and gold.
some were young gentlemen with personal ties to the companys shareholders a bunch of unruly sparks packed off by their friends to escape worse destinies at home others hoped to make a quick profit.
all they wanted one of them said was to dig gold refine gold load gold but there was no gold and the men fared poorly in their new environment.
arriving in virginia after an exhausting four month voyage they settled on a swampy peninsula which they named jamestown to honor the king.
there the adventurers lacked access to fresh water refused to plant crops and quickly died off only n new france e w s quebec st la three rivers montreal r ce en r w abenaki new ns iroquois fort orange nt ou m oh io r salem boston plymouth providence hartford new haven new amsterdam ai lenape delaware om pot ac r.
connecticut r hudson r abenaki england pemaquid maryland atlantic ocean st marys city virginia chesapeake bay ac al pp sse hi an jamestown tuscarora va sa te.
er a nn e nn this map drawn by roanoke colonist john white may hold a clue to the fate of the so called lost colony.
the island of roanoke is right of center just off the mainland and within the barrier islands.
directly west on the point where the roanoke and chowan rivers join is a barely visible paper patch.
when lit from behind a red fort is clearly visible beneath the patch suggesting that the roanoke colonists may already have identified a settlement site there when he left the colony john white wrote that the remaining colonists were prepared to remove from roanoak 50 miles into the maine land archaeologists and historians plan to use this discovery to guide further explorations in the area.
the art archive at art resource ny.
200 miles 200 kilometers catawba areas colonized by 1660 r ah john whites map of virginia creek st augustine timucuan chiefdoms spain france england netherlands key settlements not yet explored by europeans explored but not settled by europeans map 2 3 eastern north america 1650 by 1650 four european nations had permanent settlements along the eastern coast of north america but only england had substantial numbers of settlers some 25 000 in new england and another 15 000 in the chesapeake region.
french dutch swedish and english colonists were also trading european manufactures to native americans in exchange for animal furs and skins with far reaching implications for indian societies.
chapter 2 american experiments 1521 1700 john smith and opechancanough the powerful indian warrior opechancanough towers over english explorer john smith in this engraving.
in december 1607 smith led a party of jamestown colonists upriver in search of indian food supplies.
two hundred warriors intercepted them captured smith and took him to the powhatan village of werowacomoco.
it was on this occasion that pocahontas supposedly interceded to save his life see thinking like a historian p 50.
the note at the bottom of the engraving is doubly mistaken as it was opechancanough not powhatan who took smith captive.
library of congress.
38 of the 120 men were alive nine months later.
death rates remained high by 1611 the virginia company had dispatched 1 200 colonists to jamestown but fewer than half remained alive.
our men were destroyed with cruell diseases as swellings fluxes burning fevers and by warres reported one of the settlements leaders but for the most part they died of meere famine their plan to dominate the local indian population ran up against the presence of powhatan the powerful chief who oversaw some thirty tribal chiefdoms between the james and potomac rivers.
he was willing to treat the english traders as potential allies who could provide valuable goods but just as the englishmen expected tribute from the indians powhatan expected tribute from the english.
he provided the hungry english adventurers with corn in return he demanded hatchets.
bells beads and copper as well as two great guns and expected jamestown to become a dependent community within his chiefdom.
subsequently powhatan arranged a marriage between his daughter pocahontas and john rolfe an english colonist thinking like a historian p 50.
but these tactics failed.
the inability to decide who would pay tribute to whom led to more than a decade of uneasy relations followed by a long era of ruinous warfare.
the war was precipitated by the discovery of a cash crop that like sugar in brazil offered colonists a way to turn a profit but required steady expansion onto indian lands.
tobacco was a plant native to the americas long used by indians as a medicine and a stimulant.
john rolfe found a west indian strain that could flourish in virginia soil and produced a small crop pleasant sweet and strong that fetched a high price in england and spurred the migration of thousands of new settlers.
the english soon came to crave the nicotine that tobacco contained.
james i initially condemned the plant as a vile weed whose black stinking fumes were baleful to the nose harmful to the brain and dangerous to the lungs but the kings attitude changed as taxes on imported tobacco thinking like a historian who was pocahontas.
matoaka nicknamed pocahontas was born around 1596 in the region the english would soon name virginia.
a daughter of chief powhatan her interactions with colonists were important at the time and have been mythologized ever since.
pocahontas left no writings so what we know of her comes from others.
from these accounts we know that she acted as a mediator with the jamestown settlers she was the first native american to marry an englishman and she traveled to england with her husband and son.
pocahontas fell ill and died in gravesend england in june 1617.
john smith generall historie of virginia 1624.
smiths description of being a captive of powhatan in 1607.
having feasted smith after their best barbarous manner they could a long consultation was held but the conclusion was two great stones were brought before powhatan then as many as could layd hands on him dragged him to them and thereon laid his head and being ready with their clubs to beate out his braines pocahontas the kings dearest daughter when no entreaty could prevaile got his head in her armes and laid her owne upon his to save him from death whereat the emperour was contented he should live to make him hatchets and her bells beads and copper.
robert vaughns engraving of pocahontas saving smiths life from john smiths generall historie of virginia 1624.
john smith generall historie of virginia 1624.
pocahontas visited jamestown regularly in the years following smiths capture.
smith returned to england in 1609 four years later captain samuel argall kidnapped pocahontas and held her captive in jamestown.
s he too james towne was brought.
a messenger forthwith was sent to her father that his daughter pocahontas he loved so dearely he must ransome with our men swords peeces tooles c he treacherously had stolen.
sent us word that when we would deliver his daughter he would make us satisfaction for all injuries done to us and give us five hundred bushels of corne and for ever be friends with us.
w e could not believe the rest of our armes were either lost or stolen from him and therefore till he sent them we would keep his daughter.
w e heard no more from him a long time after.
long before this master john rolfe an honest gentleman of good behavior had been in love with pocahontas and she with him.
t his marriage came soone to the knowledge of powhatan a thing acceptable to him as appeared by his sudden consent for within ten daies he sent opachisco an old uncle of hers and two of his sons to see the manner of the marriage and to do in that behalf what they were requested.
which was accordingly done about the first of april and ever since we have had friendly trade and commerce.
john rolfe letter to sir thomas dale 1614.
pocahontas and john rolfe married in april 1614.
in june rolfe defended his motives in this letter to virginias deputy governor.
source british library board robana art resource ny.
i freely subject my selfe to your grave and mature judgment deliberation approbation and determination.
i am not led by the unbridled desire of carnal affection but for the good of this plantation for the honour of our countrie for the glory of god for my owne salvation and for the converting to the true knowledge of god and jesus christ an unbeleeving creature namely pocahontas.
to whom my hartie and best thoughts are and have for a long time bin so intangled and inthralled in so intricate a labyrinth that i was even awearied to unwinde my selfe thereout.
i have often thought surely these are wicked instigations hatched by him who seeketh and delighteth in mans destruction.
i say the holy spirit of god has often demanded of me why i was created.
but to labour in the lords vineyard.
likewise adding hereunto her great appearance of love to me her desire to be taught and instructed in the knowledge of god her capableness of understanding her aptness and willingness to receive any good impression and also the spirituall besides her owne incitements stirring me up hereunto.
now if the vulgar sort who square all mens actions by the base rule of their owne filthiness shall tax or taunt me in this my godly labour let them know it is not any hungry appetite to gorge my selfe with incontinency sure if i would and were so sensually inclined i might satisfy such desire though not without a seared conscience.
portrait of pocahontas by simon van de pass 1616.
in 1616 the virginia company of london sent pocahontas john rolfe and their son thomas to england where she met king james and sat for this portrait the only surviving image of pocahontas.
h earing shee was at branford with divers of my friends i went to see her after a modest salutation without any word she turned about obscured her face as not seeming well contented and in that humour her husband with divers others we all left her two or three houres.
but not long after she began to talke and remembred mee well what courtesies she had done saying you did promise powhatan what was yours should bee his and he the like to you you called him father being in his land a stranger and by the same reason so must i doe you which though i would have excused i durst not allow of that title because she was a kings daughter with a well set countenance she said were you not afraid to come into my fathers countrie and caused feare in him and all his people but mee and feare you here i should call you father i tell you then i will and you shall call mee childe and so i will bee for ever and ever your countrieman.
they did tell us always you were dead and i knew no other till i came to plymouth yet powhatan did command uttamatomakkin to seeke you and know the truth because your countriemen will lie much.
sources 1 3 6 john smith generall historie of virginia glasgow james maclehose and sons 1907 101 218 220 238 239 4 j franklin jameson narratives of early virginia new york charles scribners sons 1907 237 244.
analyzing the evidence 1.
most historians now believe that the event described and shown in sources 1 and 2 was a powhatan ritual to make smith an ally and that his life was not actually in danger.
what elements of these sources suggest the validity of this interpretation.
why would pocahontas a child of eleven or twelve at the time have had a role in such a ritual.
how does vaughn source 2 depict power relations and social hierarchy among the powhatans.
where does pocahontas fit within this hierarchy.
what messages about pocahontas do you think van de pass source 5 intended to convey.
how do these images contribute to the pocahontas myth.
how does rolfe explain his interest in pocahontas source 4.
what is his view of her.
how do you interpret the letter.
assess the reliability of sources 1 3 and 6 and consider smiths motive in including them in his historie.
source 6 purports to record an actual conversation between pocahontas and smith.
what is the tone of this encounter and what might explain pocahontass remarks.
putting it all together source national portrait gallery smithsonian institution art resource ny.
john smith generall historie of virginia 1624.
in 1624 john smith recalled a meeting he had with pocahontas during her 1616 tour of england.
imagine the various encounters pocahontas experienced with the jamestown englishmen from her point of view.
reflect on who pocahontas was as described in these documents savior and friend captive baptized wife virginia company prize and betrayed ally and in a brief essay use pocahontass experience to explore the uncertain nature of english powhatan relations in the first decade of contact.
part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 bolstered the royal treasury.
powhatan however now accused the english of coming not to trade but to invade my people and possess my country to foster the flow of migrants the virginia company allowed individual settlers to own land granting 100 acres to every freeman and more to those who imported servants.
the company also created a system of representative government the house of burgesses first convened in 1619 could make laws and levy taxes although the governor and the company council in england could veto its acts.
by 1622 landownership self government and a judicial system based on the lawes of the realme of england had attracted some 4 500 new recruits.
to encourage the transition to a settler colony the virginia company recruited dozens of maides young and uncorrupt to make wifes to the inhabitants the indian war of 1622 the influx of migrants sparked an all out conflict with the neighboring indians.
the struggle began with an assault led by opechancanough powhatans younger brother and successor.
in 1607 opechancanough had attacked some of the first english invaders subsequently he stood aloof from the english settlers and would not be drawn to any treaty in particular he resisted english proposals to place indian children in schools to be brought upp in christianytie upon becoming the paramount chief in 1621 opechancanough told the leader of the neighboring potomack indians before the end of two moons there should not be an englishman in all their countries opechancanough almost succeeded.
in 1622 he coordinated a surprise attack by twelve indian chiefdoms that killed 347 english settlers nearly one third of the population.
the english fought back by seizing the fields explain and food of those they now consequences called naked tanned deformed how did the proximity of the powhatan chiefdom savages and declared a peraffect developments in petual war without peace or early virginia.
truce that lasted for a decade.
they sold captured warriors into slavery destroy ing them who sought to destroy us and taking control of their cultivated places shocked by the indian uprising james i revoked the virginia companys charter and in 1624 made virginia a royal colony.
now the king and his ministers appointed the governor and a small advisory council retaining the locally elected house of burgesses but stipulating that the kings privy council a committee of political advisors must ratify all legislation.
the king also decreed the legal establishment of the church of england in the colony which meant that residents had to pay taxes to support its clergy.
these institutions an appointed governor an elected assembly a formal legal system and an established anglican church became the model for royal colonies throughout english america.
lord baltimore settles catholics in maryland a second tobacco growing colony developed in neighboring maryland.
king charles i r 1625 1649 jamess successor was secretly sympathetic toward catholicism and in 1632 he granted lands bordering the vast chesapeake bay to catholic aristocrat cecilius calvert lord baltimore.
thus maryland became a refuge for catholics who were subject to persecution in england.
in 1634 twenty gentlemen mostly catholics and 200 artisans and laborers mostly protestants established st marys city at the mouth of the potomac river.
to minimize religious confrontations the proprietor instructed the governor to allow no scandall nor offence to be given to any of the protestants and to cause all acts of romane catholicque religion to be done as privately as may be maryland grew quickly because baltimore imported many artisans and offered ample lands to wealthy migrants.
but political conflict threatened the colonys stability.
disputing baltimores powers settlers elected a representative assembly and insisted on the right to initiate legislation which baltimore grudgingly granted.
anti catholic agitation by protestants also threatened his religious goals.
to protect his coreligionists lord baltimore persuaded the assembly to enact the toleration act 1649 which granted all christians the right to follow their beliefs and hold church services.
in maryland as in virginia tobacco quickly became the main crop and that similarity rather than any religious difference ultimately made the two colonies very much alike in their economic and social systems.
the caribbean islands virginias experiment with a cash crop that created a land intensive plantation society ran parallel to developments in the caribbean where english french and dutch sailors began looking for a permanent toehold.
in 1624 a small english party under the command of sir thomas warner established a settlement on st christopher st kitts.
a year later warner allowed a french group to settle the other end of the island so they could better defend their position from the spanish.
chapter 2 american experiments 1521 1700 a sugar mill in the french west indies 1655 making sugar required both hard labor and considerable expertise.
field slaves labored strenuously in the hot tropical sun to cut the sugarcane and carry or cart it to an oxen or wind powered mill where it was pressed to yield the juice.
then skilled slave artisans took over.
they carefully heated the juice and at the proper moment added ingredients that granulated the sugar and separated it from the molasses which was later distilled into rum.
the granger collection new york.
within a few years the english and french colonists on st kitts had driven the native caribs from the island weathered a spanish attack and created a common set of bylaws for mutual occupation of the island.
after st kitts a dozen or so colonies were founded in the lesser antilles including the french islands of martinique guadeloupe and st barts the english outposts of nevis antigua montserrat anguilla tortola and barbados and the dutch colony of st eustatius.
in 1655 an english fleet captured the spanish island of jamaica one of the large islands of the greater antilles and opened it to settlement as well.
a few of these islands were unpopulated before europeans settled there elsewhere native populations were displaced and often wiped out within a decade or so.
only on the largest islands did native populations hold out longer.
colonists experimented with a wide variety of cash crops including tobacco indigo cotton cacao and ginger.
beginning in the 1640s and drawing on the example of brazil planters on many of the islands shifted to sugar cultivation.
where conditions were right as they were in barbados jamaica nevis and martinique these colonies were soon producing substantial crops of sugar and as a consequence claimed some of the worlds most valuable real estate.
plantation life in north america and the caribbean plantations were initially small freeholds farms of 30 to 50 acres owned and farmed by families or male partners.
but the logic of plantation agriculture soon encouraged consolidation large planters engrossed as much land as they part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 could and experimented with new forms of labor discipline that maximized their control over production.
in virginia the headright system guaranteed 50 acres of land to anyone who paid the passage of a new immigrant to the colony thus by buying additional indentured servants and slaves the colonys largest planters also amassed ever greater claims to land.
european demand for tobacco set off a forty year economic boom in the chesapeake.
all our riches for the present do consist in tobacco a planter remarked in 1630.
exports rose from 3 million pounds in 1640 to 10 million pounds in 1660.
after 1650 wealthy migrants from gentry or noble families established large estates along the coastal rivers.
coming primarily from southern england where tenants and wage laborers farmed large manors they copied that hierarchical system by buying english indentured servants and enslaved africans to work their lands.
at about the same time the switch to sugar production in barbados caused the price of land there to quadruple driving small landowners out.
for rich and poor alike life in the plantation colonies of north america and the caribbean was harsh.
the scarcity of towns deprived settlers of community map 2 4.
families were equally scarce because there were few women and marriages often ended with the early death of a spouse.
pregnant women were especially vulnerable to malaria spread by mosquitoes that flourished in tropical and subtropical climates.
many mothers died after bearing a first or second child so orphaned children along with unmarried young men formed a large segment of the society.
sixty percent of the children born in middlesex county virginia before 1680 lost one or both parents before they were thirteen.
death was pervasive.
although 15 000 english migrants arrived in virginia between 1622 and 1640 the population rose only from 2 000 to 8 000.
it was even harsher in the islands where yellow fever epidemics killed indiscriminately.
on barbados burials outnumbered baptisms in the second half of the seventeenth century by four to one.
indentured servitude still the prospect of owning land continued to lure settlers.
by 1700 more than 100 000 english migrants had come to virginia and maryland and over 200 000 had migrated to the islands of the west indies principally to barbados the vast majority to both destinations traveled as indentured servants figure 2 2.
shipping registers from the english port of bristol reveal the backgrounds of 5 000 servants embarking for the chesapeake.
three quarters were young men.
they came to bristol searching for work once there merchants persuaded them to sign contracts to labor in america.
indentured servitude contracts bound the men and the quarter who were women to work for a master for four or five years after which they would be free to marry and work for themselves.
for merchants servants were valuable cargo their contracts fetched high prices from chesapeake and west indian planters.
for the plantation owners indentured servants were a bargain if they survived the chesapeake bay h riv er r ve ri ck hi cka ho note the location of the indian villages.
how do you explain their position in relation to the english settlements.
h t a r ve ri shirley hundred berkeley hundred werowacomoco a rk yo henrico n appamatuck flowerdew hundred lawnes plantation use the scale of miles to estimate the distance between jamestown and the outlying settlements or hundreds.
what does this suggest about the nature of early virginia society.
r rive smiths hundred martins james jamestown brandon smiths martins fort hundred note the lack of roads and the dependence of the settlements on river transportation.
why was river transport particularly important for the tobacco trade.
20 miles 20 kilometers dales gift cape charles point comfort kecoughtan hampton roads s machot p o w min y riv er river plantations in virginia c 1640 e w no an riv er c arrohateck bermuda hundred ap on i orapax fort west falling creek ra pp a t at m pa m un ke y map 2 4 n why was fort west located here and what was its major function.
fort algernon smith is.
atlantic ocean english settlement english fort indian village fresh salt transition zone the first migrants settled in widely dispersed plantations along the james river a settlement pattern promoted by the tobacco economy.
from their riverfront plantations wealthy planter merchants could easily load heavy hogsheads of tobacco onto oceangoing ships and offload supplies that they then sold to smallholding planters.
consequently few substantial towns or trading centers developed in the chesapeake region.
chapter 2 white population white labor force white servant population 90 000 70 000 50 000 30 000 46 of white population in labor force 10 000 10 of labor force figure 2 2 chesapeake whites workers dependents and indentured servants 1640 1700 the chesapeakes white population grew tenfold in the years after 1640 and it also changed significantly in character.
as more women migrated to virginia and maryland and bore children the percentage of the population who worked in the fields daily fell dramatically from 75 percent to 46 percent.
the proportion of indentured servants in the labor force likewise declined from 30 percent to 10 percent.
voyage and their first year in a harsh new disease environment a process called seasoning during the chesapeakes tobacco boom a male servant could produce five times his purchase price in a single year.
to maximize their gains many masters ruthlessly exploited servants forcing them to work long hours beating them without cause and withholding permission to marry.
if servants ran away or became pregnant masters went to court to increase the term of their service.
female servants were especially vulnerable to abuse.
a virginia law of 1692 stated that dissolute masters have gotten their maids with child and yet claim the benefit of their service planters got rid of uncooperative servants by selling their contracts.
in virginia an englishman remarked in disgust that servants were sold up and down like horses few indentured servants escaped poverty.
in the chesapeake half the men died before completing the term of their contract and another quarter remained landless.
only one quarter achieved their quest for property and respectability.
female servants generally fared better.
because men had grown very sensible of the misfortune of wanting wives many propertied planters married female servants.
thus a few very american experiments 1521 1700 fortunate men and women escaped a life of landless poverty.
african laborers the rigors of indentured servitude paled before the brutality that accompanied the large scale shift to african slave labor.
in barbados and the other english islands sugar production devoured laborers and the supply of indentured servants quickly compare and became inadequate to planters contrast needs.
by 1690 blacks outnum how were the experiences bered whites on barbados nearly of indentured servants and three to one and white slave slaves in the chesapeake owners were developing a code and the caribbean similar.
of force and terror to keep sugar in what ways were they flowing and maintain control of different.
the black majority that surrounded them.
the first comprehensive slave legislation for the island adopted in 1661 was called an act for the better ordering and governing of negroes in the chesapeake the shift to slave labor was more gradual.
in 1619 john rolfe noted that a dutch man of warre.
sold us twenty negars slaves originally shipped by the portuguese from the port of luanda in angola.
for a generation the number of africans remained small.
about 400 africans lived in the chesapeake colonies in 1649 just 2 percent of the population.
by 1670 that figure had reached 5 percent.
most africans served their english masters for life.
however since english common law did not acknowledge chattel slavery it was possible for some africans to escape bondage.
some were freed as a result of christian baptism some purchased their freedom from their owners some like elizabeth key whose story was related at the beginning of the chapter won their freedom in the courts.
once free some ambitious africans became landowners and purchased slaves or the labor contracts of english servants for themselves.
social mobility for africans ended in the 1660s with the collapse of the tobacco boom and the increasing political power of the gentry.
tobacco had once sold for 30 pence a pound now it fetched less than onetenth of that.
the low price of tobacco requires it should bee made as cheap as possible declared virginia planter politician nicholas spencer and blacks can make it cheaper than whites as they imported more african workers the english born political elite grew more race conscious.
increasingly spencer and other leading legislators distinguished english from african residents by color white black rather than by religion christian pagan.
by 1671 the virginia house of burgesses had forbidden africans to part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 own guns or join the militia.
it also barred them tho baptized and enjoying their own freedom from owning english servants.
being black was increasingly a mark of inferior legal status and slavery was fast becoming a permanent and hereditary condition.
as an english clergyman observed these two words negro and slave had by custom grown homogeneous and convertible neo european colonies while mesoamerica and the andes emerged at the heart of a tribute based empire in latin america and tropical and subtropical environments were transformed into plantation societies a series of colonies that more closely replicated european patterns of economic and social organization developed in the temperate zone along north americas atlantic coast america compared opposite page.
dutch french and english sailors probed the continents northern coastline initially searching for a northwest passage through the continent to asia.
gradually they developed an interest in the region on its own terms.
they traded for furs with coastal native american populations fished for cod on the grand banks off the coast of newfoundland and established freehold family farms and larger manors where they reproduced european patterns of agricultural life.
many migrants also came with aspirations to create godly communities places of refuge where they could put religious ideals into practice.
new france new netherland and new england were the three pillars of neo european colonization in the early seventeenth century.
new france in the 1530s jacques cartier ventured up the st lawrence river and claimed it for france.
cartiers claim to the st lawrence languished for three quarters of a century but in 1608 samuel de champlain returned and founded the fur trading post of quebec.
trade with the cree speaking montagnais algonquianspeaking micmacs ottawas and ojibwas and iroquois speaking hurons gave the french access to furs mink otter and beaver that were in great demand in europe.
to secure plush beaver pelts from the hurons who controlled trade north of the great lakes champlain provided them with manufactured goods.
selling pelts an indian told a french priest makes kettles hatchets swords knives bread it also made guns which champlain sold to the hurons.
the hurons also became the first focus of french catholic missionary activity.
hundreds of priests most of them jesuits fanned out to live in indian communities.
they mastered indian languages and came to understand and sometimes respect their values.
many indian peoples initially welcomed the french black robes as spiritually powerful beings but when prayers to the christian god did not protect them from disease the indians grew skeptical.
a peoria chief charged that a priests fables are good only in his own country we have our own beliefs which do not make us die as his do when a drought struck indians blamed the missionaries.
if you cannot make rain they speak of nothing less than making away with you lamented one jesuit.
while new france became an expansive center of fur trading and missionary work it languished as a the fur trade luxuriant pelts like ermine and silver fox were always desirable but the humble beaver dominated the early trade between europeans and indians in the northeast.
it had thick coarse hair but beneath that outer layer was soft underfur those fine hairs were covered in microscopic barbs that allowed them to mat into a dense mass.
european hatmakers pressed this fur into felt so strong and pliable that even broad brimmed hats would hold their shape.
as such hats became fashionable in europe and the colonies beavers were hunted to near extinction in north america.
national archives of canada.
america c o m pa r e d plantation colonies versus neo europes the prospects for europeans who traveled to tropical plantations like barbados differed dramatically from those traveling to neo european colonies like massachusetts bay.
in the former planters employed small armies of servants and slaves in the latter the first generation of colonists worked hard often in cold climates and rocky soils to eke out a living.
henry whistlers journal 1655 this island barbados is one of the richest spots of ground in the world and fully inhabited.
the gentry here doth hue appear far better than ours do in england they have most of them 100 or 2 or 3 of slaves apes who they command as they please.
this island is inhabited with all sorts with english french dutch scots irish spaniards they being jews with indians and miserable negroes borne to perpetual slavery they and their seed these negroes they do allow as many wives as they will have some will have 3 or 4 according as they find their body able our english here doth think a negro child the first day it is born to be worth 5 they cost them nothing the bringing up they go all ways naked some planters will have 30 more or les about 4 or 5 years old they sell them from one to the other as we do sheep.
this island is the dunghill whereon england doth cast forth its rubbish.
a rogue in england will hardly make a cheater here a bawd brought over puts on a demure comportment a whore if handsome makes a wife for some rich planter.
source the narrative of general venables new york longmans green and co 1900 145 146.
william wood new englands prospect 1634 but it may be objected that it is too cold a country for our english men who have been accustomed to a warmer climate.
to which it may be answered.
there is wood farming settlement.
in 1662 king louis xiv r 1643 1714 turned new france into a royal colony and subsidized the migration of indentured servants.
french servants labored under contract for three years received a salary and could eventually lease a farm far more generous terms than those for indentured servants in the english colonies.
nonetheless few people moved to new france a cold and forbidding country at the end of the world as one migrant put it.
and some state policies good store and better cheap to build warm houses and make good fires which makes the winter less tedious.
t rue it is that some venturing too nakedly in extremity of cold being more foolhardy than wise have for a time lost the use of their feet others the use of their fingers but time and surgery afterwards recovered them.
some have had their overgrown beards so frozen together that they could not get their strong water bottles into their mouths.
w hereas many do disparage the land saying a man cannot live without labor in that they more disparage and discredit themselves in giving the world occasion to take notice of their dronish disposition that would live off the sweat of another mans brows.
for all in new england must be workers of some kind.
and howsoever they are accounted poor they are well contented and look not so much at abundance as at competency.
source william wood new englands prospect boston the university of massachusetts press 1993 28 29 68.
questions for analysis 1.
henry whistler was a soldier who briefly visited barbados on a military expedition to the west indies while william wood lived for four years in massachusetts bay.
how might that difference influence the tone of these two descriptions.
what core values does each author ascribe to the colony he writes about.
what kinds of people are most likely to end up in each of these two colonies.
discouraged migration.
louis xiv drafted tens of thousands of men into military service and barred huguenots french calvinist protestants from migrating to new france fearing they might win converts and take control of the colony.
moreover the french legal system gave peasants strong rights to their village lands whereas migrants to new france faced an oppressive aristocracy and church dominated feudal system.
in the village of saint ours in quebec for example peasants paid 45 percent of their wheat crop part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 to nobles and the catholic church.
by 1698 only 15 200 europeans lived in new france compared to 100 000 in englands north american colonies.
despite this small population france eventually claimed a vast inland arc from the st lawrence valley through the great lakes and down the course of the ohio and mississippi rivers.
explorers and fur traders drove this expansion.
in 1673 jacques marquette reached the mississippi river in present day wisconsin then in 1681 robert de la salle traveled down the majestic river to the gulf of mexico.
to honor louis xiv la salle named the region louisiana.
by 1718 french merchants had founded the port of new orleans at the mouth of the mississippi.
eventually a network of about two dozen forts grew up in the great lakes and mississippi.
soldiers and missionaries used them as bases of operations while indians traders and their mtis mixed race offspring created trading communities alongside them.
new netherland by 1600 amsterdam had become the financial and commercial hub of northern europe and dutch financiers dominated the european banking insurance and textile industries.
dutch merchants owned more ships and employed more sailors than did the combined fleets of england france and spain.
indeed the dutch managed much of the worlds commerce.
during their struggle for independence from spain and portugal ruled by spanish monarchs 1580 1640 the dutch seized portuguese forts in africa and indonesia and sugar plantations in brazil.
these conquests gave the dutch control of the atlantic trade in slaves and sugar and the indian ocean commerce in east indian spices and chinese silks and ceramics map 2 5.
in 1609 dutch merchants dispatched the english mariner henry hudson to locate a navigable route to the riches of the east indies.
what he found as he probed the rivers of northeast america was a fur bonanza.
following hudsons exploration of the river that now bears his name the merchants built fort orange albany in 1614 to trade for furs with the munsee and iroquois indians.
then in 1621 the dutch government chartered the west india company which founded the colony of new netherland set up new amsterdam on manhattan island as its capital and brought in farmers and artisans to make the enterprise self sustaining.
the new colony did not thrive.
the population of the dutch republic was too small to support much emigration just 1 5 million people compared to 5 million in britain and 20 million in france and its migrants sought riches in southeast asia rather than fur trading profits in america.
to protect its colony from rival european nations the west india company granted huge estates along the hudson river to wealthy dutchmen who promised to populate them.
but by 1664 new netherland had only 5 000 residents and fewer than half of them were dutch.
new amsterdam c 1640 as the wooden palisade suggests new amsterdam was a fortlike trading post at the edge of a vast land populated by alien indian peoples feared by the dutch.
the city was also a pale miniature imitation of amsterdam with its many canals.
the first settlers built their houses in the dutch style with gable ends facing the street note the two middle houses and excavated a canal across lower manhattan island new york citys canal street today.
library of congress.
chapter 2 american experiments 1521 1700 arctic oce an wheat timber fur tar pitch fish netherlands pottery amsterdam n o r t h a m e ri c a k sil w e cartagena panama spanish main guiana sla ves new granada s lima peru pacific ocean es lav s brazil bahia cairo sla ves af ric a luanda angola south a m e ri c a mozambique sofala rio de janeiro s pi ce i sp ce s s cape town persia arabia mombasa slaves japan nagasaki silver rugs ves sla slaves cape verde gold coast sugar curaao neth.
tripoli alexandria seville mola puerto rico jamaica veracruz k sil n old ar g sug silk asia constantinople tools cloth sea silver acapulco florida haiti cuba sses venice red new spain mexico city madrid spain lisbon a tl a n ti c o c ea n ves sla euro pe portugal tools cloth ormuz india gujarat arabian sea ves sla ld o g ry th ivo clo er hells p p s s pe ie lave wr s co aden goa china ningbo porcelain canton silk macao 1 000 slav es 1 000 2 000 kilometers silver philippines malacca sumatra moluccas borneo indonesia new guinea java madagascar mauritius neth.
au s t r a l i a indian oce an portuguese trade routes spanish trade routes dutch trade routes other major trade routes 2 000 miles pacific ocean manila ceylon main eurasian trade routes 1650 strait of magellan cape horn silk european controlled areas portuguese control spanish control dutch control map 2 5 the eurasian trade system and european spheres of influence 1650 between 1550 and 1650 spanish portuguese and dutch merchants took control of the maritime trade routes between europe and india indonesia and china.
they also created two new trading connections.
the south atlantic system carried slaves sugar and manufactured goods between europe africa and the valuable plantation settlements in brazil and the caribbean islands.
and a transpacific trade carried spanish american silver to china in exchange for silks ceramics and other manufactures.
to trace long term changes in trade and empires see map 1 4 on p 24 and map 5 1 on p.
like new france new netherland flourished as a fur trading enterprise.
trade with the powerful iroquois though rocky at first gradually improved.
but dutch settlers had less respect for their algonquian speaking neighbors.
they seized prime farming land from the algonquian peoples and took over their trading network which exchanged corn and wampum from long island for furs from maine.
in response in 1643 the algonquians launched attacks that nearly destroyed the colony.
almost every place is abandoned a settler lamented whilst the indians daily threaten to overwhelm us to defeat the algonquians the dutch waged vicious warfare maiming burning and killing hundreds of men women and children and formed an alliance with the mohawks who were no less brutal.
the grim progression of euro indian relations an uneasy welcome followed by rising tensions and war afflicted even the dutch who had few designs on indian lands or on their unregenerate souls and were only looking to do business.
after the crippling indian war the west india company ignored new netherland and expanded its profitable trade in african slaves and brazilian sugar.
in identify causes new amsterdam governor why did new france and peter stuyvesant ruled in an new netherland struggle authoritarian fashion rejecting to attract colonists.
demands for a representative system of government and alienating the colonys diverse dutch english and swedish residents.
consequently the residents of new netherland offered little resistance when england invaded the colony in part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 1664.
new netherland became new york and fell under english control.
the rise of the iroquois like other native groups decimated by european diseases and warfare the five nations of the iroquois suffered as a result of colonization but they were able to capitalize on their strategic location in central new york to dominate the region between the french and dutch colonies.
obtaining guns and goods from dutch merchants at fort orange iroquois warriors inflicted terror on their neighbors.
partly in response to a virulent smallpox epidemic in 1633 which cut their number by one third the iroquois waged a series of devastating wars against the hurons 1649 neutrals 1651 eries 1657 and susquehannocks 1660 all iroquoian speaking peoples.
they razed villages killing many residents and taking many more captive.
the conquered hurons ceased to exist as a distinct people survivors trekked westward with displaced algonquian peoples and formed a new nation the wyandots.
iroquois warriors pressed still farther eastward into new england south to the carolinas north to quebec and west via the great lakes to the mississippi dominating indian groups along the way.
collectively known as the beaver wars these iroquois campaigns dramatically altered the map of northeastern north america.
many iroquois raids came at the expense of frenchallied algonquian indians and in the 1660s new france committed to all out war against the iroquois.
in 1667 the mohawks were the last of the five nations to admit defeat.
as part of the peace settlement the five nations accepted jesuit missionaries into their communities.
a minority of iroquois perhaps 20 percent of the population converted to catholicism and moved to the st lawrence valley where they settled in mission communities near montreal where their descendants still live today.
the iroquois who remained in new york did not collapse however.
forging a new alliance with the englishmen who had taken over new netherland they would continue to be a dominant force in the politics of the northeast for generations to come.
new england in 1620 102 english protestants landed at a place they called plymouth near cape cod.
a decade later a much larger group began to arrive just north of plymouth in the newly chartered massachusetts bay colony.
by 1640 the region had attracted more than 20 000 migrants map 2 6.
unlike the early arrivals in virginia and barbados these were not parties of young male adventurers seeking their fortunes or bound to labor for someone else.
they came in family groups to create communities like the ones they left behind except that they intended to establish them according to protestant principles as john calvin had done in geneva.
their numbers were small compared to the caribbean and the chesapeake but their balanced sex ratio and organized approach to community formation allowed them to multiply quickly.
by distributing land broadly they built a society of independent farm families.
and by establishing a holy commonwealth they gave a moral dimension to american history that survives today.
the pilgrims the pilgrims were religious separatists puritans who had left the church of england.
when king james i threatened to drive puritans out of the land or else do worse some puritans chose to live among dutch calvinists in holland.
subsequently 35 of these exiles resolved to maintain their english identity by moving to america.
led by william bradford and joined by 67 migrants from england the pilgrims sailed to america aboard the mayflower.
because they lacked a royal charter they combined themselves together into a civill body politick as their leader explained.
this mayflower compact used the puritans self governing religious congregation as the model for their political structure.
only half of the first migrant group survived until spring but thereafter plymouth thrived the cold climate inhibited the spread of mosquito borne disease and the pilgrims religious discipline encouraged a strong work ethic.
moreover a smallpox epidemic in 1618 devastated the local wampanoags minimizing the danger they posed.
by 1640 there were 3 000 settlers in plymouth.
to ensure political stability they established representative self government broad political rights property ownership and religious freedom of conscience.
meanwhile england plunged deeper into religious turmoil.
when king charles i repudiated certain protestant doctrines including the role of grace in salvation english puritans now powerful in parliament accused the king of popery of holding catholic beliefs.
in 1629 charles dissolved parliament claimed the authority to rule by divine right and raised money through royal edicts and the sale of monopolies.
when charless archbishop william laud began to purge dissident ministers thousands of chapter 2 american experiments 1521 1700 n w england e s e to new new england maryland to che virginia ng l a 5 0 0 nies o l co ake sape atlantic ocean nd 2 w to e 0 0 0 0 i st n ia nd ds an l is 0 0 bermuda origins of massachusetts puritans east anglia norfolk suffolk essex hartford counties bahamas west country wiltshire hampshire dorset counties yorkshire yorkshire lincoln counties rowley newbury ipswich cambridge hingham plymouth st croix st kitts caribbean sea nevis barbados york 500 miles 250 500 kilometers hull east anglia boston hingham ipswich dedham chelmsford braintree cambridge massachusetts bay and plymouth colonies exeter yorkshire rowley 100 miles dartmouth 50 100 kilometers andover newbury salisbury west country england map 2 6 the puritan migration to america 1620 1640 forty five thousand puritans left england for america and the west indies between 1620 and 1640.
about half traveled to the new england colonies of plymouth massachusetts bay and connecticut where they created durable societies with deep religious identities.
migrants from the three major centers of puritanism in england yorkshire east anglia and the west country commonly settled among those from their own region.
often they named american communities after their english towns of origin and tried to live as they had in old england.
for example settlers from rowley in yorkshire transplanted their customary system of open field agriculture to rowley in massachusetts bay.
puritans protestants who did not separate from the church of england but hoped to purify it of its ceremony and hierarchy fled to america.
john winthrop and massachusetts bay the puritan exodus began in 1630 with the departure of 900 migrants led by john winthrop a well educated country squire who became the first governor of the massachusetts bay colony.
calling england morally corrupt and overburdened with people winthrop sought land for his children and a place in christian history for his people.
we must consider that we shall be as a city upon a hill winthrop told the migrants.
the eyes of all people are upon us like the pilgrims to see a longer excerpt of winthrops city upon a hill sermon along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 the puritans envisioned a reformed christian society with authority in magistrates liberty in people purity in the church as minister john cotton put it.
by their example they hoped to inspire religious reform throughout christendom.
winthrop and his associates governed the massachusetts bay colony from the town of boston.
they transformed their joint stock corporation a commercial agreement that allows investors to pool their resources into a representative political system with a governor council and assembly.
to ensure rule by the compare and godly the puritans limited the contrast right to vote and hold office to what made new england different from new france men who were church memand new netherland.
rejecting the plymouth colonys policy of religious tolerance the massachusetts bay colony established puritanism as the state supported religion barred other faiths from conducting services and used the bible as a legal guide.
where there is no law they said magistrates should rule as near the law of god as they can over the next decade about 10 000 puritans migrated to the colony along with 10 000 others fleeing hard times in england.
the new england puritans sought to emulate the simplicity of the first christians.
seeing bishops as traitours unto god they placed power in the congregation of members hence the name congregationalist for their churches.
inspired by john calvin many puritans embraced predestination the idea that god saved only a few chosen people.
church members often lived in great anxiety worried that god had not placed them among the elect some hoped for a conversion experience the intense sensation of receiving gods grace and being born again other puritans relied on preparation the confidence in salvation that came from spiritual guidance by their ministers.
still others believed that they were gods chosen people the new israelites and would be saved if they obeyed his laws.
roger williams and rhode island to maintain gods favor the massachusetts bay magistrates purged their society of religious dissidents.
one target was roger williams the puritan minister in salem a coastal town north of boston.
williams opposed the decision to establish an official religion and praised the pilgrims separation of church and state.
he advocated toleration arguing that political magistrates had authority over only the bodies goods and outward estates of men not their spiritual lives.
williams also questioned the puritans seizure of indian lands.
the magistrates banished him from the colony in 1636.
williams and his followers settled 50 miles south of boston founding the town of providence on land purchased from the narragansett indians.
other religious dissidents settled nearby at portsmouth and newport.
in 1644 these settlers obtained a corporate charter from parliament for a new colony rhode island with full authority to rule themselves.
in rhode island as in plymouth there was no legally established church and individuals could worship god as they pleased.
anne hutchinson the massachusetts bay magistrates saw a second threat to their authority in anne hutchinson.
the wife of a merchant and mother of seven hutchinson held weekly prayer meetings for women and accused various boston clergymen of placing undue emphasis on good behavior.
like martin luther hutchinson denied that salvation could be earned through good deeds.
there was no covenant of works that would save the well behaved only a covenant of grace through which god saved those he predestined for salvation.
hutchinson likewise declared that god revealed divine truth directly to individual believers a controversial doctrine that the puritan magistrates denounced as heretical.
the magistrates also resented hutchinson because of her sex.
like other christians puritans believed that both men and women could be saved.
but gender equality stopped there.
women were inferior to men in earthly affairs said leading puritan divines who told married women thy desires shall bee subject to thy husband and he shall rule over thee puritan women could not be ministers or lay preachers nor could they vote in church affairs.
in 1637 the magistrates accused hutchinson of teaching that inward grace freed an individual from the rules of the church and found her guilty of holding heretical views.
banished she followed roger williams into exile in rhode island.
other puritan groups moved out from massachusetts bay in the 1630s and settled on or near the connecticut river.
for several decades the colonies of connecticut new haven and saybrook were independent of one another in 1660 they secured a charter from king charles ii r 1660 1685 for the selfgoverning colony of connecticut.
like massachusetts bay connecticut had a legally established church and an elected governor and assembly however it granted voting rights to most property owning men not just to church members as in the original puritan colony.
chapter 2 the puritan revolution in england meanwhile a religious civil war engulfed england.
archbishop laud had imposed the church of england prayer book on presbyterian scotland in 1637 five years later a rebel scottish army invaded england.
thousands of english puritans and hundreds of american puritans joined the scots demanding religious reform and parliamentary power.
after years of civil war parliamentary forces led by oliver cromwell emerged victorious.
in 1649 parliament beheaded king charles i proclaimed a republican commonwealth and banished bishops and elaborate rituals from the church of england.
the protestant almanack 1700 the conflict between protestants and catholics took many forms.
to reinforce the religious identity of english protestants a writer using the pseudonym philopretes published this almanac that charted not only the passage of the seasons and the influence of the pagan signs of the zodiack but also the pernicious revolutions of the papacy against the lord and his anointed cambridge university library.
american experiments 1521 1700 the puritan triumph in england was short lived.
popular support for the commonwealth ebbed after cromwell took dictatorial control in 1653.
following his death in 1658 moderate protestants and a resurgent aristocracy restored the monarchy and the hierarchy of bishops.
with charles ii r 1660 1685 on the throne englands experiment in radical protestant government came to an end.
for the puritans in america the restoration of the monarchy began a new phase of their errand into the wilderness they had come to new england expecting to return to europe in triumph.
when the failure of the english revolution dashed that sacred mission ministers exhorted congregations to create a godly republican society in america.
the puritan colonies now stood as outposts of calvinism and the atlantic republican tradition.
puritanism and witchcraft like native americans puritans believed that the physical world was full of supernatural forces.
devout christians saw signs of gods or satans power in blazing stars birth defects and other unusual events.
noting after a storm that the houses of many ministers had been smitten with lightning cotton mather a prominent puritan theologian wondered what the meaning of god should be in it puritans were hostile toward people who they believed tried to manipulate these forces and many were willing to condemn neighbors as satans wizards or witches people in the town of andover were much addicted to sorcery claimed one observer and there were forty men in it that could raise the devil as well as any astrologer between 1647 and 1662 civil authorities in new england hanged fourteen people for witchcraft most of them older women accused of being double tongued or of having an unruly spirit the most dramatic episode of witch hunting occurred in salem in 1692.
several girls who had experienced strange seizures accused neighbors of bewitching them.
when judges at the accused witches trials allowed the use of spectral evidence visions of evil beings and marks seen only by the girls the accusations spun out of control.
eventually massachusetts bay authorities tried 175 people for witchcraft and executed 19 of them.
the causes of this mass hysteria were complex and are still debated.
some historians point to group rivalries many accusers were the daughters or servants of poor farmers whereas many of the alleged witches were wealthier church members or their friends.
because 18 of those put to death were women other historians see the episode as part of a broader part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 puritan effort to subordinate women.
still others focus on political instability in massachusetts bay in the early 1690s and on fears raised by recent indian attacks in nearby maine which had killed the parents of some of the young accusers.
it is likely that all of these causes played some role in the executions.
whatever the cause the salem episode marked a major turning point.
shaken by the number of deaths government officials now discouraged legal prosecutions for witchcraft.
moreover many influential people embraced the outlook of the european enlightenment a major intellectual movement that began around 1675 and promoted a rational scientific view of the world.
increasingly educated men and women explained strange happenings and sudden deaths by reference to natural causes not witchcraft.
unlike cotton mather 1663 1728 who believed that lightning was a supernatural sign benjamin franklin 1706 1790 and other well read men of his generation would investigate it as a natural phenomenon.
a yeoman society 1630 1700 in building their communities new england puritans consciously rejected the feudal practices of english society.
many puritans came from middling families in east anglia a region of pasture lands and few manors and had no desire to live as tenants of wealthy aristocrats or submit to oppressive taxation by a distant government.
they had escaped out of the pollutions of the world the settlers of watertown in massachusetts bay declared and vowed to live close togither in self governing communities.
accordingly the general courts of massachusetts bay and connecticut bestowed land on groups of settlers who then distributed it among the male heads of families.
widespread ownership of land did not mean equality of wealth or status.
god had ordained different degrees and orders of men proclaimed boston merchant john saffin some to be masters and commanders others to be subjects and to be commanded town proprietors normally awarded the largest plots to men of high social status who often became selectmen and justices of the peace.
however all families received some land and most adult men had a vote in the town meeting the main institution of local government map 2 7.
in this society of independent households and selfgoverning communities ordinary farmers had much more political power than chesapeake yeomen and european peasants did.
although nathaniel fish was one of the poorest men in the town of barnstable he owned just a two room cottage 8 acres of land an ox and a cow he was a voting member of the town meeting.
each year fish and other barnstable farmers levied taxes enacted ordinances governing fencing roadbuilding and the use of common fields and chose the mason children this 1670 portrait of david joanna and abigail mason by an unknown painter illustrates the growing prosperity of well to do boston households.
all three wear white linen edged with fine lace and expensive ribbons.
eight year old david is dressed like a gentleman his slashed sleeves kid gloves and silvertipped walking stick represent the height of english fashion.
puritans with their plain style were uneasy about such finery.
as minister samuel torrey complained a spirit of worldliness a spirit of sensuality was gaining strength in the younger generation.
the fine arts museums of san francisco m h de young memorial museum gift of mr and mrs john d rockefeller iii 1979 7 3.
fine arts museums of san francisco.
chapter 2 andover 1650 1692 new houses by 1650 by 1692 meeting house er m rim ack the key to the right indicates that a central purpose of this map is to show the geographic distribution of nucleated and dispersed villages.
why are there so many nucleated towns in the connecticut river valley and so many dispersed settlements in eastern massachusetts.
indian settlements continuous english settlements by 1700 roads field boundaries un andover sudbury ni pm uc k worcester m ire sh be connecticut river rk hadley oxford ot qu rhode island n aga pe r nar woodstock hartford connecticut t set wethersfield farmington dedham wallingford e w s medfield plymouth wampanoag barnstable wethersfield in 1640 is an example of a nucleated village with house lots clustered around the meeting house and fields arranged in geometric patterns in the surrounding countryside.
sakonnet an eg waterbury newtown n h o i on sa t ou h m cr ive r atlantic ocean newton m a s s a c h u s e t t s windsor manchester salem sunderland hatfield mo ipswich ok co a nn pe as sa ch us et ta in s mah ican haverhill westfield 20 kilometers village types ab en a hampton deerfield 20 miles the map of andover shows how an originally nucleated settlement changed over time into a dispersed town.
new farms tended to be located farther and farther from the meeting house and town center represented by a triangle on the town plan.
after vaughn northfield nucleated initially nucleated dispersed by 1700 dispersed ki meeting house greenfield guilford derby 0 5 1 mile wethersfield meeting house long island after wood 4 miles river nucleated to dispersed in fifty years american experiments 1521 1700 the field boundaries in wethersfield indicate that the land is flat in the connecticut river valley.
in contrast the pattern of roads and paths in andover suggests a hilly topography.
these uplands gave the merrimack river a strong current and many rapids which were later harnessed for industrial development.
see map 9 1 on page 288.
map 2 7 settlement patterns in new england towns 1630 1700 throughout new england colonists pressed onto desirable indian lands.
initially most puritan towns were compact families lived close to one another in village centers and traveled daily to work in the surrounding fields.
this 1640 map of wethersfield connecticut a town situated on the broad plains of the connecticut river valley shows this pattern clearly.
the first settlers in andover massachusetts also chose to live in the village center.
however the rugged topography of eastern massachusetts encouraged the townspeople to disperse.
by 1692 as the varied location of new houses shows many andover residents were living on farms distant from the village center.
after andrews part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 the selectmen who managed town affairs.
the farmers also selected the towns representatives to the general court which gradually displaced the governor as the center of political authority.
for fish and thousands of other ordinary settlers new england had proved to be a new world of opportunity.
instability war and rebellion everywhere in the colonies conflicts arose over the control of resources the legitimacy of colonial leaders claims to power and attempts to define social and cultural norms.
periodically these conflicts flared spectacularly into episodes of violence.
each episode has its own story its own unique logic and narrative but taken together they also illustrate the way that in their formative stages colonial societies pressured people to accept new patterns of authority and new claims to power.
when these claims were contested the results could quickly turn deadly.
new englands indian wars relations between colonists and indians in early new england were bewilderingly complex.
many rival indian groups lived there before europeans arrived by the 1630s these groups were bordered by the dutch colony of new netherland to their west and the various english settlements to the east plymouth massachusetts bay rhode island connecticut new haven and saybrook.
the regions indian leaders created various alliances for the purposes of trade and defense wampanoags with plymouth mohegans with massachusetts and connecticut pequots with new netherland narragansetts with rhode island.
puritan pequot war because of their alliance with the dutch the pequots became a thorn in the side of english traders.
a series of violent encounters began in july 1636 with the killing of english trader john oldham and escalated until may 1637 when a combined force of massachusetts and connecticut the hurons feast of the dead hurons buried their dead in temporary raised tombs so they could easily care for their spirits.
when they moved their villages in search of fertile soil and better hunting the hurons held a feast of the dead and reburied the bones of their own deceased and often bones from other villages in a common pit lined with beaver robes.
this solemn ceremony united living as well as dead clan members strengthening the bonds of the huron confederacy.
it also was believed to release the spirits of the dead allowing them to travel to the land where the first huron aataentsic fell from the sky made earth and man and lived with her son and assistant iouskeha.
library of congress.
chapter 2 militiamen accompanied by narragansett and mohegan warriors attacked a pequot village and massacred some five hundred men women and children.
in the months that followed the new englanders drove the surviving pequots into oblivion and divided their lands.
believing they were gods chosen people puritans considered their presence to be divinely ordained.
initially they pondered the morality of acquiring native american lands.
by what right or warrant can we enter into the land of the savages they asked themselves.
responding to such concerns john winthrop detected gods hand in a recent smallpox epidemic if god were not pleased with our inheriting these parts he asked why doth he still make roome for us by diminishing them as we increase experiences like the pequot war confirmed new englanders confidence in their enterprise.
god laughed at the enemies of his people one soldier boasted after the 1637 massacre filling the place with dead bodies like catholic missionaries puritans believed that their church should embrace all peoples.
however their strong emphasis on predestination the idea that god saved only a few chosen people made it hard for them to accept that indians could be counted among the elect.
probably the devil delivered these miserable savages to america cotton mather suggested in hopes that the gospel of the lord jesus christ would never come here a few puritan ministers committed themselves to the effort to convert indians.
on marthas vineyard jonathan mayhew helped to create an indian led community of wampanoag christians.
john eliot translated the bible into algonquian and created fourteen indian praying towns.
by 1670 more than 1 000 indians lived in these settlements but relatively few native americans were ever permitted to become full members of puritan congregations.
metacoms war 1675 1676 by the 1670s europeans in new england outnumbered indians by three to one.
the english population had multiplied to 55 000 while native peoples had diminished from an estimated 120 000 in 1570 to barely 16 000.
to the wampanoag leader metacom also known as king philip the prospects for coexistence looked dim.
when his people copied english ways by raising hogs and selling pork in boston puritan officials accused them of selling at an under rate and restricted their trade.
when indians killed wandering hogs that devastated their cornfields authorities prosecuted them for violating english property rights american voices p 68.
metacom concluded that the english colonists had to be expelled.
in 1675 the wampanoags leader forged american experiments 1521 1700 metacom king philip chief of the wampanoags the indian war of 1675 1676 left an indelible mark on the history of new england.
this painting from the 1850s done on semitransparent cloth and lit from behind for effect was used by traveling performers to tell the story of king philips war.
notice that metacom is pictured not as a savage but as a dignified man.
no longer in danger of indian attack nineteenth century whites in new england adopted a romanticized version of their regions often brutal history.
shelburne museum shelburne vermont.
a military alliance with the narragansetts and nipmucks and attacked white settlements throughout new england.
almost every day settler william harris fearfully reported understand points he heard new reports of the of view indians burneing houses take how did new englanders ing cattell killing men women religious ideas influence children carrying others their relations with neighcaptive bitter fighting continued boring native american into 1676 ending only when the peoples.
indian warriors ran short of gunpowder and the massachusetts bay government hired mohegan and mohawk warriors who killed metacom.
metacoms war of 1675 1676 which english settlers called king philips war was a deadly affair.
indians destroyed one fifth of the english towns in american voices the causes of metacoms war the causes of and responsibility for every american war are much debated and the war of 1675 1676 between puritans and native americans is no exception.
the english settlers called it king philips war suggesting that the wampanoag chief metacom king philip instigated it.
was that the case.
we have no firsthand indian accounts of its origins but three english accounts offer different versions of events.
given the variation among the accounts and their fragmentary character how can historians reconstruct what really happened.
john easton a relacion of the indyan warre john easton was the deputy governor of rhode island and a quaker.
like many quakers easton was a pacifist and tried to prevent the war.
he wrote this relacion shortly after the conflict ended.
in january 1675 an indian was found dead and by a coroner inquest of plymouth colony judged murdered.
the dead indian was called sassamon and a christian that could read and write.
the report came that.
three indians had confessed and accused philip of employing them to kill sassamon and that consequently.
the english would hang philip.
so the indians were afraid and reported that.
philip believed that the english.
might kill him to have his land.
so philip kept his men in arms.
plymouth governor josiah winslow required him to disband his men and informed him his jealousy his worry about land seizure was false.
philip answered he would do no harm and thanked the governor for his information.
the three indians were hung on june 8 1675.
and it was reported that sassamon before his death had informed the english of the indian plot and that if the indians knew it they would kill him and that the heathen might destroy the english for their wickedness as god had permitted the heathen to destroy the israelites of old.
so the english were afraid and philip was afraid and both increased in arms but for forty years time reports and jealousies of war had been very frequent that we did not think that now a war was breaking forth.
but about a week before it did we had cause to think it would then to endeavor to prevent it we sent a man to philip.
he called his council and agreed to come to us philip came himself unarmed and about forty of his men armed.
then five of us went over to speak to the indians.
three were magistrates.
we sat very friendly together june 14 18.
we told him our business was to endeavor that they might not.
they said that was well they had done no wrong the english wronged them.
we said we knew the english said that the indians wronged them and the indians said the english wronged them but our desire was the quarrel might rightly be decided in the best way and not as dogs decide their quarrels.
the indians owned that fighting was the worst way then they propounded how right might take place we said by arbitration.
they said all english agreed against them and so by arbitration they had had much wrong many square miles of land so taken from them for the english would have english arbitrators.
another grievance of the indians the english cattle and horses still increased and that.
they could not keep their corn from being spoiled by the english livestock.
so we departed without any discourtesies and suddenly c june 25 had a letter from the plymouth governor that they intended in arms to subjugate philip.
and in a weeks time after we had been with the indians the war thus begun.
source john easton a relacion of the indyan warre by mr easton of roade isld 1675 in narratives of the indian wars 1675 1699 ed.
charles h lincoln new york charles scribners sons 1913 7 17.
edward randolph short narrative of my proceedings edward randolph an english customs official in boston denounced the independent policies of the puritan colonies and tried to subject them to english control.
his short narrative written in 1675 was a report to his superiors in london.
various are the reports and conjectures of the causes of the present indian war.
some impute it to an impudent zeal in the magistrates of boston to christianize those heathen before they were civilized and enjoining them the strict observation of their laws which to a people so rude and licentious hath proved even intolerable.
while the magistrates for their profit put the laws severely in execution against the indians the people on the other side for lucre and gain entice and provoke the indians.
to drunkenness to which those people are so generally addicted that they will strip themselves to their skin to have their fill of rum and brandy.
some believe there have been vagrant and jesuitical french priests who have made it their business for some years past to go from sachem to sachem chief to chief to exasperate the indians against the english and to bring them into a confederacy and that they were promised supplies from france and other parts to extirpate the english nation out of the continent of america.
others impute the cause to some injuries offered to the sachem philip for he being possessed of a tract of land called mount hope.
some english had a mind to dispossess him thereof who never wanting one pretence or other to attain their end complained of injuries done by philip and his indians to their stock and cattle whereupon philip was often summoned before the magistrate sometimes imprisoned and never released but upon parting with a considerable part of his land.
but the government of the massachusetts.
do declare that because of the sins of the people.
god hath given the heathen commission to rise against them.
for men wearing long hair and periwigs made of womens hair for women.
cutting curling and laying out the hair.
for profaneness in the people not frequenting their church meetings.
source albert b hart ed american history told by contemporaries new york macmillan 1897 1 458 460.
benjamin church entertaining passages captain benjamin church fought in the war and helped end it by capturing metacoms wife and son and leading the expedition that killed the indian chieftain.
forty years later in 1716 churchs son thomas wrote an account of the war based on his fathers notes and recollections.
where they lived.
they plundered the nearest houses that the inhabitants had deserted on the rumor of a war but as yet offered no violence to the people at least none were killed.
however the alarm was given by their numbers and hostile equipage and by the prey they made of what they could find in the forsaken houses.
an express came the same day to the governor c june 25 who immediately gave orders to the captains of the towns to march the greatest part of their companies of militia and to rendezvous at taunton.
the enemy who began their hostilities with plundering and destroying cattle did not long content themselves with that game.
they thirsted for english blood and they soon broached it killing two men in the way not far from mr miless garrison.
and soon after eight more at mattapoisett upon whose bodies they exercised more than brutish barbarities.
these provocations drew out the resentment of some of capt.
prentices troop who desired they might have liberty to go out and seek the enemy in their own quarters c june 26.
source benjamin church entertaining passages relating to philips war which began in the month of june 1675 ed.
thomas church boston b.
green 1716.
questions for analysis 1.
compare what these documents say about the causes of the war.
where do the documents agree and disagree about these causes.
according to randolph what did the magistrates of massachusetts bay believe to be a major cause of the war.
could historians verify or disprove their explanation.
what additional sources of evidence might be useful.
drawing from these sources who was the prime instigator of the war.
which documents provide the most compelling evidence for your conclusion.
while mr church was diligently settling his new farm.
the rumor of a war between the english and the natives gave a check to his projects.
philip according to his promise to his people permitted them to march out of the neck of the mount hope peninsula part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 massachusetts and rhode island and killed 1 000 settlers nearly 5 percent of the adult population for a time the puritan experiment hung in the balance.
but the natives losses from famine and disease death in battle and sale into slavery were much larger about 4 500 indians died one quarter of an already diminished population.
many of the surviving wampanoag narragansett and nipmuck peoples moved west intermarrying with algonquian tribes allied to the french.
over the next century these displaced indian peoples would take their revenge joining with french catholics to attack their puritan enemies.
metacoms war did not eliminate the presence of native americans in southern new england but it effectively destroyed their existence as independent peoples.
bacons rebellion at the same time that new england fought its war with metacom virginia was wracked by a rebellion that nearly toppled its government.
it too grew out of a conflict with neighboring indians but this one inspired a popular uprising against the colonys royal governor.
like metacoms war it highlighted the way that a landintensive settler colony created friction with native american populations in addition it dramatized the way that ordinary colonists could challenge the right of a new planter elite to rule over them.
by the 1670s economic and political power in virginia was in the hands of a small circle of men who amassed land slaves and political offices.
through headrights and royal grants they controlled nearly half of all the settled land in virginia what they could not plant themselves they leased to tenants.
freed indentured servants found it ever harder to get land of their own many were forced to lease lands or even sign new indentures to make ends meet.
to make matters worse the price of tobacco fell until planters received only a penny a pound for their crops in the 1670s.
at the top of virginias narrow social pyramid was william berkeley governor between 1642 and 1652 and again after 1660.
to consolidate power berkeley bestowed large land grants on members of his council.
the councilors exempted these lands from taxation and appointed friends as justices of the peace and county judges.
to win support in the house of burgesses berkeley bought off legislators with land grants and lucrative appointments as sheriffs and tax collectors.
but social unrest erupted when the burgesses took the vote away from landless freemen who by now constituted half the adult white men.
although property holding yeomen retained their voting rights they were angered by falling tobacco prices political corruption and grievous taxations that threatened the utter ruin of us the poor commonalty berkeley and his allies were living on borrowed time.
frontier war an indian conflict ignited the flame of social rebellion.
in 1607 when the english intruded 30 000 native americans resided in virginia by 1675 the native population had dwindled to only 3 500.
by then europeans numbered some 38 000 and africans another 2 500.
most indians lived on treaty guaranteed territory along the frontier where poor freeholders and landless former servants now wanted to settle demanding that the natives be expelled or exterminated.
their demands were ignored by wealthy planters who wanted a ready supply of tenants and laborers and by governor berkeley and the planter merchants who traded with the occaneechee indians for beaver pelts and deerskins.
fighting broke out late in 1675 when a vigilante band of virginia militiamen murdered thirty indians.
defying berkeleys orders a larger force then surrounded a fortified susquehannock village and killed five leaders who came out to negotiate.
the susquehannocks retaliated by attacking outlying plantations and killing three hundred whites.
in response berkeley proposed a defensive strategy a series of frontier forts to deter indian intrusions.
the settlers dismissed this scheme as a militarily useless plot by planter merchants to impose high taxes and take all our tobacco into their own hands challenging the government enter nathaniel bacon a young well connected migrant from england who emerged as the leader of the rebels.
bacon held a position on the governors council but he was shut out of berkeleys inner circle and differed with berkeley on indian policy.
when the governor refused to grant him a military commission bacon mobilized his neighbors and attacked any indians he could find.
condemning the frontiersmen as rebels and mutineers berkeley expelled bacon from the council and had him arrested.
but bacons army forced the governor to release their leader and hold legislative elections.
the newly elected house of burgesses enacted far reaching reforms that curbed the powers of the governor and council and restored voting rights to landless freemen.
these much needed reforms came too late.
poor farmers and servants resented years of exploitation by wealthy planters arrogant justices of the peace and chapter 2 american experiments 1521 1700 power and sway is got into the hands of the rich bacon proclaimed as his army burned jamestown to the ground and plundered the plantations of berkeleys allies.
when bacon died suddenly of dysentery in october 1676 the governor took revenge dispersing the rebel army seizing the estates of well to do rebels and hanging 23 men.
in the wake of bacons rebellion virginias leaders worked harder to appease their humble neighbors.
but the rebellion also coincided with the time when virginia planters were switching from indentured servants place events who became free after four in context years to slaves who labored for in what ways was bacons life.
in the eighteenth century rebellion symptomatic wealthy planters would make of social tensions in the common cause with poorer colony of virginia.
whites while slaves became the colonys most exploited workers.
that fateful change eased tensions within the free population but committed subsequent generations of americans to a labor system based on racial exploitation.
bacons rebellion like metacoms war reminds us that these colonies were unfinished worlds still searching for viable foundations.
summary nathaniel bacon condemned as a rebel and a traitor in his own time nathaniel bacon emerged in the late nineteenth century as a southern hero a harbinger of the confederate rebels of 1860 1865.
the association for the preservation of virginia antiquities founded in 1888 commissioned this stained glass window depicting bacon in dual guises of a well dressed gentleman and a rebel in body armor.
installing bacons portrait in a window of the powder magazine in williamsburg built by governor alexander spotswood in 1715 explained a leading member of the association would connect present virginia with her great and noble past and commemorate those who shed their blood for virginia and the south preservation virginia.
wicked pernicious counsellors as one yeoman rebel complained a poor man who has only his labour to maintain himself and his family pays as much in taxes as a man who has 20 000 acres backed by 400 armed men bacon issued a manifesto and declaration of the people that demanded the removal of indians and an end to the rule of wealthy parasites all the during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries three types of colonies took shape in the americas.
in mesoamerica and the andes spanish colonists made indigenous empires their own capitalizing on preexisting labor systems and using tribute and the discovery of precious metals to generate enormous wealth which philip ii used to defend the interests of the catholic church in europe.
in tropical and subtropical regions colonizers transferred the plantation complex a centuries old form of production and labor discipline to places suited to growing exotic crops like sugar tobacco and indigo.
the rigors of plantation agriculture demanded a large supply of labor which was first filled in english colonies by indentured servitude and later supplemented and eclipsed by african slavery.
the third type of colony neo european settlement developed in north americas temperate zone where european migrants adapted familiar systems of social and economic organization in new settings.
everywhere in the americas colonization was first and foremost a process of experimentation.
as resources part 1 transformations of north america 1450 1700 from the americas flowed to europe monarchies were strengthened and the competition among them sharpened by the schism between protestants and catholics gained new force and energy.
establishing colonies demanded political social and cultural innovations that threw europeans native americans and africans together in bewildering circumstances triggered massive ecological change through the c h a p t e r columbian exchange and demanded radical adjustments.
in the chesapeake and new england the two earliest regions of english settlement on mainland north america the adjustment to new circumstances sparked conflict with neighboring indians and waves of instability within the colonies.
these external and internal crises were products of the struggle to adapt to the rigors of colonization.
r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events chattel slavery p 40 neo europes p 40 encomienda p 42 columbian exchange p 43 outwork p 45 mercantilism p 45 house of burgesses p 52 royal colony p 52 freeholds p 53 headright system p 54 key people indentured servitude p 54 pilgrims p 60 puritans p 61 joint stock corporation p 62 predestination p 62 toleration p 62 covenant of works p 62 covenant of grace p 62 town meeting p 64 philip ii p 44 francis drake p 45 opechancanough p 52 lord baltimore p 52 john winthrop p 61 roger williams p 62 anne hutchinson p 62 metacom p 67 review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapters main ideas.
how did spains conquest of central mexico and the andes shape european competition in the americas.
how did the protestant reformation affect this competition.
how did environmental and ecological factors shape colonial enterprise and how did the process of colonization impact american ecology and environments.
chapter 2 3.
what push factors caused people to leave england for its colonies in the seventeenth century.
what pull factors drew them to particular colonies or regions.
chapter review beliefs and culture on the thematic timeline on page 5.
how did political developments in seventeenth century england impact the development of its american colonies.
review the events listed under politics and power and ideas thematic understanding making connections recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.
in chapter 1 we saw that there were many parallels between native american european and african societies on the eve of contact.
yet europeans ended up dominating both native american and african populations in colonial american settings.
based on what you learned in chapter 2 what factors help to explain that dominance.
across time and place more to explore take another look at the image of john smith and opechancanough on page 49.
it is taken from smiths generall historie of virginia new england and the summer isles which was first published in 1624.
what is the dominant theme of the image.
how might recent events in virginia have colored the emphases in the books illustrations.
visual evidence start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.
virginia dejohn anderson creatures of empire 2004.
explores the significance of animal domestication in early new england and chesapeake colonies.
the plymouth colony archive project histarch uiuc edu plymouth.
a rich array of fully searchable texts and material culture resources.
kathleen brown good wives nasty wenches and anxious patriarchs 1996.
examines the interrelationship of gender and race in early virginia.
salem witch trials etext virginia edu salem witchcraft home html.
extensive materials on the salem witchcraft trials including a fascinating interactive map feature.
alfred w crosby ecological imperialism 1986.
introduces the term neo europes and asks why there are so many of them.
jenny hale pulsipher subjects unto the same king 2005.
considers the multifaceted contest for power in seventeenth century new england.
part 1 chapter review timeline ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
1550 1630 english crown supports mercantilism 1556 1598 reign of philip ii king of spain 1558 1603 reign of elizabeth i queen of england 1577 1580 francis drakes golden hind circles the globe captures spanish treasure fleet 1560 1620 growth of english puritan movement storms and english ships destroy spanish armada 1603 1625 reign of james i king of england english traders settle jamestown virginia samuel de champlain founds quebec henry hudson explores north america for the dutch dutch set up fur trading post at fort orange albany first africans arrive in chesapeake region house of burgesses convenes in virginia pilgrims found plymouth colony 1620 1660 chesapeake colonies enjoy tobacco boom dutch west india company chartered opechancanoughs uprising virginia becomes royal colony 1625 1649 reign of charles i king of england puritans found massachusetts bay colony colonists arrive in maryland beginning of puritan pequot war roger williams founds providence anne hutchinson banished from massachusetts bay 1640s iroquois initiate wars over fur trade 1642 1659 puritan revolution in england restoration of the english monarchy tobacco prices fall and remain low english conquer new netherland bacons rebellion in virginia 1675 1676 metacoms war in new england salem witchcraft trials chapter 2 chapter review key turning points the chesapeake tobacco boom 1620 1660 opechancanoughs uprising 1622 and the takeover of virginia by the crown 1624.
how were these events related to each other.
what was their cumulative result.
p a r t c h.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 england and england and the new world ireland englands long struggle to conquer and pacify ireland which lasted well into the seventeenth century absorbed money and energy that might have been directed toward the new world.
in subduing ireland whose catholic population was deemed a threat to the stability of protestant rule in england the government employed a variety of approaches including military conquest the slaughter of civilians the seizure of land and introduction of english economic practices and the dispatch of large numbers of settlers.
rather than seeking to absorb the irish into english society the english excluded the native population from a territory of settlement known as the pale where the colonists created their own social order.
just as the reconquest of spain from the moors established patterns that would be repeated in spanish new world colonization the methods used in ireland anticipated policies england would undertake in america.
some sixteenth century english writers directly compared the allegedly barbaric wild irish with american indians.
like the indians the irish supposedly confused liberty and license.
they refused to respect english authority and resisted conversion to english protestantism.
the early english colonies in north america and the west indies were known as plantations that is communities planted from abroad among an alien population the same term was originally used to describe protestant settlements in ireland.
england and north america not until the reign of elizabeth i did the english turn their attention to north america although sailors and adventurers still showed more interest in raiding spanish cities and treasure fleets in the caribbean than establishing settlements.
the government granted charters grants of exclusive rights and privileges to sir humphrey gilbert and sir walter raleigh authorizing them to establish colonies in north america at their own expense.
with little or no support from the crown both ventures failed.
gilbert who had earned a reputation for brutality in the irish wars by murdering civilians and burning their crops established a short lived settlement on newfoundland in 1582.
three years later raleigh dispatched a fleet of five ships with some 100 colonists many of them his personal servants to set up a base on roanoke island off the north carolina coast partly to facilitate continuing raids on spanish shipping.
but the colonists mostly young men under military leadership abandoned the venture in 1586 and returned to england.
a second group of 100 settlers composed of families who hoped to establish a permanent colony was dispatched that year.
their fate remains a mystery.
when a ship bearing supplies arrived in 1590 the sailors found the colony abandoned with the inhabitants evidently having moved to live among the indians.
the word croaton the indian name for a nearby island or tribe had been carved on a tree.
raleigh by now nearly bankrupt lost his enthusiasm for colonization.
to establish a successful colony it seemed clear would require more planning and economic resources than any individual could provide.
what were the main contours of english colonization in the seventeenth century.
spreading protestantism as in the case of spain national glory profit and religious mission merged in early english thinking about the new world.
the reformation heightened the english governments sense of catholic spain as its mortal enemy a belief reinforced in 1588 when a spanish naval armada unsuccessfully attempted to invade the british isles.
just as spain justified its empire in part by claiming to convert indians to catholicism england expressed its imperial ambitions in terms of an obligation to liberate the new world from the tyranny of the pope.
by the late sixteenth century anticatholicism had become deeply ingrained in english popular culture.
reports of the atrocities of spanish rule were widely circulated.
english translations of bartolom de las casass writings appeared during elizabeths reign.
one using a common protestant term for the catholic church bore the title popery truly displayed although atrocities were hardly confined to any one nation as englands own conduct in ireland demonstrated the idea that the empire of catholic spain was uniquely murderous and tyrannical enabled the english to describe their own imperial ambitions in the language of freedom.
in a discourse concerning western planting written in 1584 at the request of sir walter raleigh the protestant minister and scholar richard hakluyt listed twenty three reasons why queen elizabeth i should support the establishment of colonies.
among them was the idea that english settlements would strike a blow against spains empire and therefore form part of a divine mission to rescue the new world and its inhabitants from the influence of catholicism and tyranny.
tied as slaves under spanish rule he wrote the indians of the new world were crying out to us.
to come and help they would welcome english settlers and revolt clean from the spaniard crying with one voice liberta liberta as desirous of liberty and freedom england would repeat much of spains behavior in the new world.
but the english always believed that they were unique.
in their case empire and freedom would go hand in hand.
motives for colonization but bringing freedom to indians was hardly the only argument hakluyt marshaled as england prepared to step onto the world stage.
national power and glory were never far from the minds of the eras propagandists of empire.
through colonization hakluyt and other writers argued england a relatively minor power in europe at the end of the sixteenth century could come to rival the wealth and standing of great nations like spain and france.
other considerations also weighed heavily in their arguments.
spanish claims to the south and french explorations in the area of present day canada left to england the middle part of north america a region deemed worthless by other powers because it lacked an engraving by theodor de bry depicts colonists hunting and fishing in virginia.
promotional images such as this emphasized the abundance of the new world and suggested that colonists could live familiar lives there.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 england and the new world precious metals and was unsuitable for sugar cultivation the two paths to riches in early american empires.
this did not however prevent promoters of colonization from painting a portrait of a fertile land of great plenty its animals were supposedly so abundant and its climate and soil so favorable that colonists could enrich the mother country and themselves by providing english consumers with goods now supplied by foreigners and opening a new market for english products.
unlike early adventurers such as raleigh who thought of wealth in terms of deposits of gold hakluyt insisted that trade would be the basis of englands empire.
the william hogarths well known engraving gin lane 1751 offers a satiric glimpse of lower class life in london.
hogarth was particularly concerned about the abuse of alcohol.
a drunken woman allows her baby to fall from her arms while on the left a man and his wife pawn their coats tools and cooking utensils for money for liquor.
social crisis equally important america could be a refuge for englands surplus population benefiting mother country and emigrants alike.
the late sixteenth century was a time of social crisis in england with economic growth unable to keep pace with the needs of a population that grew from 3 million in 1550 to about 4 million in 1600.
for many years english peasants had enjoyed a secure hold on their plots of land.
but in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries landlords sought profits by raising sheep for the expanding trade in wool and introducing more modern farming practices such as crop rotation.
they evicted small farmers and fenced in commons previously open to all.
while many landlords farmers and town merchants benefited from the enclosure movement as this process was called thousands of persons were uprooted from the land.
many flooded into englands cities where wages fell dramatically.
others denounced by authorities as rogues vagabonds and vagrants wandered the roads in search of work.
their situation grew worse as prices throughout europe rose buoyed by the influx of gold and silver from the mines of latin america into spain.
a pioneering study of english society conducted at the end of the seventeenth century estimated that half the population lived at or below the poverty line.
the cost of poor relief fell mainly on local communities.
all our towns wrote the puritan leader john winthrop in 1629 shortly before leaving england for massachusetts complain of the burden of poor people and strive by all means to rid any such as they have england he added somberly grows weary of her inhabitants the government struggled to deal with this social crisis.
under henry viii those without jobs could be whipped branded forced into the army or hanged.
during elizabeths reign a law authorized justices of the peace to regulate hours and wages and put the unemployed to work.
vagrants were required to accept any job offered to them and could be punished if they sought to change employment.
another solution was to encourage the unruly poor to leave for the new world.
richard hakluyt wrote of the advantages of settling in america such needy people of our country who now what were the main contours of english colonization in the seventeenth century.
trouble the commonwealth and.
commit outrageous offenses as colonists they could become productive citizens contributing to the nations wealth.
masterless men as early as 1516 when thomas more published utopia a novel set on an imaginary island in the western hemisphere the image of america as a place where settlers could escape from the economic inequalities of europe had been circulating in england.
this ideal coincided with the goals of ordinary englishmen.
although authorities saw wandering or unemployed masterless men as a danger to society and tried to force them to accept jobs popular attitudes viewed economic dependence as itself a form of servitude.
working for wages was widely associated with servility and loss of liberty.
only those who controlled their own labor could be regarded as truly free.
indeed popular tales and ballads romanticized the very vagabonds highwaymen and even beggars denounced by the propertied and powerful since despite their poverty they at least enjoyed freedom from wage work.
the image of the new world as a unique place of opportunity where the english laboring classes could regain economic independence by acquiring land and where even criminals would enjoy a second chance was deeply rooted from the earliest days of settlement.
john smith had scarcely landed in virginia in 1607 when he wrote that in america every man may be the master and owner of his own labor and land in 1623 the royal letter approving the recruitment of emigrants to new england promised that any settler could easily become lord of 200 acres of land an amount far beyond the reach of most englishmen.
the main lure for emigrants from england to the new world was not so much riches in gold and silver as the promise of independence that followed from owning land.
economic freedom and the possibility of passing it on to ones children attracted the largest number of english colonists.
the coming of the english english emigrants seventeenth century north america was an unstable and dangerous environment.
diseases decimated indian and settler populations alike.
colonies were racked by religious political and economic tensions and drawn into imperial wars and conflict with indians.
they remained dependent on the mother country for protection and economic assistance.
without sustained immigration most settlements would have collapsed.
with a population of between 4 million and 5 million about half that of spain and a quarter of that of france england produced a far larger number of men women and children willing to brave the dangers of emigration to the new world.
in large part this was because economic conditions in england were so bad.
between 1607 and 1700 more than half a million people left england.
a pamphlet published in 1609 promoting emigration to virginia.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 the coming of the english north america was not the destination of the majority of these emigrants.
approximately 180 000 settled in ireland and about the same number migrated to the west indies where the introduction of sugar cultivation promised riches for those who could obtain land.
nonetheless the population of englands mainland colonies quickly outstripped that of their rivals.
the chesapeake area where the tobacco producing colonies of virginia and maryland developed a constant demand for cheap labor received about 120 000 settlers most of whom landed before 1660.
new england attracted 21 000 emigrants nearly all of them arriving before 1640.
in the second part of the seventeenth century the middle colonies new york new jersey and pennsylvania attracted about 23 000 settlers.
although the arrivals to new england and the middle colonies included many families the majority of newcomers were young single men from the bottom rungs of english society who had little to lose by emigrating.
many had already moved from place to place in england.
colonial settlement was in many ways an extension of the migration at home of an increasingly mobile english population.
indentured an indenture a contract for labor for a period of years signed by james mahoney who emigrated from ireland to north america in 1723.
servants settlers who could pay for their own passage government officials clergymen merchants artisans landowning farmers and members of the lesser nobility arrived in america as free persons.
most quickly acquired land.
in the seventeenth century however nearly two thirds of english settlers came as indentured servants who voluntarily surrendered their freedom for a specified time usually five to seven years in exchange for passage to america.
like slaves servants could be bought and sold could not marry without the permission of their owner were subject to physical punishment and saw their obligation to labor enforced by the courts.
to ensure uninterrupted work by female servants the law lengthened the term of their indenture if they became pregnant.
many negroes are better used complained elizabeth sprigs an indentured servant in maryland who described being forced to work day and night.
then tied up and whipped but unlike slaves servants could look forward to a release from bondage.
assuming they survived their period of labor servants would receive a payment known as freedom dues and become free members of society.
for most of the seventeenth century however indentured servitude was not a guaranteed route to economic autonomy.
given the high death rate many servants did not live to the end of their terms.
freedom dues were sometimes so meager that they did not enable recipients to acquire land.
many servants found the reality of life in the new world less appealing than they had anticipated.
employers constantly complained of servants running away not working diligently or being unruly all manifestations of what one commentator called their fondness for freedom land and liberty access to land played many roles in seventeenth century america.
land english settlers believed was the basis of liberty.
owning land gave men what obstacles did the english settlers in the chesapeake overcome.
control over their own labor and in most colonies the right to vote.
the promise of immediate access to land lured free settlers and freedom dues that included land persuaded potential immigrants to sign contracts as indentured servants.
land in america also became a way for the king to reward relatives and allies.
each colony was launched with a huge grant of land from the crown either to a company or to a private individual known as a proprietor.
some grants if taken literally stretched from the atlantic ocean to the pacific.
land was a source of wealth and power for colonial officials and their favorites who acquired enormous estates.
without labor however land would have little value.
since emigrants did not come to america intending to work the land of others except temporarily in the case of indentured servants the very abundance of free land eventually led many property owners to turn to slaves as a workforce.
englishmen and indians land in north america of course was already occupied.
and the arrival of english settlers presented the native inhabitants of eastern north america with the greatest crisis in their history.
unlike the spanish english colonists did not call themselves conquerors they wanted land not dominion over the existing population.
they were chiefly interested in displacing the indians and settling on their land not intermarrying with them organizing their labor or making them subjects of the crown.
the marriage between john rolfe and pocahontas the daughter of virginias leading chief discussed below is well known but almost unique.
no such mixed marriage took place in seventeenthcentury massachusetts and only two more in virginia before the legislature outlawed the practice in 1691.
the english exchanged goods with the native population and indians often traveled through colonial settlements.
fur traders on the frontiers of settlement sometimes married indian women partly as a way of gaining access to native societies and the kin networks essential to economic relationships.
most english settlers however remained obstinately separate from their indian neighbors.
despite their insistence that indians had no real claim to the land since they did not cultivate or improve it most colonial authorities in practice recognized indians title based on occupancy.
they acquired land by purchase often in treaties forced upon indians after they had suffered military defeat.
colonial courts recorded numerous sales of indian land to governments or individual settlers.
to keep the peace some colonial governments tried to prevent the private seizure or purchase of indian lands or they declared certain areas off limits to settlers.
but these measures were rarely enforced and ultimately proved ineffective.
an engraving by john white of an indian village surrounded by a stockade.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 the coming of the english new settlers and freed servants sought land for themselves and those who established families in america needed land for their children.
the seventeenth century was marked by recurrent warfare between colonists and indians.
these conflicts generated a strong feeling of superiority among the colonists and left them intent on maintaining the real and imagined boundaries separating the two peoples.
in the initial stages of settlement english colonists often established towns on sites indians had cleared planted indian crops and adopted indian technology such as snowshoes and canoes which were valuable for travel in the american wilderness.
but over time the english displaced the original inhabitants more thoroughly than any other european empire.
the the only known contemporary portrait of a new england indian this 1681 painting by an unnamed artist was long thought to represent ninigret ii a leader of the narragansetts of rhode island.
it has been more recently identified as david an indian who saved the life of john winthrop ii a governor of colonial connecticut.
apart from the wampum beads around his neck everything the indian wears is of english manufacture.
transformation of indian life many eastern indians initially welcomed the newcomers or at least their goods which they appreciated for their practical advantages.
items like woven cloth metal kettles iron axes fishhooks hoes and guns were quickly integrated into indian life.
indians also displayed a great desire for goods like colorful glass beads and copper ornaments that could be incorporated into their religious ceremonies.
as indians became integrated into the atlantic economy subtle changes took place in indian life.
european metal goods changed their farming hunting and cooking practices.
men devoted more time to hunting beaver for fur trading.
older skills deteriorated as the use of european products expanded and alcohol became increasingly common and disruptive.
indians learned to bargain effectively and to supply items that europeans desired.
later observers would describe this trade as one in which indians exchanged valuable commodities like furs and animal skins for worthless european trinkets.
in fact both europeans and indians gave up goods they had in abundance in exchange for items in short supply in their own society.
but as the colonists achieved military superiority over the indians the profits of trade mostly flowed to colonial and european merchants.
growing connections with europeans stimulated warfare among indian tribes and the overhunting of beaver and deer forced some groups to encroach on territory claimed by others.
and newcomers from europe brought epidemics that decimated indian populations.
changes in the land traders religious missionaries and colonial authorities all sought to reshape indian society and culture.
but as settlers spread over the land they threatened indians ways of life more completely than any company of soldiers or group of bureaucrats.
as settlers fenced in more and more land and introduced new crops and livestock the natural environment changed in ways that undermined traditional indian agriculture and hunting.
pigs and cattle roamed freely trampling indian cornfields and gardens.
the need for wood to build what obstacles did the english settlers in the chesapeake overcome.
and heat homes and export to england depleted forests on which indians relied for hunting.
the rapid expansion of the fur trade diminished the population of beaver and other animals.
since you are here strangers and come into our country one group of indians told early settlers in the chesapeake you should rather conform yourselves to the customs of our country than impose yours on us but it was the indians whose lives were most powerfully altered by the changes set in motion in 1607 when english colonists landed at jamestown.
settling the chesapeake the jamestown colony ch by 1650 english settlement in the the early history of jamestown was to say the least not promising.
the chesapeake had spread well beyond the colonys leadership changed repeatedly its inhabitants suffered an extraorinitial colony at jamestown as tobacco dinarily high death rate and with the company seeking a quick profit supplanters sought fertile land near navigable plies from england proved inadequate.
the hopes of locating riches such as waterways.
the spanish had found in mexico were quickly dashed.
silver and gold they have none one spanish observer english settlement commented their local resources were not much to be in the chesapeake regarded and they had no commerce with any nation ca.
1650 the first settlers were a quarrelsome band of gentlemen and servants they included few farmers and laborers and 50 miles numerous sons of english gentry and high status crafts0 50 kilometers maryland men jewelers stonecutters and the like who preferred to 1632 prospect for gold rather than farm.
they would rather starve than work declared john smith one of the colonys first leaders.
jamestown lay beside a swamp containing malariacarrying mosquitoes and the garbage settlers dumped into maryland 1632 the local river bred germs that caused dysentery and nantaughtacund onawmanient typhoid fever.
disease and lack of food took a heavy toll.
by chi ch h ic cac ca ac a co oa an mattaponi chicacoan rappahannock the end of the first year the original population of 104 wicocomoco chickahominy cuttatowomen had fallen by half.
new arrivals including the first two accohannock pamunkey women who landed in 1608 brought the numbers up to virginia chiskiak y 400 in 1609 but by 1610 after a winter long remembered accomac o 1607 as the starving time only 65 settlers remained alive.
appomattoc one point the survivors abandoned jamestown and sailed jamestown ja me sr for england only to be intercepted and persuaded to return weyanock.
to virginia by ships carrying a new governor 250 colonists and supplies.
by 1616 about 80 percent of the immigrants nansemond who had arrived in the first decade were dead.
only rigorous military discipline held the colony ro together.
john smith was a forceful man whose career a before coming to america included a period fighting the turks in hungary where he was captured and for a time 1607 date of settlement enslaved.
he imposed a regime of forced labor on company roan oke english settlement ca.
1650 islan d lands.
he that will not work shall not eat smith declared.
smiths autocratic mode of governing alienated many of esa pea ke bay r rk no ke r c h.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 settling the chesapeake the colonists.
after being injured in an accidental gunpowder explosion in 1609 he was forced to return to england.
but his immediate successors continued his iron rule.
from a portrait of john smith the leader of the early virginia colony engraved on a 1624 map of new england.
the only portrait of pocahontas during her lifetime was engraved by simon van de passe in england in 1616.
after converting to christianity pocahontas took the name rebecca.
company to society the virginia company slowly realized that for the colony to survive it would have to abandon the search for gold grow its own food and find a marketable commodity.
it would also have to attract more settlers.
with this end in view it announced new policies in 1618 that powerfully shaped virginias development as a functioning society rather than an outpost of london based investors.
instead of retaining all the land for itself the company introduced the headright system awarding fifty acres of land to any colonist who paid for his own or anothers passage.
thus anyone who brought in a sizable number of servants would immediately acquire a large estate.
in place of the governors militaristic regime a charter of grants and liberties was issued including the establishment of a house of burgesses.
when it convened in 1619 this became the first elected assembly in colonial america.
the house of burgesses was hardly a model of democracy only landowners could vote and the company and its appointed governor retained the right to nullify any measure the body adopted.
but its creation established a political precedent that all english colonies would eventually follow.
also in 1619 the first twenty blacks arrived in virginia on a dutch vessel.
the full significance of these two events would not be apparent until years later.
but they laid the foundation for a society that would one day be dominated economically and politically by slaveowning planters.
powhatan and pocahontas when the english arrived at jamestown they landed in an area inhabited by some 15 000 to 25 000 indians living in numerous small agricultural villages.
most acknowledged the rule of wahunsonacock a shrewd and forceful leader who had recently consolidated his authority over the region and collected tribute from some thirty subordinate tribes.
called powhatan by the settlers after the indian word for both his tribe and his title of paramount chief he quickly realized the advantages of trade with the newcomers.
for its part mindful of las casass condemnation of spanish behavior the virginia company instructed its colonists to treat local indians kindly and to try to convert them to christianity.
realizing that the colonists depended on the indians for food john smith tried to stop settlers from seizing produce from nearby villages lest the indians cut off all trade.
in the first two years of jamestowns existence relations with indians were mostly peaceful and based on a fairly equal give and take.
at one point smith was captured by the indians and threatened with execution by powhatan only to be rescued by pocahontas reputedly the favorite among his many children by dozens of wives.
the incident has come down in legend most recently a popular animated film as an example of a rebellious love struck teenager defying her father.
in fact it was probably part of an elaborate ceremony designed by powhatan to demonstrate his power over the colonists and incorporate them into his realm.
pocahontas subsequently how did virginia and maryland develop in their early years.
became an intermediary between the two peoples bringing food and messages to jamestown.
john smiths return to england raised tensions between the two groups and a period of sporadic conflict began in 1610 with the english massacring villagers indiscriminately and destroying indian crops.
pocahontas herself was captured and held as a hostage by the settlers in 1613.
while confined to jamestown she converted to christianity.
as part of the restoration of peace in 1614 she married the english colonist john rolfe.
two years later she accompanied her husband to england where she caused a sensation in the court of james i as a symbol of anglo indian harmony and missionary success.
but she succumbed to disease in 1617.
her father died the following year.
the uprising of once it became clear that the english were interested in establishing a permanent and constantly expanding colony not a trading post conflict with local indians was inevitable.
the peace that began in 1614 ended abruptly in 1622 when powhatans brother and successor opechancanough led a brilliantly planned surprise attack that in a single day wiped out one quarter of virginias settler population of 1 200.
the surviving 900 colonists organized themselves into military bands which then massacred scores of indians and devastated their villages.
a spokesman for the virginia company explained the reason behind the indian assault the daily fear that.
in time we by our growing continually upon them would dispossess them of this country but by going to war declared governor francis wyatt the indians had forfeited any claim to the land.
virginias policy he continued must now be nothing less than the expulsion of the savages to gain the free range of the country indians remained a significant presence in virginia and trade continued throughout the century.
but the unsuccessful uprising of 1622 fundamentally shifted the balance of power in the colony.
the settlers supremacy was reinforced in 1644 when a last desperate rebellion led by opechancanough now said to be 100 years old was crushed after causing the deaths of some 500 colonists.
virginia forced a treaty on the surviving coastal indians who now numbered less than 2 000 that acknowledged their subordination to the government at jamestown and required them to move to tribal reservations to the west and not enter areas of european settlement without permission.
this policy of separation followed the precedent already established in ireland.
settlers spreading inland into the virginia countryside continued to seize indian lands.
the destruction caused by the uprising of 1622 was the last in a series of blows suffered by the virginia company.
two years later it surrendered its charter and virginia became the first royal colony its governor now appointed by the crown.
virginia had failed to accomplish any of its goals for either the company or the settlers.
investors had not turned a profit and although the company had sent 6 000 settlers to virginia its white population numbered only 1 200 when the king assumed control.
preoccupied with affairs at home the government in london for years paid little attention to virginia.
henceforth the local elite not a faraway company controlled the colonys development.
and that elite was growing rapidly in powhatan the most prominent indian leader in the original area of english settlement in virginia.
this image showing powhatan and his court was engraved on john smiths map of virginia and included in smiths general history of virginia published in 1624.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 settling the chesapeake theodor de brys engraving of the 1622 indian uprising in virginia depicts the indians massacring defenseless colonists who are shown unarmed although many in fact owned guns.
wealth and power thanks to the cultivation of a crop introduced from the west indies by john rolfe tobacco.
a an advertisement for tobacco includes images of slaves with agricultural implements.
tobacco colony king james i considered tobacco harmful to the brain and dangerous to the lungs and issued a spirited warning against its use.
but increasing numbers of europeans enjoyed smoking and believed the tobacco plant had medicinal benefits.
as a commodity with an ever expanding mass market in europe tobacco became virginias substitute for gold.
it enriched an emerging class of tobacco planters as well as members of the colonial government who assigned good land to themselves.
the crown profited from customs duties taxes on tobacco that entered or left the kingdom.
by 1624 more than 200 000 pounds were being grown producing startling profits for landowners.
forty years later the crop totaled 15 million pounds and it doubled again by the 1680s.
the spread of tobacco farming produced a dispersed society with few towns and little social unity.
it inspired a get richquick attitude and a frenzied scramble for land and labor.
by the middle of the seventeenth century a new influx of immigrants with ample financial resources sons of merchants and english gentlemen had taken advantage of the headright system and governmental connections to acquire large estates along navigable rivers.
they established themselves as the colonys social and political elite.
the expansion of tobacco cultivation also led to an increased demand for field labor met for most of the seventeenth century by young male indentured servants.
despite harsh conditions of work in the tobacco fields a persistently high death rate and laws mandating punishments from whipping to an extension of service for those who ran away or were unruly the how did virginia and maryland develop in their early years.
abundance of land continued to attract migrants.
of the 120 000 english immigrants who entered the chesapeake region during the seventeenth century three quarters came as servants.
virginias white society increasingly came to resemble that of england with a wealthy landed gentry at the top a group of small farmers mostly former indentured servants who had managed to acquire land in the middle and an army of poor laborers servants and landless former indentured servants at the bottom.
by 1700 the regions white population had grown to nearly 90 000.
women and the fa m i ly virginia however lacked one essential element of english society stable family life.
the colony avidly promoted the immigration of women including several dozen tobacco brides who arrived in 1620 and 1621 for arranged marriages.
but given the demand for male servants to work in the tobacco fields men in the chesapeake outnumbered women for most of the seventeenth century by four or five to one.
the vast majority of women who emigrated to the region came as indentured servants.
since they usually had to complete their terms of service before marrying they did not begin to form families until their mid twenties.
the high death rate unequal ratio between the sexes and late age of marriage for those who found partners retarded population growth and produced a society with large numbers of single men widows and orphans.
although patriarchal ideals remained intact in virginia in practice the traditional authority of husbands and fathers was weakened.
because of their own low life expectancy fathers found it difficult to supervise the careers and marriages of their children.
in the colonies as in england a married woman possessed certain rights before the law including a claim to dower rights of one third of her husbands property in the event that he died before she did.
when the widow processing tobacco was as labor intensive as caring for the plant in the fields.
here scantily clad slaves and female indentured servants work with the crop after it has been harvested.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 settling the chesapeake died however the property passed to the husbands male heirs.
english law was far less generous than in spain where a woman could hold independently any property inherited from her parents and a man and wife owned jointly all the wealth accumulated during a marriage.
social conditions in the colonies however opened the door to roles women rarely assumed in england.
widows and the few women who never married took advantage of their legal status as femme sole a woman alone who enjoyed an independent legal identity denied to married women to make contracts and conduct business.
margaret brent who emigrated to the chesapeake in 1638 acquired land managed her own plantation and acted as a lawyer in court.
some widows were chosen to administer their husbands estates or were willed their husbands property outright rather than receiving only the one third dower rights but because most women came to virginia as indentured servants they could look forward only to a life of hard labor in the tobacco fields and early death.
servants were frequently subjected to sexual abuse by their masters.
those who married often found themselves in poverty when their husbands died.
the maryland experiment although it began under very different sponsorship and remained much smaller than virginia during the seventeenth century the second chesapeake colony maryland followed a similar course of development.
as in virginia tobacco came to dominate the economy and tobacco planters the society.
but in other ways marylands history was strikingly different.
maryland was established in 1632 as a proprietary colony that is a grant of land and governmental authority to a single individual.
this was cecilius calvert the son of a recently deceased favorite of king charles i.
the charter made calvert proprietor of the colony and granted him full free and absolute power including control of trade and the right to initiate all legislation with an elected assembly confined to approving or disapproving his proposals.
calvert imagined maryland as a feudal domain.
land would be laid out in manors with the owners paying quitrents to the proprietor.
calvert disliked representative institutions and believed ordinary people should not meddle in governmental affairs.
on the other hand the charter also guaranteed to colonists all privileges franchises and liberties of englishmen.
while these were not spelled out they undoubtedly included the idea of a government limited by the law.
here was a recipe for conflict and maryland had more than its share during the seventeenth century.
religion in maryland further aggravating instability in the colony was the fact that calvert a catholic envisioned maryland as a refuge for his persecuted coreligionists in england especially the younger sons of catholic gentry who had few economic or political prospects in england.
in maryland he hoped protestants and catholics could live in a harmony unknown in europe.
the first group of 130 colonists included a number of catholic gentlemen and two priests.
most appointed officials were also catholic including relatives of the proprietor as were those to whom he awarded the choicest land grants.
but protestants always formed a majority of the settlers.
most as how did virginia and maryland develop in their early years.
in virginia came as indentured servants but others took advantage of marylands generous headright system to acquire land by transporting workers to the colony.
as in virginia the death rate remained very high.
in one county half the marriages during the seventeenth century lasted fewer than eight years before one partner died.
almost 70 percent of male settlers in maryland died before reaching the age of fifty and half the children born in the colony did not live to adulthood.
but at least initially maryland seems to have offered servants greater opportunity for landownership than virginia.
unlike in the older colony freedom dues in maryland included fifty acres of land.
as tobacco planters engrossed the best land later in the century however the prospects for landless men diminished.
t h e n e w e n g l a n d way the rise of puritanism as virginia and maryland evolved toward societies dominated by a small aristocracy ruling over numerous bound laborers a very different social order emerged in seventeenth century new england.
the early history of that region is intimately connected to the religious movement known as puritanism which arose in england late in the sixteenth century.
the term was initially coined by opponents to ridicule those not satisfied with the progress of the protestant reformation in england who called themselves not puritans but godly or true protestants puritanism came to define a set of religious principles and a view of how society should be organized.
puritans differed among themselves on many issues.
but all shared the conviction that the church of england retained too many elements of catholicism in its religious rituals and doctrines.
puritans saw elaborate church ceremonies the rule that priests could not marry and ornate church decorations as vestiges of popery many rejected the catholic structure of religious authority descending from a pope or king to archbishops bishops and priests.
only independent local congregations they believed should choose clergymen and determine modes of worship.
these puritans were called congregationalists all puritans shared many of the beliefs of the church of england and the society as a whole including a hatred of catholicism and a pride in englands greatness as a champion of liberty.
but they believed that neither the church nor the nation was living up to its ideals.
puritans considered religious belief a complex and demanding matter and urged believers to seek the truth by reading the bible and listening to sermons by educated ministers rather than devoting themselves to sacraments administered by priests and to what puritans considered formulaic prayers.
the sermon was the central rite of puritan practice.
in the course of a lifetime according to one estimate the average puritan listened to some 7 000 sermons.
in their religious beliefs puritans followed the ideas of the french born swiss theologian john calvin.
the world calvin taught was divided between the elect and the damned.
all persons sought salvation but whether one was among the elect destined to be saved had already been determined by god.
his will ultimately was unknowable and nothing one did on earth including prayers good works and offerings would make the first book printed in the english mainland colonies the whole book of psalmes faithfully translated into english metre was published in cambridge massachusetts in 1640.
worshipers used it to sing psalms religious songs from the bible sung in massachusetts unaccompanied by music which puritan churches banned.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 the new england way any difference.
but while there were no guarantees of salvation worldly success leading a good life prospering economically might well be indications of gods grace.
idleness and immoral behavior were sure signs of damnation.
moral a portrait of john winthrop first governor of the massachusetts bay colony painted in the 1640s.
liberty puritanism however was not simply a set of ideas but a state of mind a zealousness in pursuing the true faith that alienated many who held differing religious views.
a minority of puritans such as those who settled in plymouth colony became separatists abandoning the church of england entirely to form their own independent churches.
most however hoped to purify the church from within.
but in the 1620s and 1630s as charles i seemed to be moving toward a restoration of catholic ceremonies and the church of england dismissed puritan ministers and censored their writings many puritans decided to emigrate.
they departed england not so much due to persecution but because they feared that popish practices had grown to such an intolerable height as one minister complained that the consciences of gods saints.
could no longer bear them by the same token puritans blamed many of englands social problems on the wandering poor whom they considered indolent and ungodly.
when puritans emigrated to new england they hoped to escape what they believed to be the religious and worldly corruptions of english society.
they would establish a city set upon a hill a bible commonwealth whose influence would flow back across the atlantic and rescue england from godlessness and social decay.
like so many other emigrants to america puritans came in search of liberty especially the right to worship and govern themselves in what they deemed a truly christian manner.
freedom for puritans was primarily a spiritual affair.
it implied the opportunity and the responsibility to obey gods will through self government and self denial.
it certainly did not mean unrestrained action improper religious practices or sinful behavior of which puritans thought there were far too many examples in england.
in a 1645 speech to the massachusetts legislature explaining the puritan conception of freedom john winthrop the colonys governor distinguished sharply between two kinds of liberty.
natural liberty or acting without restraint suggested a liberty to do evil this was the false idea of freedom supposedly adopted by the irish indians and bad christians generally.
genuine moral liberty the christian liberty described in chapter 1 meant a liberty to that only which is good it was quite compatible with severe restraints on speech religion and personal behavior.
true freedom winthrop insisted depended on subjection to authority both religious and secular otherwise anarchy was sure to follow.
to puritans liberty meant that the elect had a right to establish churches and govern society not that others could challenge their beliefs or authority.
the pilgrims at p ly m o u t h the first puritans to emigrate to america were a group of separatists known as the pilgrims.
they had already fled to the netherlands in 1608 believing that satan had begun to sow errors heresies and discords in england.
a decade later fearing that their children were being corrupted by being what made the english settlement of new england distinctive.
drawn into the surrounding culture they decided to emigrate to virginia.
the expedition was financed by a group of english investors who hoped to establish a base for profitable trade.
in september 1620 the mayflower carrying 150 settlers and crew among them many nonpuritans embarked from england.
blown off course they landed not in virginia but hundreds of miles to the north on cape cod.
here the 102 who survived the journey established the colony of plymouth.
before landing the pilgrim leaders drew up the mayflower compact in which the adult men going ashore agreed to obey just and equal laws enacted by representatives of their own choosing.
this was the first written frame of government in what is now the united states.
a century earlier when giovanni da verrazano explored the atlantic coast of north america he encountered thickly settled villages and saw the smoke of innumerable indian bonfires.
by the time the pilgrims landed hundreds of european fishing vessels had operated off new england landing to trade with indians and bringing as elsewhere epidemics.
the pilgrims arrived in an area whose native population had recently been decimated by smallpox.
they established plymouth on the site of an abandoned indian village whose fields had been cleared before the epidemic and were ready for cultivation.
nonetheless the settlers arrived six weeks before winter without food or farm animals.
half died during the first winter.
the colonists only survived through the help of local indians notably squanto who with twenty other indians had been kidnapped and brought to spain in 1614 by the english explorer thomas hunt who planned to sell them as slaves.
rescued by a local priest squanto somehow made his way to london where he learned english.
he returned to massachusetts in 1619 only to find that his people the patuxet had succumbed to disease.
he served as interpreter for the pilgrims taught them where to fish and how to plant corn and helped in the forging of an alliance with massasoit a local chief.
in the autumn of 1621 the pilgrims invited their indian allies to a harvest feast celebrating their survival the first thanksgiving.
the pilgrims hoped to establish a society based on the lives of the early christian saints.
their government rested on the principle of consent and voting was not restricted to church members.
all land was held in common until 1627 when it was divided among the settlers.
plymouth survived as an independent colony until 1691 but it was soon overshadowed by massachusetts bay to its north.
the great migration chartered in 1629 the massachusetts bay company was founded by a group of london merchants who hoped to further the puritan cause and an early seventeenth century engraving shows the english explorer bartholomew gosnold encountering native americans.
gosnold landed at cape cod in 1602 and then established a small outpost on nearby cuttyhunk island.
the regions indians had much experience with europeans before pilgrims settled there.
visions of freedom samuel de champlains 1605 sketch of plymouth harbor made when he was exploring the coast of modern day new england in search of a site for a french settlement shows the area dotted with wigwams and fields of corn squash and beans.
by the time the pilgrims arrived in 1620 epidemics had destroyed this thriving indian community.
questions 1.
what does champlains sketch tell us about native american life in new england before the advent of english settlement.
why do you think many europeans claimed that indians did not live in settled communites.
what made the english settlement of new england distinctive.
turn a profit through trade with the indians.
the first five ships sailed from england in 1629 and by 1642 some 21 000 puritans had emigrated to massachusetts.
long remembered as the great migration this flow of population represented less than one third of english emigration in the 1630s.
far more english settlers arrived in ireland the chesapeake and the caribbean.
after 1640 migration to new england virtually ceased and in some years more colonists left the region than arrived.
nonetheless the great migration established the basis for a stable and thriving society.
in many ways the settling of new england was unique.
although servants represented about one quarter of the great migration most settlers arrived in massachusetts in families.
they came for many reasons including the desire to escape religious persecution anxiety about the future of england and the prospect of economic betterment.
compared with colonists in virginia and maryland they were older and more prosperous and the number of men and women more equally balanced.
because of the even sex ratio and new englands healthier climate the population grew rapidly doubling every twenty seven years.
although the region received only a small fraction of the centurys migration by 1700 new englands white population of 91 000 outnumbered that of both the chesapeake and the west indies.
nearly all were descendants of those who crossed the atlantic during the great migration.
the puritan fa m i ly while the imbalance between male and female migrants made it difficult for patriarchal family patterns fully to take root in the chesapeake until the end of the seventeenth century they emerged very quickly in new england.
whatever their differences with other englishmen on religious matters puritans shared with the larger society a belief in male authority within the household as well as an adherence to the common law tradition that severely limited married womens legal and economic rights.
puritans in america carefully emulated the family structure of england insisting that the obedience of women children and servants to mens will was the foundation of social stability.
the fathers authority was all the more vital because in a farming society without large numbers of slaves or servants control over the labor of ones family was essential to a mans economic success.
to be sure puritans deemed women to be the spiritual equals of men and women were allowed to become full church members.
although all ministers were men the puritan belief in the ability of believers to interpret the bible opened the door for some women to claim positions of religious leadership.
the ideal puritan marriage was based on reciprocal affection and companionship and divorce was legal.
yet within the household the husbands authority was virtually absolute.
indeed a mans position as head of his family was thought to replicate gods authority in spiritual matters and the authority of the government in the secular realm.
magistrates sometimes intervened to protect wives from physical abuse but they also enforced the power of fathers over their children and husbands over their wives.
moderate correction was considered appropriate for women who violated their husbands sense of proper behavior.
seal of the massachusetts bay colony.
the indians scanty attire suggests a lack of civilization.
his statement come over and help us based on an incident in the bible illustrates the english conviction that they were liberating the native population rather than exploiting them as other empires had.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 the new england way their responsibilities as wives and mothers defined womens lives.
in his 1645 speech on liberty quoted above john winthrop noted that woman achieved genuine freedom by fulfilling her prescribed social role and embracing subjection to her husbands authority the family was the foundation of strong communities and unmarried adults seemed a danger to the social fabric.
an early law of plymouth declared that no single person be suffered to live of himself the typical new england woman married at twenty two a younger age than her english counterpart and gave birth seven times.
because new england was a far healthier environment than the chesapeake more children survived infancy.
thus much of a womans adult life was devoted to bearing and rearing children.
government the savage family a 1779 painting by the new england artist edward savage depicts several generations of a typically numerous puritan family.
and society in massachusetts in a sermon aboard the arabella on which he sailed for massachusetts in 1630 john winthrop spoke of the settlers binding themselves together in the bond of brotherly affection in order to promote the glory of god and their own common good puritans feared excessive individualism and lack of social unity.
unlike the dispersed plantation centered society of the chesapeake the leaders of massachusetts organized the colony in selfgoverning towns.
groups of settlers received a land grant from the colonys government and then subdivided it with residents awarded house lots in a central area and land on the outskirts for farming.
much land remained in commons either for collective use or to be divided among later settlers or the sons of the towns founders.
each town had its own congregational church.
each according to a law of 1647 was required to establish a school since the ability to read the bible was central to puritan belief.
to train an educated ministry harvard college was established in 1636 nearly a century after the royal university of mexico founded in 1551 and two years later the first printing press in english america was established in cambridge.
the government of massachusetts reflected the puritans religious and social vision.
wishing to rule the colony without outside interference and to prevent non puritans from influencing decision making the shareholders of the massachusetts bay company emigrated to america taking the charter with them and transforming a commercial document into a form of government.
at first the eight shareholders chose the men who ruled the colony.
in 1634 a group of deputies elected by freemen landowning church members was added to form a single ruling body the general court.
ten years later company officers and elected deputies were divided into two legislative houses.
unlike virginia whose governors were appointed first by a faraway company and after 1624 by the crown or maryland where authority rested with a what made the english settlement of new england distinctive.
single proprietor the freemen of massachusetts elected their governor.
the principle of consent was central to puritanism.
church government was decentralized each congregation as one minister put it had complete liberty to stand alone churches were formed by voluntary agreement among members who elected the minister.
no important church decision was made without the agreement of the male members.
towns governed themselves and local officials delegates to the general court and the colonial governor were all elected.
puritans however were hardly believers in equality.
church membership a status that carried great prestige and power was a restrictive category.
anyone could worship at a church or as the puritans preferred to call it meeting house but to be a full member required demonstrating that one had experienced divine grace and could be considered a visible saint usually by testifying about a conversion experience.
although male property holders generally chose local officials voting in colony wide elections was limited to men who had been accepted as full church members.
this requirement at first made for a broad electorate especially compared with england.
but as time went on it meant that a smaller and smaller percentage of the population controlled the government.
puritan democracy was for those within the circle of church membership those outside the boundary occupied a secondary place in the bible commonwealth.
puritan liberties seventeenth century new england was a hierarchical society in which socially prominent families were assigned the best land and the most desirable seats in church.
some must be rich and some poor some high and eminent in power and dignity others mean and in subjection declared john winthrop.
this was part of gods plan reinforced by man made law and custom.
the general court forbade ordinary men and women from wearing the garb of gentlemen ordinary settlers were addressed as goodman and goodwife while the better sort were called gentleman and lady or master and mistress when the general court in 1641 issued a body of liberties outlining the rights and responsibilities of massachusetts colonists it adopted the traditional understanding of liberties as privileges that derived from ones place in the social order.
inequality was considered an expression of gods will and while some liberties applied to all inhabitants there were separate lists of rights for freemen women children and servants.
the body of liberties also allowed for slavery.
the first african slave appears in the records of massachusetts bay in 1640.
massachusetts forbade ministers from holding office so as not to interfere with their spiritual responsibilities.
but church and state were closely interconnected.
the law required each town to establish a church and to an embroidered banner depicting the main building at harvard the first college established in the english colonies.
it was probably made by a massachusetts woman for a husband or son who attended harvard.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 new englanders divided levy a tax to support the minister.
there were no separate church courts but the state enforced religious devotion.
the body of liberties affirmed the rights of free speech and assembly and equal protection of the law for all within the colony but the laws of massachusetts prescribed the death penalty for among other things worshiping any god but the lord god practicing witchcraft or committing blasphemy.
new englanders divided the puritans exalted individual judgment hence their insistence on reading the bible.
the very first item printed in english america was a broadside the oath of a freeman 1638 explaining the rights and duties of the citizens of massachusetts and emphasizing that men should vote according to their own conscience.
without respect of persons or favor of any men yet modern ideas of individualism privacy and personal freedom would have struck puritans as quite strange.
they considered too much emphasis on the self dangerous to social harmony and community stability.
in the closely knit towns of new england residents carefully monitored one anothers behavior and chastised or expelled those who violated communal norms.
in the puritan view as one colonist put it the main freedom possessed by dissenters was the liberty to keep away from us towns banished individuals for such offenses as criticizing the church or government complaining about the colony in letters home to england or in the case of one individual abigail gifford for being a very burdensome woman tolerance of difference was not high on the list of puritan values.
roger williams differences of opinion about how to organize a bible commonwealth however emerged almost from the founding of massachusetts.
with its emphasis on individual interpretation of the bible puritanism contained the seeds of its own fragmentation.
the first sustained criticism of the existing order came from the young minister roger williams who arrived in massachusetts in 1631 and soon began to insist that its congregations withdraw from the church of england and that church and state be separated.
soul liberty williams believed required that individuals be allowed to follow their consciences wherever they led.
to most puritans the social fabric was held together by certain religious truths which could not be questioned.
to williams any law abiding citizen should be allowed to practice whatever form of religion he chose.
for the government to molest any person jew or gentile for either professing doctrine or practicing worship violated the principle that genuine religious faith is voluntary.
williams aimed to strengthen religion not weaken it.
the embrace of government he insisted corrupted the purity of christian faith and drew believers into endless religious wars like those that racked europe.
to leaders like john winthrop the outspoken ministers attack on the religious political establishment of massachusetts was bad enough but williams compounded the offense by rejecting the conviction that puritans were an elect people on a divine mission to spread the true faith.
williams denied that god had singled out any group as special favorites.
what were the main sources of discord in early new england.
english settlement in new england ca.
maine lake champlain sac r.
salmon falls r m ac rri me connectic ut abenaki or new hampshire portland york k r exeter atl anti c o cean pennacook gloucester salem massachusett massachusetts cambridge bostonmassachusetts 1629 1630 bay weymouth nipmuck provincetown springfield pokanoket hartford us ho connecticut narragansett providence 1636 th ames r.
hudson r windsor rhode cape cod ca p e co d bay 1620 sandwich wampanoag barnstable portsmouth plymouth plymouth ato island 1636 1649 1636 1643 ni c mohegan newport r edgartown pequot war mystic na n t u c ket new haven m a rt h a s 1638 v i n eya rd stratford 1620 nd d sou stamford n a l s i long easthampton lon g isla n d 50 miles new amsterdam 50 kilometers rhode island and connecticut banished from massachusetts in 1636 williams and his followers moved south where they established the colony of rhode island which eventually received a charter from london.
in a world in which the right of individuals to participate in religious activities without governmental interference barely existed rhode island became a beacon of religious freedom.
it had no established church no religious qualifications for voting until the eighteenth century and no requirement that citizens attend church.
it became a haven for dissenters protestants who belonged to denominations other than the established church and jews persecuted in other colonies.
rhode islands frame of government was also more democratic.
the assembly was elected twice a year the governor annually and town meetings were held more frequently than elsewhere in new england.
religious disagreements in massachusetts generated other colonies as well.
in 1636 the minister thomas hooker established a settlement at date of settlement massachusetts plymouth rhode island connecticut new haven by the mid seventeenth century english settlement in new england had spread well inland and up and down the atlantic coast.
recent h1 voices of freedom from john winthrop speech to the massachusetts general court july 3 1645 john winthrop governor of the massachusetts bay colony describes two very different definitions of liberty in this speech.
the great questions that have troubled the country are about the authority of the magistrates and the liberty of the people.
concerning liberty i observe a great mistake in the country about that.
there is a twofold liberty natural i mean as our nature is now corrupt and civil or federal.
the first is common to man with beasts and other creatures.
by this man as he stands in relation to man simply hath liberty to do what he lists it is a liberty to do evil as well as to do good.
this liberty is incompatible and inconsistent with authority and cannot endure the least restraint of the most just authority.
the exercise and maintaining of this liberty makes men grow more evil and in time to be worse than brute beasts.
this is that great enemy of truth and peace that wild beast which all the ordinances of god are bent against to restrain and subdue it.
the other kind of liberty i call civil or federal it may also be termed moral.
this liberty is the proper end and object of authority and cannot subsist without it and it is a liberty to that only which is good just and honest.
this liberty is maintained and exercised in a way of subjection to authority it is of the same kind of liberty wherewith christ hath made us free.
the womans own choice makes.
a man her husband yet being so chosen he is her lord and she is to be subject to him yet in a way of liberty not of bondage and a true wife accounts her subjection her honor and freedom and would not think her condition safe and free but in her subjection to her husbands authority.
such is the liberty of the church under the authority of christ.
from roger williams l e t t e r t o t h e to w n o f pr o v i d e n c e 1 6 5 5 a pioneer of the idea of religious toleration in the colonies roger williams left massachusetts to found rhode island where unlike in puritan massachusetts he established separation of church and state.
believing his views had been misunderstood by some of the settlers of providence he wrote this letter to explain his understanding of liberty and its extent and limits.
the commander of this ship ought to command the ships course yea and also command that justice peace and sobriety be kept and practiced both among the seamen and all the passengers.
if any of the seamen refuse to perform their services or passengers to pay their freight if any refuse to help in person or purse towards the common charges or defense if any refuse to obey the common laws and orders of the ship concerning their common peace or preservation if any shall mutiny and rise up against their commanders and officers because all that ever i should speak or write a tittle that tends to.
an infinite liberty of conscience is a mistake are not equal in christ therefore no masters nor officers no laws nor orders nor corrections nor punishments i say i never denied but in such and which i have ever disclaimed and abhorred.
to prevent such mistakes i shall at present only cases whatever is pretended the commander or commanders may judge resist compel and punish propose this case there goes many a ship to sea with many hundred souls in one ship whose weal or woe such transgressors.
is common and is a true picture of a commonwealth or a human combination or society.
it hath fallen out sometimes that both papists and protestants jews and turks muslims may be embarked in one ship upon which supposal i affirm that all the liberty of conscience that ever i pleaded for turns upon these two hinges that none of the papists protestants jews or turks be forced to come to the ships prayers or worship nor compelled from their own particular prayers or worship if they practice any.
i further add that i never denied that notwithstanding this liberty questions 1.
why does winthrop consider natural liberty dangerous.
in what ways does williams place limits on liberty.
how do the views of winthrop and williams differ and in what ways are they similar.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 new englanders divided hartford.
its system of government embodied in the fundamental orders of 1639 was modeled on that of massachusetts with the significant exception that men did not have to be church members to vote.
quite different was the colony of new haven founded in 1638 by emigrants who wanted an even closer connection between church and state.
in 1662 hartford and new haven received a royal charter that united them as the colony of connecticut.
the trials of anne hutchinson more threatening to the puritan establishment both because of her gender and because she attracted a large and influential following was anne hutchinson.
a midwife and the daughter of a clergyman hutchinson wrote john winthrop was a woman of a ready wit and bold spirit she arrived in massachusetts with her husband in 1634 to join their minister john cotton who had been expelled from his pulpit in england by church authorities.
hutchinson began holding meetings in her home where she led discussions of religious issues among men and women including a number of prominent merchants and public officials.
in hutchinsons view salvation was gods direct gift to the elect and could not be earned by good works devotional practices or other human effort.
most puritans shared this belief.
what set hutchinson apart was her charge that nearly all the ministers in massachusetts were guilty of faulty preaching for distinguishing saints from the damned on the basis of activities such as church attendance and moral behavior rather than an inner state of grace.
in massachusetts where church and state reinforced each other both ministers and magistrates were intent on suppressing any views that challenged their own leadership.
their critics denounced cotton and hutchinson for antinomianism a term for putting ones own judgment or faith above both human law and the teachings of the church.
in 1637 she was placed on trial before a civil court for sedition expressing opinions dangerous to authority.
her position as a public woman made her defiance seem even more outrageous.
her meetings said governor winthrop were neither comely in the sight of god nor fitting to your sex a combative and articulate woman hutchinson ably debated interpretation of the bible with her university educated accusers.
she more than held her own during her trial.
but when she spoke of divine revelations of god speaking to her directly rather than through ministers or the bible she violated puritan doctrine and sealed her own fate.
such a claim the colonys leaders felt posed a threat to the very existence of organized churches and indeed to all authority.
hutchinson and a number of her followers were banished.
her family made its way to rhode island and then to westchester north of what is now new york city where hutchinson and most of her relatives perished during an indian war.
anne hutchinson lived in new england for only eight years but she left her mark on the regions religious culture.
as in the case of roger williams her career showed how the puritan belief in each individuals ability to interpret the bible could easily lead to criticism of the religious and political establishment.
it would take many years before religious toleration which violated the puritans understanding of moral liberty and social harmony came to massachusetts.
what were the main sources of discord in early new england.
puritans and indians along with disruptive religious controversies new england like other colonies had to deal with the difficult problem of relations with indians.
the native population of new england numbered perhaps 100 000 when the puritans arrived.
but because of recent epidemics the migrants encountered fewer indians near the coast than in other parts of eastern north america.
in areas of european settlement colonists quickly outnumbered the native population.
some settlers notably roger williams sought to treat the indians with justice.
williams learned complex indian languages and he insisted that the king had no right to grant land already belonging to someone else.
no town said williams should be established before its site had been purchased.
while john winthrop believed uncultivated land could legitimately be taken by the colonists he recognized the benefits of buying land rather than simply seizing it.
but he insisted that such purchases usually completed after towns had already been settled must carry with them indian agreement to submit to english authority and pay tribute to the colonists.
to new englands leaders the indians represented both savagery and temptation.
in puritan eyes they resembled catholics with their false gods and deceptive rituals.
they enjoyed freedom but of the wrong kind what winthrop condemned as undisciplined natural liberty rather than the moral liberty of the civilized christian.
always concerned that sinful persons might prefer a life of ease to hard work puritans feared that indian society might prove attractive to colonists who lacked the proper moral fiber.
in 1642 the connecticut general court set a penalty of three years at hard labor for any colonist who abandoned godly society to live with the indians.
to counteract the attraction of indian life the leaders of new england also encouraged the publication of captivity narratives by those captured by indians.
the most popular was the sovereignty and goodness of god by mary rowlandson who had emigrated with her parents as a child in 1639 and was seized along with a group of other settlers and held for three months until ransomed during an indian war in the 1670s.
rowlandson acknowledged that she had been well treated and suffered not the least abuse or unchastity but her books overriding theme was her determination to return to christian society.
puritans announced that they intended to bring christian faith to the indians but they did nothing in the first two decades of settlement to accomplish this.
they generally saw indians as an obstacle to be pushed aside rather than as potential converts.
the pequot war indians in new england lacked a paramount chief like powhatan in virginia.
coastal indian tribes their numbers severely reduced by disease initially sought to forge alliances with the newcomers to enhance their own position against inland rivals.
but as the white population expanded and new towns proliferated conflict with the regions indians became unavoidable.
the turning point came in 1637 when a fur trader was killed by pequots a powerful tribe who controlled southern new englands fur trade and exacted tribute from other indians.
a force of connecticut and massachusetts soldiers augmented by narragansett allies surrounded the main pequot the title page of a translation of the bible into the massachusett language published by john eliot in 1663.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 an engraving from john underhills news from america published in london in 1638 shows the destruction of the pequot village on the mystic river in 1637.
the colonial forces firing guns are aided by indian allies with bows and arrows.
new englanders divided fortified village at mystic and set it ablaze killing those who tried to escape.
over 500 men women and children lost their lives in the massacre.
by the end of the war a few months later most of the pequot had been exterminated or sold into caribbean slavery.
the treaty that restored peace decreed that their name be wiped from the historical record.
the destruction of one of the regions most powerful indian groups not only opened the connecticut river valley to rapid white settlement but also persuaded other indians that the newcomers possessed a power that could not be resisted.
the colonists ferocity shocked their indian allies who considered european military practices barbaric.
a few puritans agreed.
it was a fearful sight to see them frying in the fire the pilgrim leader william bradford wrote of the raid on mystic.
but to most puritans including bradford the defeat of a barbarous nation by the sword of the lord offered further proof that they were on a sacred mission and that indians were unworthy of sharing new england with the visible saints of the church.
the new england economy the leaders of the new england colonies prided themselves on the idea that religion was the primary motivation for emigration.
we all came into these parts of america proclaimed an official document of the 1640s with one and the same end and aim namely to advance the kingdom of our lord jesus christ and to enjoy the liberties of the gospel in purity with peace but economic motives were hardly unimportant.
one promotional pamphlet of the 1620s spoke of new england as a place where religion and profit jump together most puritans came to america from east anglia an internationally renowned cloth producing region.
one of the most economically advanced areas of england east anglia in the 1620s and 1630s was suffering from a series of poor harvests and the dislocations caused by a decline in the cloth trade.
a majority of the emigrants from this area were weavers tailors or farmers.
but while they were leaving a depressed region they were relatively well off.
most came from the middle ranks of society and paid for their familys passage rather than indenturing themselves to labor.
they sought in new england not only religious liberty but also economic advancement if not riches then at least a competency the economic independence that came with secure landownership or craft status.
when one preacher proclaimed that the main end of settlement was to honor god a man in the congregation cried out sir you are mistaken.
our main end was to catch fish but to puritans no contradiction existed between piety and profit so long as one did not forget the needs of the larger community.
success in ones calling might be taken as a sign of divine grace.
lacking a marketable staple like sugar or tobacco new englanders turned to fishing and timber for exports.
but the economy centered on family farms producing food for their own use and a small marketable surplus.
although what were the main sources of discord in early new england.
the body of liberties of 1641 as noted above made provision for slavery in the bible commonwealth there were very few slaves in seventeenth century new england.
nor were indentured servants as central to the economy as in the chesapeake.
most households relied on the labor of their own members including women in the home and children in the fields.
sons remained unmarried into their mid twenties when they could expect to receive land from their fathers from local authorities or by moving to a new town.
indeed while religious divisions spawned new settlements the desire for land among younger families and newcomers was the major motive for new englands expansion.
in sudbury massachusetts for example one resident proposed in 1651 that every adult man be awarded an equal parcel of land.
when a town meeting rejected the idea a group of young men received a grant from the general court to establish their own town farther west.
the merchant elite per capita wealth in new england lagged far behind that of the chesapeake but it was much more equally distributed.
a majority of new england families achieved the goal of owning their own land the foundation for a comfortable independence.
nonetheless as in the chesapeake economic development produced a measure of social inequality.
on completing their terms indentured servants rarely achieved full church membership or received grants of land.
most became disenfranchised wage earners.
new england gradually assumed a growing role within the british empire based on trade.
as early as the 1640s new england merchants shipped and marketed the staples of other colonies to markets in europe and africa.
they engaged in a particularly profitable trade with the west indies whose growing slave plantations they supplied with fish timber and agricultural produce gathered at home.
especially in boston a powerful class of merchants arose who challenged some key puritan policies including the subordination of economic activity to the common good.
as early as the 1630s when the general court established limits on prices and wages measures common in england and gave a small group of merchants a monopoly on imports from europe others protested.
indeed merchants were among the most prominent backers of anne hutchinsons challenge to colonial authority.
some left boston to establish a new town at portsmouth in the region eventually chartered as the royal colony of new hampshire.
others remained to fight with increasing success for the right to conduct business as they pleased.
by the 1640s massachusetts had repealed many of its early economic regulations.
although the puritans never abandoned the idea that economic activity should serve the general welfare boston merchants soon came to exercise a decisive influence in public affairs.
the government of massachusetts bay colony actively promoted economic development by building roads and bridges offering bounties to economic enterprises and abandoning laws limiting prices.
eventually the puritan experiment would evolve into a merchant dominated colonial government.
a self portrait from around 1680 painted by thomas smith.
a sailor who came to new england from bermuda around 1650 smith acquired considerable wealth as evidenced by his fashionable clothing.
the background depicts a naval battle involving dutch and english ships possibly a reference to their joint attack on a north african port in 1670.
in the foreground is a poem with smiths initials.
this is the earliest known american selfportrait.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 the mrs elizabeth freake and baby mary.
painted by an anonymous artist in the 1670s this portrait depicts the wife and daughter of john freake a prominent boston merchant and lawyer.
to illustrate the familys wealth mrs freake wears a triple strand of pearls a garnet bracelet and a gold ring and her child wears a yellow silk dress.
half way religion politics and freedom covenant in the mid seventeenth century some puritan leaders began to worry about their societys growing commercialization and declining piety or declension by 1650 less than half the population of boston had been admitted to full church membership.
massachusetts churches were forced to deal with a growing problem the religious status of the third generation.
children of the elect could be baptized but many never became full church members because they were unable to demonstrate the necessary religious commitment or testify to a conversion experience.
what was the status of their children.
new englanders faced a difficult choice.
they could uphold rigorous standards of church admission which would limit the size and social influence of the congregational church.
or they could make admission easier which would keep the church connected to a larger part of the population but would raise fears about a loss of religious purity.
the half way covenant of 1662 tried to address this problem by allowing for the baptism and a kind of subordinate or half way membership for grandchildren of those who emigrated during the great migration.
in a significant compromise of early puritan beliefs ancestry not religious conversion became the pathway to inclusion among the elect.
but church membership continued to stagnate.
by the 1660s and 1670s ministers were regularly castigating the people for selfishness manifestations of pride violations of the sabbath and a great backsliding from the colonys original purposes.
these warnings called jeremiads after the ancient hebrew prophet jeremiah interpreted crop failures and disease as signs of divine disapproval and warned of further punishment to come if new englanders did not mend their ways.
yet hard work and commercial success in ones chosen calling had always been central puritan values.
in this sense the commercialization of new england was as much a fulfillment of the puritan mission in america as a betrayal.
religion politics and freedom the rights of englishmen even as english emigrants began the settlement of colonies in north america england itself became enmeshed in political and religious conflict in which ideas of liberty played a central role.
the struggle over english liberty in the first half of the seventeenth century expanded the definition of freedom at home and spilled over into early english north america.
by 1600 the traditional definition of liberties as a set of privileges confined to one or another social group still persisted but alongside it had arisen the idea that certain rights of englishmen applied to all within the kingdom.
this tradition rested on the magna carta or great charter of 1215.
an agreement between king john and a group of barons local lords whose private armies frequently fought against each other and the crown the magna carta attempted to put an end to a chronic state of civil unrest.
it listed a series of liberties granted by the king to all the free men of our realm this was a restricted group at the time since a h o w d i d t h e e n g l i s h c i v i l wa r a f f e c t t h e c o l o n i e s i n a m e r i c a.
large part of the english population still lived as serfs peasants working land owned by feudal lords and legally bound to provide labor and other services.
the liberties mentioned in the magna carta included protection against arbitrary imprisonment and the seizure of ones property without due process of law.
the principal beneficiaries of the magna carta were the barons who obtained the right to oversee the kings conduct and even revolt if he violated their privileges.
but over time the document came to be seen as embodying the idea of english freedom that the king was subject to the rule of law and that all persons should enjoy security of person and property.
these rights were embodied in the common law whose provisions such as habeas corpus a protection against being imprisoned without a legal charge the right to face ones accuser and trial by jury came to apply to all free subjects of the english crown.
and as serfdom slowly disappeared the number of englishmen considered freeborn and therefore entitled to these rights expanded enormously.
the english civil war at the beginning of the seventeenth century when english emigrants began arriving in the new world freedom still played only a minor role in englands political debates.
but the political upheavals of that century elevated the notion of english freedom to a central place.
the struggle for political supremacy between parliament and the stuart monarchs james i and charles i culminated in the english civil war of the 1640s.
this longrunning battle arose from religious disputes about how fully the church of england should distance its doctrines and forms of worship from catholicism.
conflict also developed over the respective powers of the king and parliament a debate that produced numerous invocations of the idea of the freeborn englishman and led to a great expansion of the concept of english freedom.
the leaders of the house of commons the elective body that along with the hereditary aristocrats of the house of lords makes up the english parliament accused the stuart kings of endangering liberty by imposing taxes without parliamentary consent imprisoning political foes and leading the nation back toward catholicism.
civil war broke out in 1642 resulting in a victory for the forces of parliament.
in 1649 charles i was beheaded the monarchy abolished and england declared a commonwealth and free state a nation governed by the will of the people.
oliver cromwell the head of the victorious parliamentary army ruled for almost a decade after the execution of the king.
in 1660 the monarchy was restored and charles ii assumed the throne.
but by then the breakdown of authority the court of common pleas.
trial by jury was a central element in the definition of english liberty this watercolor appeared in a three volume series the microcosm of london 1808 1810.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 the execution of charles i in 1649 a central event of the english civil war.
had stimulated intense discussions of liberty authority and what it meant to be a freeborn englishman englands a 1629 portrait by john aubrey depicts john milton the philosopher of liberty when he attended cambridge university.
religion politics and freedom debate over freedom the idea of freedom suddenly took on new and expanded meanings between 1640 and 1660.
the writer john milton who in 1649 called london the mansion house of liberty called for freedom of speech and of the press.
new religious sects sprang up demanding the end of public financing and special privileges for the anglican church and religious toleration for all protestants.
the levellers historys first democratic political movement proposed a written constitution the agreement of the people which began by proclaiming at how high a rate we value our just freedom at a time when democracy was still widely seen as the equivalent of anarchy and disorder the document proposed to abolish the monarchy and house of lords and to greatly expand the right to vote.
the poorest he that lives in england hath a life to live as the greatest he declared the leveller thomas rainsborough and therefore any man that is born in england.
ought to have his voice in election rainsborough even condemned african slavery.
the levellers offered a glimpse of the modern definition of freedom as a universal entitlement in a society based on equal rights not a function of social class.
another new group the diggers went even further hoping to give freedom an economic underpinning through the common ownership of land.
previous discussion of freedom declared gerard winstanley the diggers leader had been misguided you are like men in a mist seeking for freedom and know not what it is true freedom applied equally to the poor as well as the rich all were entitled to a comfortable livelihood in this their own land even before the restoration of the monarchy the levellers diggers and other radical movements spawned by the english civil war had been crushed or driven underground.
but some of the ideas of liberty that flourished during the 1640s and 1650s would be carried to america by english emigrants.
h o w d i d t h e e n g l i s h c i v i l wa r a f f e c t t h e c o l o n i e s i n a m e r i c a.
english liberty these struggles elevated the notion of english liberty to a central place in anglo american political culture.
it became a major building block in the assertive sense of nationhood then being consolidated in england.
the medieval idea of liberties as a collection of limited entitlements enjoyed by specific groups did not suddenly disappear.
but it was increasingly overshadowed by a more general definition of freedom grounded in the common rights of all individuals within the english realm.
by self definition england was a community of free individuals and its past a history of liberty all englishmen were governed by a king but he rules over free men according to the law unlike the autocratic monarchs of france spain russia and other countries.
by 1680 in his book english liberties or the free born subjects inheritance the writer henry care described the english system of government as a qualified monarchy which he considered the best political structure in the world because even though the nobility enjoyed privileges not available to others all citizens were guarded in their persons and properties by the fence of law which renders them freemen not slaves the belief in freedom as the common heritage of all englishmen and the conception of the british empire as the worlds guardian of liberty helped to legitimize english colonization in the western hemisphere and to cast its imperial wars against catholic france and spain as struggles between freedom and tyranny.
the civil war and english america these struggles accompanied by vigorous discussions of the rights of freeborn englishmen inevitably reverberated in englands colonies dividing them from one another and internally.
most new englanders sided with parliament in the civil war of the 1640s.
some returned to england to join the parliamentary army or take up pulpits to help create a godly commonwealth at home.
but puritan leaders were increasingly uncomfortable as the idea of religious toleration for protestants gained favor in england.
it was the revolutionary parliament that in 1644 granted roger williams his charter for the rhode island colony he had founded after being banished from massachusetts.
meanwhile a number of followers of anne hutchinson became quakers one of the sects that sprang up in england during the civil war.
quakers held that the spirit of god dwelled within every individual not just the elect and that this inner light rather than the bible or teachings of the clergy offered the surest guidance in spiritual matters.
when quakers appeared in massachusetts colonial officials had them whipped fined and banished.
in 1659 and 1660 four quakers who returned from exile were hanged including mary dyer a former disciple of hutchinson.
the treatment of quakers gave massachusetts a reputation in england as a hotbed of religious persecution.
when charles ii after the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 reaffirmed the massachusetts charter he ordered the colony to recognize the liberty of conscience of all protestants.
but while hangings ceased efforts to suppress the quakers continued as did attacks on baptists whose disdain for a learned ministry also seemed to threaten puritan beliefs.
meeting of the general council of the army at putney scene of the debate in 1647 over liberty and democracy between levellers and more conservative army officers.
2 beginnings of english america 1607 1660 the a portrait of oliver cromwell who ruled england after the execution of charles i by the artist sir peter lely.
crisis in religion politics and freedom maryland unlike the new england colonies virginia sided with charles i.
its leaders even proclaimed charles ii king after his fathers execution in 1649 although oliver cromwells government in london soon brought the rebellious colony under control.
in maryland the combination of the religious and political battles of the civil war homegrown conflict between catholic and protestant settlers and anti proprietary feeling produced a violent civil war within the colony later recalled as the plundering time indeed maryland in the 1640s verged on total anarchy with a pro parliament force assaulting those loyal to charles i.
the emerging protestant planter class longed to seize power from the catholic elite created by cecelius calvert.
the assemblys protestant majority rejected laws proposed by the proprietor and claimed the same power to legislate and levy taxes enjoyed by the house of commons in england.
to stabilize the colony and attract more settlers calvert appointed a protestant governor and offered refuge to protestant dissenters being persecuted in virginia where anglicanism was the established religion and laws restricted the religious and political rights of others.
in 1649 maryland adopted an act concerning religion which institutionalized the principle of toleration that had prevailed from the colonys beginning.
all christians were guaranteed the free exercise of religion.
the act did not establish religious liberty in a modern sense since it punished those who denied the divinity of jesus christ or the doctrine of the holy trinity.
indeed a jewish physician was soon arrested under its provisions.
nonetheless the law was a milestone in the history of religious freedom in colonial america.
turmoil however continued.
during the 1650s the commonwealth government in london placed maryland under the control of a protestant council which repealed the toleration act and forbade catholics from openly practicing their religion.
in 1657 however calverts authority was restored and with it marylands experiment in religious freedom.
cromwell and the empire oliver cromwell who ruled england from 1649 until his death in 1658 undertook an aggressive policy of colonial expansion the promotion of protestantism and commercial empowerment in the british isles and the western hemisphere.
his army forcibly extended english control over ireland massacring civilians banning the public practice of catholicism and seizing land owned by catholics.
in the caribbean england seized jamaica a valuable sugar island from spain.
in 1651 as will be related in chapter 3 parliament passed the first navigation act which sought to challenge the dutch hold on international commerce by confining colonial trade to english ships and ports.
thus by the middle of the seventeenth century several english colonies existed along the atlantic coast of north america.
established as part of an ad hoc process rather than arising under any coherent national plan they differed enormously in economic political and social structure.
the seeds had been planted in the chesapeake for the development of plantation societies based on unfree labor and in new england for settlements centered on small towns and family farms.
throughout the colonies many res suggested reading idents enjoyed freedoms they had not possessed at home especially access to land and the right to worship as they desired.
others found themselves confined to unfree labor for many years or an entire lifetime.
the next century would be a time of crisis and consolidation as the population expanded social conflicts intensified and britain moved to exert greater control over its flourishing north american colonies.
suggested reading books anderson victoria d new englands generation the great migration and the formation of society and culture in the seventeenth century 1991.
a careful study of emigration from england to new england.
banner stuart.
how the indians lost their land law and power on the frontier 2005.
argues that most indian land came into settlers hands by legal processes rather than conquest.
bonomi patricia.
under the cope of heaven religion society and politics in colonial america 1986.
traces the interrelationship of religion and politics and the rise of religious diversity in the colonies.
brown kathleen.
good wives nasty wenches and anxious patriarchs gender race and power in colonial virginia 1996.
a pioneering study of gender relations and their impact on virginia society.
cronon william.
changes in the land colonists and the ecology of new england 1983.
a path breaking examination of how english colonization affected the natural environment in new england.
gleach frederic w powhatans world and colonial virginia a conflict of cultures 1997.
a study of indian culture and the impact of european colonization upon it.
hill christopher.
the century of revolution 1961.
a survey stressing the causes and consequences of the english civil war.
horn james.
adapting to a new world english society in the seventeenth century chesapeake 1994.
a detailed examination of the lives of early settlers in england and later in virginia.
morgan edmund s the puritan family 1944.
an early examination of family life and gender relations in colonial america.
pestana carla g the english atlantic in an age of revolution 1640 1661 2001.
analyzes how the english civil war reverberated in the american colonies.
philbrick nathaniel.
mayflower 2006.
an account of one of the most celebrated voyages of the colonial era and the early history of the plymouth colony.
price david a.
love and hate in jamestown john smith pocahontas and the start of a new nation 2003.
presents the legend and reality of john smith pocahontas and early virginia.
taylor alan.
american colonies 2001.
a comprehensive survey of the history of north american colonies from their beginnings to 1763.
winship michael.
making heretics militant protestantism and free grace in massachusetts 1636 1641 2002.
the most recent account of anne hutchinson and the antinomian controversy.
websites plymouth colony archive project virtual jamestown c hapter r eview review questions 1.
compare and contrast englands settlement history in the americas to spains.
consider the treatment of indians the role of the church the significance of women and economic development.
for the english land was the basis of liberty.
explain the reasoning behind that concept and how it was markedly different from the indians conception of land.
many puritans claimed they came to north america seeking religious freedom but they were extremely intolerant of other beliefs.
in fact there was greater liberty of conscience back in their native england.
how do you explain this.
describe who chose to emigrate to north america from england in the seventeenth century and explain their reasons.
in what ways did the new england economy and government differ from those in the chesapeake colonies.
the english believed that unlike the spanish their motives for colonization were pure and that the growth of empire and freedom would always go hand in hand.
how did the expansion of the british empire affect the freedoms of native americans the irish and even many english citizens.
considering politics social tensions and debates over the meaning of liberty how do the events and aftermath of the english civil war demonstrate that the english colonies in north america were part of a larger atlantic community.
how did the tobacco economy draw the chesapeake colonies into the greater atlantic world.
freedom questions 1.
with many degrees of freedom coexisting in seventeenth century north america a person might go from having no rights to possessing many in a lifetime.
use examples to demonstrate this fact.
to provide full freedoms for the higher social orders in both england and english north america lower social orders had to do without.
explain how and why this was so.
how did the concepts and goals of freedom differ for the following settlers newcomers to john smiths jamestown a puritan family in 1630s massachusetts and a catholic landowner in 1640s maryland.
explain how the puritans used their concept of moral liberty to justify their actions against others in the new world.
then discuss why some puritans other english settlers in the new world and those remaining in england might see these justifications as hypocritical.
5 review the debates over the true meaning of freedom and english liberty following the english civil war.
what would you say was the lasting significance of these debates.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e virginia company p 54 early colonial british settlements roanoke colony p 56 plantation p 56 colony date established founder governor major religion virginia virginia company john smith anglican plymouth english investors william bradford pilgrims puritan separatists massachusetts massachusetts bay company john winthrop puritan congregationalists maryland proprietary colony cecilius calvert protestant and catholic rhode island royal charter roger williams haven for all religions connecticut royal charter thomas hooker puritan congregationalists a discourse concerning western planting p 57 enclosure movement p 58 sponsor indentured servant p 60 john smith p 63 headright system p 64 house of burgesses p 64 uprising of 1622 p 65 tobacco colony p 66 dower rights p 67 puritans p 69 moral liberty p 70 john winthrop p 70 pilgrims p 70 mayflower compact p 71 great migration p 71 captivity narratives p 81 the sovereignty and goodness of god p 81 pequot war p 81 half way covenant p 84 english liberty p 84 act concerning religion p 88 c hapter 3 dutch west india company settles manhattan first navigation act issued by parliament english seize new netherland which becomes new york the fundamental constitutions of carolina first english settlers arrive in carolina lords of trade 1675 king philips war bacons rebellion william penn granted pennsylvania charter of liberty drafted by penn charter of liberties privileges drafted by ny assembly 1686 dominion of new england 1688 formed glorious revolution in england parliament enacts a bill of rights maryland uprising leislers rebellion toleration act passed by parliament plymouth colony absorbed into massachusetts 1691 salem witch trials yamasee and creek uprising is crushed walking purchase creating anglo america 1660 1750 global competition and the expansion of englands empire the mercantilist system the conquest of new netherland new york and the rights of englishmen and englishwomen new york and the indians the charter of liberties the founding of carolina the holy experiment quaker liberty land in pennsylvania origins of american slavery englishmen and africans slavery in history slavery in the west indies slavery and the law the rise of chesapeake slavery bacons rebellion land and labor in virginia the end of the rebellion and its consequences a slave society notions of freedom the maryland uprising leislers rebellion changes in new england the prosecution of witches the salem witch trials the growth of colonial america a diverse population attracting settlers the german migration religious diversity indian life in transition regional diversity the consumer revolution colonial cities colonial artisans an atlantic world social classes in the colonies the colonial elite anglicization the south carolina aristocracy poverty in the colonies the middle ranks women and the household economy north america at mid century colonies in crisis the glorious revolution the glorious revolution in america charles town harbor a watercolor painted around 1740 by the artist bishop roberts depicts the flourishing major port city of south carolina.
the ships all fly british flags since the navigation acts prevented foreign vessels from carrying the colonys main export rice.
south carolina was home to the wealthiest elite in britains mainland colonies and ships carried imported luxury goods for them from great britain.
f ocus q uestions how did the english empire in america expand in the mid seventeenth century.
how was slavery established in the western atlantic world.
what major social and political crises rocked the colonies in the late seventeenth century.
what were the directions of social and economic change in the eighteenthcentury colonies.
how did patterns of class and gender roles change in eighteenth century america.
a scene from king philips war included on a 1675 map of new england.
l o n the last quarter of the seventeenth century a series of crises rocked the european colonies of north america.
social and political tensions boiled over in sometimes ruthless conflicts between rich and poor free and slave settler and indian and members of different religious groups.
at the same time struggles within and between european empires echoed in the colonies.
aggrieved groups seized upon the language of freedom to advance their goals.
although each conflict had its own local causes taken together they added up to a general crisis of colonial society in the area that would become the united states.
the bloodiest and most bitter conflict occurred in southern new england where in 1675 an indian alliance launched attacks on farms and settlements that were encroaching on indian lands.
it was the most dramatic and violent warfare in the region in the entire seventeenth century.
new englanders described the wampanoag leader metacom known to the colonists as king philip as the uprisings mastermind although in fact most tribes fought under their own leaders.
by this time the white population considerably outnumbered the indians.
but the fate of the new england colonies hung in the balance for several months.
by 1676 indian forces had attacked nearly half of new englands ninety towns.
twelve in massachusetts were destroyed.
as refugees fled eastward the line of settlement was pushed back almost to the atlantic coast.
some how did the english empire in america expand in the mid seventeenth century.
1 000 settlers out of a population of 52 000 and 3 000 of new englands 20 000 indians perished in the fighting.
in mid 1676 the tide of battle turned and a ferocious counterattack broke the indians power once and for all.
although the uprising united numerous tribes others remained loyal to the colonists.
the role of the iroquois in providing essential military aid to the colonists helped to solidify their developing alliance with the government of new york.
together colonial and indian forces inflicted devastating punishment on the rebels.
metacom was captured and executed indian villages destroyed and captives including men women and children killed or sold into slavery in the west indies.
most of the survivors fled to canada or new york.
even the praying indians about 2 000 indians who had converted to christianity and lived in autonomous communities under puritan supervision suffered.
removed from their towns to deer island in boston harbor supposedly for their own protection many perished from disease and lack of food.
both sides committed atrocities in this merciless conflict but in its aftermath the image of indians as bloodthirsty savages became firmly entrenched in the new england mind.
in the long run king philips war produced a broadening of freedom for white new englanders by expanding their access to land.
but this freedom rested on the final dispossession of the regions indians.
g l o b a l c o m p e t i t i o n a n d t h e e x pa n s i o n of englands empire the mercantilist system as the new world became a battleground in european nations endless contests for wealth and power england moved to seize control of atlantic trade solidify its hold on north americas eastern coast and exert greater control over its empire.
by the middle of the seventeenth century it was apparent that the colonies could be an important source of wealth for the mother country.
according to the prevailing theory known as mercantilism the government should regulate economic activity so as to promote national power.
it should encourage manufacturing and commerce by special bounties monopolies and other measures.
above all trade should be controlled so that more gold and silver flowed into the country than left it.
that is exports of goods which generated revenue from abroad should exceed imports which required paying foreigners for their products.
in the mercantilist outlook the role of colonies was to serve the interests of the mother country by producing marketable raw materials and importing manufactured goods from home.
foreign trade declared an influential work written in 1664 by a london merchant formed the basis of englands treasure commerce not territorial plunder was the foundation of empire.
under oliver cromwell as noted in chapter 2 parliament passed in 1651 chapter 5 european exploration and colonization 43 european merchants and rulers were anxious to find a sea route to reach china and the spice islands of the east indies.
this would allow them to ship these luxury goods more easily back to europe.
advances in technology.
europeans had benefited from contacts through trade with china which had invented gunpowder and the magnetic compass.
from arabia europeans learned how to make better sails.
europeans also developed the moveable rudder so they could steer larger ships more easily.
these technological improvements in navigation made it possible for europeans to sail farther than ever before.
european sailors began to use the suns angle to determine their location allowing them to judge distances.
these innovations allowed them to sail into the open ocean instead of hugging the coastline.
exploration was fanned by the renaissance spirit of inquiry and a desire to find an all water route to the east.
in portugal prince henry the navigator 1394 1460 sponsored the exploration of the atlantic coast of africa by portuguese sailors.
he developed a new lighter ship better suited for distant oceanic exploration.
many historians believe prince henry played a key role in encouraging european exploration and maritime trade with other continents.
emergence of powerful european rulers.
in the early fifteenth century the sea faring countries of europe hoped to extend their influence through exploration.
strong rulers had established power over unruly nobles.
these rulers built large armies and amassed great wealth by collecting taxes.
desire for profits.
italian city states had once profited by shipping goods across the mediterranean but routes to asia were cut off by the turkish capture of constantinople in 1453.
the capitalist economy was just emerging.
people were seeing new wealth from investment and trade.
some hoped to increase their profits through exploration.
religious enthusiasm.
european missionaries especially from spain and portugal sought to spread the christian religion.
christian missionaries believed they not only had a superior religion but also a superior culture.
what impact did marco polos travels have on european exploration.
4t what economic social and political factors motivated europeans to explore oceans.
name chapter 5 european exploration and colonization 45 applying what you have learned make your own drawing of one of the inventions that aided navigation.
use the internet to find and read excerpts from the journal of columbus.
make a chart of the positive and negative effects of the columbian exchange for both native american indians and europeans.
european colonial empires spanish conquistadors used horses and superior weaponry to defeat the aztecs and incas.
by 1494 news of the new world was in print throughout europe.
this greatly stimulated the appetite of european monarchs for overseas exploration.
the establishment of new spain in the caribbean mexico florida and south america further heightened the interest of spains chief rivals france holland and england.
the rulers of these nations sent their own explorers to claim lands in the americas.
where each nation explored and settled was affected by many factors including ocean currents weather patterns and where rival powers had claims.
new spain spanish conquistadors conquerors like hernando cortes and francisco pizarro used horses and superior weapons such as cannons and crossbows to conquer the powerful aztecs of mexico and the incas of peru.
cortes allied with other native american peoples who had been conquered by the aztecs to achieve his victory.
in peru the incas had been weakened by civil war shortly before the arrival of pizarro.
the spanish conquerors murdered the ruling classes of mexico and peru and destroyed their temples and palaces.
new spain was ruled by the viceroys of the king.
the spanish monarchy became enriched by shipments of gold and silver.
one fifth of all the gold and silver from the new world went to the king.
when the spanish first arrived in the new world they brought with them a set of customs and traditions from spain.
spaniards took large tracts of land for mining ranching and farming known as encomiendas.
although the encomienda system was introduced with the idea of caring and providing for native americans it quickly became a highly abusive and destructive system.
name chapter 5 european exploration and colonization 47 at first new netherland was a company owned and operated business run by the dutch west india company.
the intent of the company directors was to make a profit for the investors in the company.
dutch families settled in present day albany and new york city then known as new amsterdam.
new netherland became active in trading for furs.
beaver skins and other furs were highly valued by europeans.
the settlement of new amsterdam with its fine natural harbor became a leading center for trade.
the dutch welcomed people from other countries.
they also practiced religious toleration.
walking around new amsterdam in the 1660s a visitor might have seen irish british german or french people talking in the streets.
others there might be native americans or africans.
the dutch west india company introduced enslaved persons to the colony in 1625.
most africans in new netherland had been brought from africa or the west indies as enslaved persons.
the earliest known view of new amsterdam 1651.
which european countries established colonies and where did they settle.
what role did the dutch west india company play in creating colonial settlements.
the colonization of america shifted wealth and power away from the mediterranean region to the countries of western europe.
spain was greatly enriched by american gold and silver.
protestant england became engaged in a series of wars against catholic spain.
englands rulers desired to stake a claim for lands and riches in the new world so that they could match spains wealth.
englands colonies were established for political economic religious and social reasons.
chapter 5 european exploration and colonization 49 acting as an amateur historian captain john smith recorded what he later learned in his history of the colony the generali historie of virginia published in 1624.
these miserable and poor creatures were kept alive for the most part by roots herbs acorns walnuts berries and fish even the skins of horses.
so great was our famine that when an indian was killed and buried the poor dug him up and ate him and others boiled and stewed with roots and herbs one amongst us killed his wife powdered her and ate part of her before it was known for which he was executed what hardships did the first settlers at jamestown face.
how did some of the jamestown colonists survive the starving time.
despite these initial setbacks the colony at jamestown became profitable by growing tobacco for sale in europe.
by 1619 jamestown was exporting tons of tobacco to england for the new fashion of smoking.
jamestowns new tobacco economy created a labor shortage.
the need for laborers was so great that early settlers attempted to enslave the areas native american indians.
however these indians were unwilling to be used as forced laborers and often escaped into the surrounding forests.
the first enslaved people from africa arrived in the colony in 1619 as well as the first women.
as the success of tobacco planting spread using african slaves would grow to become the foundation of the southern agrarian economy.
later the area of colonial settlement spread from jamestown to other parts of virginia.
the capital of the colony was moved to williamsburg.
virginia eventually had both rich plantation owners and smaller farmers and grew to become one of the wealthiest colonies.
in a country without roads rivers played an important role.
the first colonists depended on rivers to ship crops from the farm to the marketplace.
the marshy coastal plain along the chesapeake bay contained many navigable streams.
land owners constructed their buildings along these streams while ocean going ships sailed up these streams for many miles stopping to load goods at each plantation.
these geographic conditions encouraged the development of independent farms and plantations in virginia and maryland.
at the same time land away from the rivers remained largely unsettled.
these colonies developed few large towns since buying and selling often took place at a farmer s dock.
name chapter 5 european exploration and colonization unlike the adventurers at jamestown the pilgrims and puritans sailed to the new world as entire families along with their wives and children.
eventually their two settlements merged into the single colony of massachusetts.
early puritans and pilgrims lived simple religious lives.
their clothing was usually black or gray.
they believed that hard work was the key to getting into heaven.
sundays and holidays were strictly observed.
religious leaders played an important role in governing the colony.
51 building a settlement in massachusetts.
other english colonies were founded for a variety of reasons rhode island.
the puritans did not ordinarily permit others to practice their religion freely in massachusetts.
in 1636 roger williams therefore left massachusetts to start his own new colony at rhode island based on principles of religious toleration.
among those who also fled to rhode island was anne hutchinson.
while living in massachusetts she had often met with friends after church and held religious discussions.
she expressed her belief that god revealed himself to individuals without the aid of clergy.
puritan leaders saw these meetings as acts against god since they believed that god could only be revealed to ministers.
anne hutchinson was put on trial where she claimed god had spoken to her directly.
she was found guilty of lying.
in 1637 she was banished from massachusetts.
soon after she joined williams and other dissenters in rhode island.
connecticut and new hampshire.
other massachusetts settlers formed new colonies in connecticut and new hampshire.
set tlers in connecticut led by thomas hooker 1586 1647 established self government in the fundamental orders of connecticut 1639.
in addition the fundamental orders of connecticut provided a basis for future governing in the colony.
at one time new netherland separated english colonies to the north and south of it.
england at war with holland in europe sent four ships into the harbor of new amsterdam in 1664.
dutch settlers fearing british cannons refused to fight.
governor peter stuyvesant surrendered the colony.
under british control new netherland was renamed new york.
fort orange became albany and new amsterdam became new york city.
name 53 chapter 5 european exploration and colonization can you classify the thirteen colonies based on why they were established or seized by the british.
the first row has been filled in for you.
complete the others.
reasons examples political concerns government citizens7 rights and responsibilities.
virginia new york delaware new jersey economic concerns money and wealth.
religious deals with beliefs and practices in the worship of god.
social involves how people organize themselves or live together.
acting as an amateur historian t maps are important tools for both geographers and historians.
sketching your own map of an area can help you better grasp where certain places are located.
a sketch map is not visually identical to the map being sketched.
rather a sketch map focuses on the relationships between and among places.
it helps you to better understand the various spatial relationships.
make your own sketch map of early colonial america showing the location of these places jamestown williamsburg plymouth boston baltimore philadelphia new york city albany and charleston.
use the internet to find pictures of these cities during colonial times to decorate the outside borders of your map.
what do all of these locations have in common.
chapter 5 european exploration and colonization 55 the colonists who established the first english colonies braved the dangers of crossing the atlantic ocean.
the ships they came on were small and crowded.
their destination was a strange and unfamiliar land with primitive living conditions.
why did they come.
political reasons encouragement from rulers british monarchs encouraged the development of colonies as new sources of wealth and power.
they granted charters to groups of businessmen like the virginia company who offered to help colonists settle in the new world economic reasons hunger for gold and silver based on the success of spain the first colonists believed that gold and silver existed in great abundance in the americas.
these early adventurers came to the americas in search of precious metals.
the availability of land was a major attraction drawing settlers to colonial america.
economic reasons land hunger colonial settlements presented new business opportunities for merchants.
the proprietors who owned the carolinas encouraged people to come.
many colonists came to obtain their own land.
most people in britain ireland and the rest of europe were peasants or tenant farmers occupying small over worked lands and paying high rents.
in america free land still seemed plentiful.
the settlers did not recognize the rights of native american indians or understand their use of the land.
many of the first settlers were given free land by the colony or were able to purchase land cheaply.
later many colonists came as indentured servants a colonial landowner paid for an indentured servants passage across the atlantic and the indentured servant then promised to work on the landowners plantation or farm usually for a period of seven years.
once the debt was paid off indentured servants obtained freedom and began saving to buy their own land.
name chapter 5 european exploration and colonization 57 chapter 5 concept map new foods to both culrjres smallpox v measles new diseases introduced to native populations political social economic reasons why colonists came mayflower compact growth of representative government k fundamental orders of ct virg x columbian thirteen 1 v exchange english why colonies j economic gunpowder c j colonies were esiabl1shed c keasuns j compass rudder technical advances religious zeal european exploration and colonization religious i religious k toleration i reasons j 1 1.
pilgrims pennsylvania puritans.
quakers rhode island anne huchinson maryland catholics cortes in mexico new spain desire for gold s1lver pizarro in peru growth of trade t spices silks reasons x for european exploration.
european colonial empires new france canada mississippi powerful rulers allowed religious tolerance new netherland diversity of ethnic groups k j chapter study cards why colonists came to new world colonization of north america a encouragement from rulers countries.
european rulers sought colonies as new sources of wealth and power.
a mercantilism.
gold and silver were prized as a source of wealth.
nations measured a nation s wealth by the gold and silver they had.
a religious reasons.
groups came to establish their own religious communities.
a better life.
most colonists faced hardships in europe.
saw colonies as a place to escape famine offered economic opportunities.
a new spain.
i mexico cuba central america.
missionaries sent to convert indians.
1 encomiendas forced labor.
a new france.
i canada great lakes mississippi river.
wanted to establish trading posts for furs i a new netherland.
became ny in 1664 i introduced the patroon system.
j a thirteen british colonies.
established colonies along atlantic coast i name chapter 5 european exploration and colonization examine the question.
this question tests your ability to draw a conclusion from a reading passage.
recall what you know.
you should recall that most of the colonists were quite religious 200 years ago.
religion was a central feature of life in europe.
apply what you know.
you should realize that since most the smith passage deals with his church sermons and praying that choices a c and d do not really apply to this passage.
the best answer is choice b.
the passage dem onstrates the importance of religion to settlers in early virginia.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 why is the mayflower compact considered an important step in the development of american democracy.
f it established the principle of separation of church and state.
govt is a g it provided a basis for self government in the plymouth colony.
h it defined colonial relations with local native american indians.
j it outlawed slavery in the massachusetts bay colony.
3 one way in which the settlements at jamestown 1607 and new amsterdam 1625 were similar is that both were located a in the mountains c near the coastline geog io a b on islands far from fresh water d in a dry climate the mayflower compact and the fundamental orders of connecticut are most closely associated with f abuses by absolute monarchs hist 3 b g establishment of religious toleration h steps toward colonial self government j adoption of universal suffrage in which region of the united states was located.
the first permanent english settlement a pacific northwest c atlantic coast geog io a j b great plains d great lakes mountains the need for agricultural workers in the tobacco fields of colonial virginia led to the f formation of labor unions g decision to industrialize h improvement in farming j use of enslaved people from africa hist 2 b j project without permission chapter 5 european exploration and colonization 61 based on these two documents and your knowledge of social studies answer the following question.
we the loyal subjects of king james having undertaken a voyage to plant the first colony in virginia do mutually combine ourselves together into a civil body politick and shall meet and convene for the general good of the colony we promise all due submission and obedience.
in witness we have subscribed our names at cape cod the mayflower compact 1620 we do therefore associate and connive ourselves to be as one public state or commonwealth and do for ourselves and our successors enter into combination and confederation as also in our civil affairs to be guided and governed according to such laws rules orders and decrees as shall be made fundamental orders of connecticut 1639 12 based on these excerpts in what way were these two documents similar.
f the signers of both documents had only just landed in america.
g in both documents colonists agreed to establish a community and obey to its laws.
h in both documents colonists agreed to obey the british kings decisions.
j both documents established a government in which its members chose their own governor.
13 which colonial settlement is correctly paired with the reason it was founded.
a north carolina haven for pilgrims and puritans i hist 2 b b georgia place for imprisoned debtors and convicts c maryland refuge for quakers d pennsylvania refuge for english catholics 14 what was the major reason european rulers sought to colonize north america.
f they needed people from north america to settle in europe.
cmst2 aq g they sought to learn more about native american cultures.
h they sought to expand their power with riches from the new world j they wanted a place to send their criminal population.
15 one reason for the importance of the mayflower compact and the fundamental orders of connecticut was that they laid the foundation for a a two house legislature in state governments just 3 b b the growth of representative government in colonial america c the development of english common law in the colonies d social freedom in colonial legislatures 16 the journeys of henry hudson christopher columbus and robert de lasalle to the new world were made possible because of the f effects of the atlantic slave trade hist 2 a g support of exploration by the english parliament h trade connections established by the travels of marco polo j development of new navigational instruments and technology name chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 planted them with new protestant landlords from scotland and eng land.
this policy also planted the seeds of the centuries old religious con icts that persist in ireland to the present day.
many eng lish soldiers developed in ireland a sneering contempt for the savage natives an attitude that they brought with them to the new world.
elizabeth energizes england elizabeth i 1533 1603 by marcus gheeraets the younger ca.
1592 although accused of being vain ckle prejudiced and miserly she proved to be an unusually successful ruler.
she never married hence the virgin queen although various royal matches were projected.
the protestant elizabeth ascended to the eng lish throne in 1558 protestantism became dominant in eng land and rivalry with catholic spain intensied.
ireland which nominally had been under eng lish rule since the twelfth century became an early scene of that rivalry.
the catholic irish sought help from catholic spain to throw off the yoke of the new protestant eng lish queen.
but spanish aid never amounted to much in the 1570s and 1580s elizabeths troops crushed the irish uprising with terrible ferocity in icting unspeakable atrocities upon the native irish people.
the eng lish crown conscated catholic irish lands and encouraged by the ambitious elizabeth i see table 2 1 hardy eng lish buccaneers now swarmed out upon the shipping lanes.
they sought to promote the twin goals of protestantism and plunder by seizing spanish trea sure ships and raiding spanish settlements even though eng land and spain were technically at peace.
the most famous of these semipiratical sea dogs was the courtly sir francis drake.
he swashbuckled and looted his way around the planet returning in 1580 with his ship heavily ballasted with spanish booty.
the venture netted prots of about 4 600 percent to his nancial backers among whom in secret was queen elizabeth.
defying spanish protest she brazenly knighted drake on the deck of his barnacled ship.
the bleak coast of newfoundland was the scene of the rst eng lish attempt at colonization.
this effort collapsed when its promoter sir humphrey gilbert lost his life at sea in 1583.
gilberts ill starred dream inspired his gallant half brother sir walter raleigh to try again in warmer climes.
raleigh orga nized an expedition that rst landed in 1585 on north carolinas roanoke island off the coast of virginia a vaguely de ned region named in honor of elizabeth the virgin queen after several false starts the hapless roanoke colony mysteriously vanished swallowed up by the wilderness.
these pathetic eng lish failures at colonization contrasted embarrassingly with the glories of the spanish empire whose prots were fabulously enriching spain.
philip ii of spain self anointed foe of the protestant reformation used part of his imperial gains to amass an invincible armada of ships for an invasion of eng land.
the showdown came in 1588 when the lumbering spanish otilla 130 strong hove into the eng lish channel.
the eng lish sea dogs fought back.
using craft that were swifter more maneuverable and more ably manned they in icted heavy damage on the cumbersome overladen spanish ships.
then a devastating storm arose the protestant wind scattering the crippled spanish eet.
england prepares for colonization in the years immediately following the defeat of the spanish armada the english writer richard hakluyt 1552 1616 extravagantly exhorted his countrymen to cast off their sluggish security and undertake the colonization of the new world there is under our noses the great and ample country of virginia the inland whereof is found of late to be so sweet and wholesome a climate so rich and abundant in silver mines a better and richer country than mexico itself.
if it shall please the almighty to stir up her majestys heart to continue with transporting one or two thousand of her people she shall by gods assistance in short space increase her dominions enrich her coffers and reduce many pagans to the faith of christ.
the rout of the spanish armada marked the beginning of the end of spanish imperial dreams though spains new world empire would not fully collapse for three more centuries.
within a few decades the spansir walter ralegh raleigh c 1552 1618 ish netherlands holland would secure its indepen1588 a dashing courtier who was one of queen dence and much of the spanish caribbean would slip elizabeths favorites for his wit good looks and courtly from spains grasp.
bloated by peruvian and mexican manners he launched important colonizing failures in silver and cockily convinced of its own invincibility the new world.
for this portrait raleigh presented spain had overreached itself sowing the seeds of its himself as the queens devoted servant wearing her own decline.
colors of black and white and her emblem of a pearl in eng lands victory over the spanish armada also his left ear.
after seducing and secretly marrying one marked a red letter day in american history.
it dampof queen elizabeths maids of honor he fell out of favor ened spains ghting spirit and helped ensure engbut continued his colonial ventures in the hopes of challenging catholic spains dominance in the lands naval dominance in the north atlantic.
it started americas.
he was ultimately beheaded for treason.
eng land on its way to becoming master of the world oceans a fact of enormous importance to the american people.
indeed eng land now had table 2 1 the tudor rulers of england many of the characteristics that spain displayed on the eve of its colonizing name reign relation to america adventure a century earlier a strong cabot voyages 1497 1498 unied national state under a pop henry vii 1485 1509 henry viii 1509 1547 eng lish reformation began ular monarch a mea sure of religious edward vi 1547 1553 strong protestant tendencies unity after a protracted struggle be bloody mary 1553 1558 catholic reaction tween protestants and catholics and elizabeth i 1558 1603 break with roman catholic church nal a vibrant sense of nationalism and drake spanish armada defeated national destiny.
a wondrous owering of the eng see table 3 1 p 55 for a continuation of the table.
lish national spirit bloomed in the chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 wake of the spanish armadas defeat.
a golden age of literature dawned in this exhilarating at mosphere with william shakespeare at its forefront making occasional poetical references to englands american colonies.
the english were seized with restlessness with thirst for adventure and with curiosity about the unknown.
everywhere there blossomed a new spirit of self condence of vibrant patriotism and of boundless faith in the future of the eng lish nation.
when england and spain nally signed a treaty of peace in 1604 the eng lish people were poised to plunge headlong into the planting of their own colonial empire in the new world.
england on the eve of empire eng lands scepterd isle as shakespeare called it throbbed with social and economic change as the seventeenth century opened.
its population was mushrooming from some 3 million people in 1550 to about 4 million in 1600.
in the ever green eng lish countryside landlords were enclosing croplands for sheep grazing forcing many small farmers into precarious tenancy or off the land altogether.
it was no accident that the woolen districts of eastern and western eng land where puritanism had taken strong root supplied many of the earliest immigrants to america.
when economic depression hit the woolen trade in the late 1500s thousands of footloose farmers took to the roads.
they drifted about eng land chronically unemployed often ending up as beggars and paupers in cities like bristol and london.
this remarkably mobile population alarmed many contemporaries.
they concluded that eng land was burdened with a surplus population though present day london holds twice as many people as did all of england in 1600.
at the same time laws of primogeniture decreed that only eldest sons were eligible to inherit landed estates.
landholders ambitious younger sons among them gilbert raleigh and drake were forced to seek their fortunes elsewhere.
bad luck plagued their early lone wolf enterprises.
but by the early 1600s the jointstock company forerunner of the modern corporation was perfected.
it enabled a considerable number of investors called adventurers to pool their capital.
peace with a chastened spain provided the opportunity for eng lish colonization.
population growth provided the workers.
unemployment as well as a thirst for adventure for markets and for religious freedom provided the motives.
joint stock companies provided the nancial means.
the stage was now set for a historic effort to establish an eng lish beachhead in the still uncharted north american wilderness.
england plants the jamestown seedling in 1606 two years after peace with spain the hand of destiny beckoned toward virginia.
a joint stock company known as the virginia company of london received a charter from king james i of eng land for a settlement in the new world.
the main attraction was the promise of gold combined with a strong desire to nd a passage through america to the indies.
like most joint stock companies of the day the virginia company was intended to endure for only a few years after which its stockholders hoped to liquidate it for a prot.
this arrangement put severe pressure on the luckless colonists who were threatened with abandonment in the wilderness if they did not quickly strike it rich on the companys behalf.
few of the investors thought in terms of long term colonization.
apparently no one even faintly suspected that the seeds of a mighty nation were being planted.
the charter of the virginia company is a signicant document in american history.
it guaranteed to the overseas settlers the same rights of eng lishmen that they would have enjoyed if they had stayed at home.
this precious boon was gradually extended to subsequent eng lish colonies helping to reinforce the colonists sense that even on the far shores of the atlantic they remained comfortably within the embrace of traditional eng lish institutions.
but ironically a century and a half later their insistence on the rights of eng lishmen fed the hot resentment of the colonists against an increasingly meddlesome mother country and nourished their appetite for independence.
setting sail in late 1606 the virginia companys three ships landed near the mouth of chesapeake bay where indians attacked them.
pushing on up the bay the tiny band of colonists eventually chose a location on the wooded and malarial banks of the james river named in honor of king james i.
the site was easy to defend but it was mosquito infested and devastatingly unhealthful.
there on may 24 1607 about a hundred eng lish settlers all of them men disembarked.
they called the place jamestown see map 2 1.
virginia s beginnings to eating dogges catts ratts and myce and even to digging up corpses for food.
one hungry man killed salted and ate his wife for which misbehavior he was executed.
of the four hundred settlers who managed to make it to virginia by 1609 only sixty survived the starving time winter of 1609 1610.
diseased and despairing the remaining colonists dragged themselves aboard homeward bound ships in the spring of 1610 only to be met at the mouth of the james river by a long awaited relief party headed by a new governor lord de la warr.
he ordered the settlers back to jamestown imposed a harsh military regime on the colony and soon undertook aggressive military action against the indians.
sq ue ha areas settled by 1675 50 km.
nn a areas settled by 1700 y li n e le va l fa annapolis ba ll do ah e an ar en d law sh 40n r de ac r e ar del a w r ma ry la n tom y ra n pp ah an st marys 1634 capital to 1694 r fort henry petersburg yorktown an oce hampton 1691 norfolk tic williamsburg jamestown 1607 capital to 1699 an henrico 1611 es r 38n b ay v i r g i n i a at l ck chesapeake no jam 76w n e piedmont fa our men were destroyed with cruel diseases as swellings burning fevers and by wars and some departed suddenly but for the most part they died of mere famine.
there were never englishmen left in a foreign country in such misery as we were in this new discovered virginia.
ll li george percy 1580 1631 accompanied captain john smith on his expedition to virginia in 1606 1607.
he served as deputy governor of the colony in 1609 1610 and returned to england in 1612 where he wrote a discourse of the plantation of virginia about his experiences su areas settled by 1650 po the early years of jamestown proved a nightmare for all concerned except the buzzards.
forty wouldbe colonists perished during the initial voyage in 1606 1607.
another expedition in 1609 lost its leaders and many of its precious supplies in a shipwreck off bermuda.
once ashore in virginia the settlers died by the dozens from disease malnutrition and starvation.
ironically the woods rustled with game and the rivers opped with sh but the greenhorn settlers many of them self styled gentlemen unaccustomed to fending for themselves wasted valuable time grubbing for nonexistent gold when they should have been gathering provisions.
virginia was saved from utter collapse at the start largely by the leadership and resourcefulness of an intrepid young adventurer captain john smith.
taking over in 1608 he whipped the gold hungry colonists into line with the rule he who shall not work shall not eat he had been kidnapped in december 1607 and subjected to a mock execution by the indian chieftain powhatan whose daughter pocahontas had saved smith by dramatically interposing her head between his and the war clubs of his captors.
the symbolism of this ritual was apparently intended to impress smith with powhatans power and with the indians desire for peaceful relations with the virginians.
pocahontas became an intermediary between the indians and the settlers helping to preserve a shaky peace and to provide needed foodstuffs.
still the colonists died in droves and living skeletons were driven to desperate acts.
they were reduced 36n t i d e wat e r 78w map 2 1 early maryland and virginia interactive map chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 the wife of a virginia governor wrote to her sister in england in 1623 of her voyage for our shippe was so pestered with people and goods that we were so full of infection that after a while we saw little but throwing folkes over board it pleased god to send me my helth till i came to shoare and 3 dayes after i fell sick but i thank god i am well recovered.
few else are left alive that came in that shippe.
cultural clashes in the chesapeake pocahontas ca.
1595 1617 taken to england by her husband she was received as a princess.
she died when preparing to return but her infant son ultimately reached virginia where hundreds of his descendants have lived including the second mrs woodrow wilson.
disease continued to reap a gruesome harvest among the virginians.
by 1625 virginia contained only some twelve hundred hard bitten survivors of the nearly eight thousand adventurers who had tried to start life anew in the ill fated colony.
the authorities meted out harsh discipline in the young virginia colony.
one jamestown settler who publicly criticized the governor was sentenced to be disarmed and have his arms broken and his tongue bored through with an awl and shall pass through a guard of 40 men and shall be butted with muskets by every one of them and at the head of the troop kicked down and footed out of the fort.
when the eng lish landed in 1607 the chieftain powhatan dominated the native peoples living in the james river area.
he had asserted supremacy over a few dozen small tribes loosely af liated in what somewhat grandly came to be called powhatans confederacy.
the english colonists dubbed all the local indians somewhat inaccurately the powhatans.
powhatan at rst may have considered the eng lish potential allies in his struggle to extend his power still further over his indian rivals and he tried to be conciliatory.
but relations between the indians and the eng lish remained tense especially as the starving colonists took to raiding indian food supplies.
the at mosphere grew even more strained after lord de la warr arrived in 1610.
he carried orders from the virginia company that amounted to a declaration of war against the indians in the jamestown region.
a veteran of the vicious campaigns against the irish de la warr now introduced irish tactics against the indians.
his troops raided indian villages burned houses conscated provisions and torched cornelds.
a peace settlement ended this first anglo powhatan war in 1614 sealed by the marriage of pocahontas to the colonist john rolfe the rst known interracial union in virginia.
a fragile respite followed which endured eight years.
but the indians pressed by the land hungry whites and ravaged by european diseases struck back in 1622.
a series of indian attacks left 347 settlers dead including john rolfe.
in response the virginia company issued new orders calling for a perpetual war without peace or truce one that would prevent the in virginians and native americans remained in virginia perhaps 10 percent of the population the original eng lish settlers had encountered in 1607.
by 1685 the eng lish considered the powhatan peoples extinct.
it had been the powhatans calamitous misfortune to fall victim to three ds disease disorga ni zation and disposability.
like native peoples throughout the new world they were extremely susceptible to europeanborne maladies.
epidemics of smallpox and measles raced mercilessly through their villages.
the powhatans also despite the apparent cohesiveness of powhatans confederacy lacked the unity with which to make effective opposition to the comparatively wellorga nized and militarily disciplined whites.
finally unlike the indians whom the spaniards had encountered to the south who could be put to work in the mines and had gold and silver to trade the powhatans served no economic function for the virginia colonists.
they provided no reliable labor source and after the virginians began growing their own food crops had no valuable commodities to offer in commerce.
the natives as far as the virginians were concerned could be disposed of without harm to the colonial economy.
indeed the indian presence frustrated the colonists desire for a local commodity the europeans desperately wanted land.
the indians new world a carolina indian woman and child by john white the artist was a member of the raleigh expedition of 1585.
notice that the indian girl carries a european doll illustrating the mingling of cultures that had already begun.
dians from being any longer a people periodic punitive raids systematically reduced the native population and drove the survivors ever farther westward.
in the second anglo powhatan war in 1644 the indians made one last effort to dislodge the virginians.
they were again defeated.
the peace treaty of 1646 repudiated any thought of assimilating the native peoples into virginia society or of peacefully coexisting with them.
instead it effectively banished the chesapeake indians from their ancestral lands and formally separated indian from white areas of settlement the origins of the later reservation system.
by 1669 an ofcial census revealed that only about two thousand indians the fate of the powhatans foreshadowed the destinies of indigenous peoples throughout the continent as the process of european settlement went forward.
native americans of course had a history well before columbuss arrival.
they were no strangers to change adaptation and even catastrophe as the rise and decline of civilizations such as the mississippians and the anasazis demonstrated.
but the shock of large scale european colonization disrupted native american life on a vast scale inducing unprecedented demographic and cultural transformations.
some changes were fairly benign.
horses stolen strayed or purchased from spanish invaders catalyzed a substantial indian migration onto the great plains in the eighteenth century.
peoples such as the lakotas sioux who had previously been sedentary forest dwellers now moved onto the wide open plains.
there they thrived impressively adopting an entirely new way of life as mounted nomadic hunters.
but the effects of contact with europeans proved less salutary for most other native peoples.
chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 disease was by far the biggest disrupter as old world pathogens licked lethally through biologically defenseless indian populations.
disease took more than human life it extinguished entire cultures and occasionally helped shape new ones.
epidemics often robbed native peoples of the elders who preserved the oral traditions that held clans together.
devastated indian bands then faced the daunting task of literally reinventing themselves without benet of accumulated wisdom or kin networks.
the decimation and forced migration of native peoples sometimes scrambled them together in wholly new ways.
the catawba nation of the southern piedmont region for example was formed from splintered remnants of several different groups uprooted by the shock of the europeans arrival.
trade also transformed indian life as traditional barter and exchange networks gave way to the temptations of european commerce.
firearms for example conferred enormous advantages on those who could purchase them from europeans.
the desire for rearms thus intensied competition among the tribes for access to prime hunting grounds that could supply the skins and pelts that the european arms traders wanted.
benjamin franklin 1706 1790 in a 1753 letter to peter collinson commented on the attractiveness of indian life to europeans when an indian child has been brought up among us taught our language and habituated to our customs yet if he goes to see his relations and make one indian ramble with them there is no persuading him ever to return.
but when white persons of either sex have been taken prisoners by the indians and lived awhile among them though ransomed by their friends and treated with all imaginable tenderness to prevail with them to stay among the english yet in a short time they become disgusted with our manner of life and the care and pains that are necessary to support it and take the rst good opportunity of escaping again into the woods from whence there is no reclaiming them.
carolina indians german painter philip georg friedrich von reck drew these yuchi indians in the 1730s.
the blanket and rie show that trade with the english settlers had already begun to transform native american culture.
slavery and democracy in early virginia the result was an escalating cycle of indian on indian violence fueled by the lure and demands of european trade goods.
native americans were swept up in the expanding atlantic economy but they usually struggled in vain to control their own place in it.
one desperate band of virginia indians resentful at the prices offered by british traders for their deerskins loaded a eet of canoes with hides and tried to paddle to eng land to sell their goods directly.
not far from the virginia shore a storm swamped their frail craft.
their cargo lost the few survivors were picked up by an eng lish ship and sold into slavery in the west indies.
indians along the atlantic seaboard felt the most ferocious effects of european contact.
farther inland native peoples had the advantages of time space and numbers as they sought to adapt to the european incursion.
the algonquins in the great lakes area for instance became a substantial regional power.
they bolstered their population by absorbing various surrounding bands and dealt from a position of strength with the few europeans who managed to penetrate the interior.
as a result a british or french trader wanting to do business with the inland tribes had little choice but to conform to indian ways often taking an indian wife.
thus was created a middle ground a zone where both europeans and native americans were compelled to accommodate to one another at least until the europeans began to arrive in large numbers.
virginia child of tobacco john rolfe the husband of pocahontas became father of the tobacco industry and an economic savior of the virginia colony.
by 1612 he had perfected methods of raising and curing the pungent weed eliminating much of the bitter tang.
soon the european demand for tobacco was nearly insatiable.
a tobacco rush swept over virginia as crops were planted in the streets of jamestown and even between the numerous graves.
so exclusively did the colonists concentrate on planting the yellow leaf that at rst they had to import some of their foodstuffs.
colonists who had once hungered for food now hungered for land ever more land on which to plant ever more tobacco.
relentlessly they pressed the frontier of settlement up the river valleys to the west abrasively edging against the indians.
virginias prosperity was nally built on tobacco smoke.
this bewitching weed played a vital role in putting the colony on rm economic foundations.
but tobacco king nicotine was something of a tyrant.
it was ruinous to the soil when greedily planted in successive years and it enchained the fortunes of virginia to the uctuating price of a single crop.
fatefully tobacco also promoted the broad acred plantation system and with it a brisk demand for fresh labor.
in 1619 the year before the plymouth pilgrims landed in new eng land what was described as a dutch warship appeared off jamestown and sold some twenty africans.
the scanty record does not reveal whether they were purchased as lifelong slaves or as servants committed to limited years of servitude.
however it transpired this simple commercial transaction planted advertisement for a voyage to america 1609 chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 the seeds of the north american slave system.
yet blacks were too costly for most of the hard pinched white colonists to acquire and for decades few were brought to virginia.
in 1650 virginia counted but three hundred blacks although by the end of the century blacks most of them enslaved made up approximately 14 percent of the colonys population.
representative self government was also born in primitive virginia in the same cradle with slavery and in the same year 1619.
the virginia company authorized the settlers to summon an assembly known as the house of burgesses.
a momentous precedent was thus feebly established for this assemblage was the rst of many miniature parliaments to ourish in the soil of america.
as time passed james i grew increasingly hostile to virginia.
he detested tobacco and he distrusted the representative house of burgesses which he branded a seminary of sedition in 1624 he revoked the charter of the bankrupt and beleaguered virginia company thus making virginia a royal colony directly under his control.
maryland catholic haven maryland the second plantation colony but the fourth eng lish colony to be planted was founded in 1634 by lord baltimore of a prominent eng lish catholic family.
he embarked upon the venture partly to reap nancial prots and partly to create a refuge for his fellow catholics.
protestant eng land was still persecuting roman catholics among numerous discriminations a couple seeking wedlock could not be legally married by a catholic priest.
absentee proprietor lord baltimore hoped that the two hundred settlers who founded maryland at st marys on chesapeake bay would be the vanguard of a vast new feudal domain.
huge estates were to be awarded to his largely catholic relatives and gracious manor houses modeled on those of eng lands aristocracy were intended to arise amidst the fertile forests.
as in virginia colonists proved willing to come only if offered the opportunity to acquire land of their own.
soon they were dispersed around the chesapeake region on modest farms and the haughty land barons mostly catholic were surrounded by resentful backcountry planters mostly protestant.
resentment ared into open rebellion near the end of the century and the baltimore family for a time lost its proprietary rights.
despite these tensions maryland prospered.
like virginia it blossomed forth in acres of tobacco.
also like virginia it depended for labor in its early years mainly on white indentured servants penniless persons who bound themselves to work for a number of years to pay their passage.
in both colonies it was only in the later years of the seventeenth century that black slaves began to be imported in large numbers.
lord baltimore a canny soul permitted unusual freedom of worship at the outset.
he hoped that he would thus purchase toleration for his own fellow worshipers.
but the heavy tide of protestants threatened to submerge the catholics and place severe restrictions on them as in eng land.
faced with disaster the catholics of maryland threw their support behind the famed act of toleration which was passed in 1649 by the local representative assembly.
marylands new religious statute guaranteed toleration to all christians.
but less liberally it decreed the death penalty for those like jews and atheists who denied the divinity of jesus.
the law thus sanctioned less toleration than had previously existed in the settlement but it did extend a temporary cloak of protection to the uneasy catholic minority.
one result was that when the colonial era ended maryland probably sheltered more roman catholics than any other eng lishspeaking colony in the new world.
the west indies way station to mainland america while the eng lish were planting the rst frail colonial shoots in the chesapeake they also were busily colonizing the islands of the west indies.
spain weakened by military overextension and distracted by its rebellious dutch provinces relaxed its grip on much of the caribbean in the early 1600s.
by the mid seventeenth century eng land had secured its claim to several west indian islands including the large prize of jamaica in 1655.
sugar formed the foundation of the west indian economy.
what tobacco was to the chesapeake sugar cane was to the caribbean with one crucial difference.
tobacco was a poor mans crop.
it could be planted easily it produced commercially marketable leaves within a year and it required only simple processing.
sugar cane in contrast was a rich mans crop.
it had to be planted extensively to yield commercially viable quantities of sugar.
extensive planting in turn required extensive and arduous land clearing.
and the english colonization in the caribbean above sugar mill in brazil by frans post ca.
1640 left saccharum ofcinarum sugar cane african peoples throughout the new world in the three and a half centuries following columbuss discovery.
to control this large and potentially restive slave population eng lish authorities devised formal codes that de ned the slaves legal status and their masters prerogatives.
the notorious barbados slave code of 1661 denied even the most fundamental rights to slaves and gave masters virtually complete control over their laborers including the right to in ict vicious punishments for even slight infractions.
cane stalks yielded their sugar only after an elaborate process of re ning in a sugar mill.
the need for land and for the labor to clear it and to run the mills made sugar cultivation a capital intensive business.
only wealthy growers with abundant capital to invest could succeed in sugar.
the sugar lords extended their dominion over the west indies in the seventeenth century.
to work their sprawling plantations they imported enormous numbers of enslaved africans more than a quarter of a million in the ve decades after 1640.
by about 1700 black slaves outnumbered white settlers in the eng lish west indies by nearly four to one and the regions population has remained predominantly black ever since.
west indians thus take their place among the numerous children of the african diaspora the vast scattering of african slaves destined for the west indian sugar plantations were bound and branded on west african beaches and ferried out in canoes to the waiting slave ships.
an english sailor described the scene the negroes are so wilful and loth to leave their own country that have often leapd out of the canoes boat and ship into the sea and kept under water till they were drowned to avoid being taken up and saved by our boats which pursued them they having a more dreadful apprehension of barbadoes than we can have of hell.
chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 the barbados slave code 1661 declared if any negro or slave whatsoever shall offer any violence to any christian by striking or the like such negro or slave shall for his or her rst offence be severely whipped by the constable.
for his second offence of that nature he shall be severely whipped his nose slit and be burned in some part of his face with a hot iron.
and being brutish slaves they deserve not for the baseness of their condition to be tried by the legal trial of twelve men of their peers as the subjects of england are.
and it is further enacted and ordained that if any negro or other slave under punishment by his master unfortunately shall suffer in life or member which seldom happens no person whatsoever shall be liable to any ne therefore.
the protable sugar plantation system soon crowded out almost all other forms of caribbean agriculture.
the west indies increasingly depended on the north american mainland for foodstuffs and other basic supplies.
and smaller eng lish farmers squeezed out by the greedy sugar barons began to migrate to the newly founded southern mainland colonies.
a group of displaced eng lish settlers from barbados arrived in carolina in 1670.
they brought with them a few enslaved africans as well as the model of the barbados slave code which eventually inspired statutes governing slavery throughout the mainland colonies.
carolina ofcially adopted a version of the barbados slave code in 1696.
just as the west indies had been a testing ground for the encomienda system that the spanish had brought to mexico and south america so the caribbean islands now served as a staging area for the slave system that would take root elsewhere in eng lish north america.
colonizing the carolinas civil war convulsed eng land in the 1640s.
king charles i had dismissed parliament in 1629 and when he eventually recalled it in 1640 the members were mutinous.
finding their great champion in the puritan soldier oliver cromwell they ultimately beheaded charles in 1649 and cromwell ruled eng land for nearly a decade.
finally charles ii son of the decapitated king was restored to the throne in 1660.
colonization had been interrupted during this period of bloody unrest.
now in the so called restoration period empire building resumed with even greater intensity and royal involvement see table 2 2.
carolina named for charles ii was formally created in 1670 after the king granted to eight of his court favorites the lords proprietors an expanse of wilderness ribboning across the continent to the pacic.
these aristocratic founders hoped to grow foodstuffs to provision the sugar plantations in barbados and to export noneng lish products like wine silk and olive oil.
carolina prospered by developing close economic ties with the ourishing sugar islands of the eng lish west indies.
in a broad sense the mainland colony was but the most northerly of those outposts.
many original carolina settlers in fact had emigrated from barbados bringing that islands slave system with them.
they also established a vigorous slave trade in carolina itself.
enlisting the aid of the coastal savannah indians they forayed into the interior in search of captives.
the lords proprietors in london protested against indian slave trading in their colony but to no avail.
manacled indians soon were among the young colonys major exports.
as many as ten thousand indians were dispatched to lifelong labor in the west indian caneelds and sugar mills.
others were sent to new eng land.
one rhode island town in 1730 counted more than two hundred indian slaves from carolina in its midst.
early carolina coins these copper halfpennies bore the image of an elephant an unofcial symbol of the colony and a prayer for the lords proprietors.
the restoration colonies in 1707 the savannah indians decided to end their alliance with the carolinians and to migrate to the backcountry of maryland and pennsylvania where a new colony founded by quakers under william penn promised better relations between whites and indians.
but the carolinians determined to thin the savannahs before they could depart.
a series of bloody raids all but annihilated the indian tribes of coastal carolina by 1710.
after much experimentation rice emerged as the principal export crop in carolina.
rice was then an exotic food in eng land no rice seeds were sent out from london in the rst supply ships to carolina.
but rice was grown in africa and the carolinians were soon paying premium prices for west african slaves experienced in rice cultivation.
the africans agricultural skill and their relative immunity to malaria thanks to a genetic trait that also unfortunately made them and their descendants susceptible to sickle cell anemia made them ideal laborers on the hot and swampy rice plantations.
by 1710 they constituted a majority of carolinians.
moss festooned charles town also named for the king rapidly became the busiest seaport in the south.
many high spirited sons of eng lish landed families deprived of an inheritance came to the charleston area and gave it a rich aristocratic avor.
the village became a colorfully diverse community to which french table 2 2 the thirteen original colonies name founded by year 1.
virginia london co 2.
new hampshire 3.
massachusetts plymouth maine 4.
maryland john mason and others puritans separatists f gorges lord baltimore 5.
connecticut mass.
emigrants charter royal under the crown mass.
emigrants none 6.
rhode island r williams 7.
delaware swedes n carolina virginians 9.
new york dutch duke of york berkeley and carteret eight nobles 11.
carolina 12.
pennsylvania 13.
georgia william penn oglethorpe and others 1775 status 10.
new jersey ca.
1628 made royal none new haven royal absorbed by mass 1641 1679 royal merged with mass 1691 bought by mass 1677 proprietary controlled by proprietor self governing under local control merged with conn 1662 self governing none none royal royal royal separated formally from n c 1712 proprietary royal ca.
1613 proprietary merged with pa 1682 same governor but separate assembly granted 1703 royal separated informally from s c 1691 chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 fort and trading post virginia 200 km.
north carolina georgia n an ah south carolina.
fort moore savannah carolina grant 1 35n roanoke i n r fort augusta new spain ke r new bern campbelltown s grant to trustees of georgia 1732 the emergence of north carolina the wild northern expanse of the huge carolina grant bordered on virginia.
from the older colony there drifted down a ragtag group of poverty stricken outcasts and religious dissenters.
many of them had been repelled by the rareed at mosphere of virginia dominated as it was by big plantation gentry belonging to the church of eng land.
north carolinians as a result have been called the quintessence of virginias discontent the newcomers who frequently were squatters without legal right to the soil raised their tobacco and other crops on small farms with little need for slaves.
distinctive traits developed rapidly in north carolina.
the poor but sturdy inhabitants regarded as riffraff by their snobbish neighbors earned a reputation for being irreligious and hospitable to pirates.
isolated from neighbors by raw wilderness and stormy cape hatteras graveyard of the atlantic the north carolinians developed a strong spirit of resistance to authority.
their location between aristocratic virginia and aristocratic south carolina caused the area to be dubbed a vale of humility between two mountains of conceit following much friction with governors north carolina was ofcially separated from south carolina in 1712 and subsequently each segment became a royal colony see map 2 2.
north carolina shares with tiny rhode island several distinctions.
these two outposts were the most democratic the most independent minded and the least aristocratic of the original thirteen eng lish colonies.
although northern carolina unlike the colonys southern reaches did not at rst import large numbers of african slaves both regions shared in the ongoing tragedy of bloody relations between indians and europeans.
tuscarora indians fell upon the edgling settlement at new bern in 1711.
the north carolinians roa 200 mi.
no av protestant refugees jews and others were attracted by religious toleration.
nearby in florida the catholic spaniards abhorred the intrusion of these protestant heretics.
carolinas frontier was often aame.
spanish incited indians brandished their tomahawks and armor clad warriors of spain frequently unsheathed their swords during the successive anglo spanish wars.
but by 1700 carolina was too strong to be wiped out.
dorchester charles town charleston atlantic ocean fort king george fort st andrew fort william fort st george carolina grant 30n 80w map 2 2 early carolina and georgia settlements interactive map aided by their heavily armed brothers from the south retaliated by crushing the indians in the tuscarora war selling hundreds of them into slavery and leaving the survivors to wander northward to seek the protection of the iroquois.
the tuscaroras eventually became the sixth nation of the iroquois confederacy.
in another ferocious encounter four years later the south carolinians defeated and dispersed the yamasee indians.
with the conquest of the yamasees virtually all the coastal indian tribes in the southern colonies had been utterly devastated by about 1720.
yet in the interior in the hills and valleys of the appalachian mountains the powerful cherokees creeks and iroquois see makers of america the iroquois pp.
42 43 remained.
stronger and more numerous than their coastal cousins they managed for half a century more to contain british settlement to the coastal plain east of the mountains.
the colonial south late coming georgia the buffer colony pine forested georgia with the harbor of savannah nourishing its chief settlement was formally founded in 1733.
it proved to be the last of the thirteen colonies to be planted 126 years after the rst virginia and 52 years after the twelfth pennsylvania.
chronologically georgia belongs elsewhere but geographically it may be grouped with its southern neighbors.
the eng lish crown intended georgia to serve chiey as a buffer.
it would protect the more valuable carolinas against vengeful spaniards from florida and against the hostile french from louisiana.
georgia indeed suffered much buffeting especially when wars broke out between spain and eng land in the european arena.
as a vital link in imperial defense the exposed colony received monetary subsidies from the british government at the outset the only one of the original thirteen to enjoy this benet in its founding stage.
named in honor of king george ii of eng land georgia was launched by a high minded group of philanthropists.
in addition to protecting their neighboring northern colonies and producing silk and wine they were determined to carve out a haven for wretched souls imprisoned for debt.
they were also determined at least at rst to keep slavery out of georgia.
the ablest of the founders was the dynamic soldier statesman james oglethorpe who became keenly interested in prison reform after one of his friends died in a debtors jail.
as an able military leader oglethorpe repelled spanish attacks.
as an imperialist and a philanthropist he saved the charity colony by his energetic leadership and by heavily mortgaging his own personal fortune.
the hamlet of savannah like charleston was a melting pot community.
german lutherans and kilted scots highlanders among others added color to the pattern.
all christian worshipers except catholics enjoyed religious toleration.
many missionaries armed with bibles and hope arrived in savannah to work among debtors and indians.
prominent among them was young john wesley who later returned to eng land and founded the methodist church.
georgia grew with painful slowness and at the end of the colonial era was perhaps the least populous of the colonies.
the development of a plantation economy was thwarted by an unhealthy climate by early restrictions on black slavery and by demoralizing spanish attacks.
the plantation colonies certain distinctive features were shared by eng lands southern mainland colonies maryland virginia north carolina south carolina and georgia.
broad acred these outposts of empire were all in some degree devoted to exporting commercial agricultural products.
protable staple crops were the rule notably tobacco and rice though to a lesser extent in small farm north carolina.
slavery was found in all the plantation colonies though only after 1750 in reform minded georgia.
immense acreage in the hands of a favored few fostered a strong aristocratic at mosphere except in north carolina and to some extent in debtor tinged georgia.
the wide scattering of plantations and farms often along stately rivers retarded the growth of cities and made the establishment of churches and schools both difcult and expensive.
in 1671 the governor of virginia actually thanked god that no free schools or printing presses existed in his colony.
all the plantation colonies permitted some religious toleration.
the tax supported church of eng land became the dominant faith though weakest of all in nonconformist north carolina.
these colonies were in some degree expansionary.
soil butchery by excessive tobacco growing drove settlers westward and the long lazy rivers invited penetration of the continent and continuing confrontation with native americans.
makers of america theafricanthe great iroquois american migration w ell before the crowned heads of europe turned their eyes and their dreams of empire toward north america a great military power had emerged in the mohawk valley of what is now new york state.
the iroquois confederacy dubbed by whites the league 75w montagnais fort qubec n algonquin 45n w.
fort orange ue a nn ha delaware susq r ne n ew en g l a n d connecticut r herl mo hawk r a ga nda on e id cayuga ois iroqu nf co ono seneca rie l e mohawk ed lake ontario and y ac er huron aki lake champlain mahican 100 mi.
ce en net wr en hudson r 100 km.
montral r ab n e w fr an c e new amsterdam r.
of the iroquois bound together ve indian nations the mohawks the oneidas the onondagas the cayugas and the senecas see map 2 3.
according to iroquois legend it was founded in the late 1500s by two leaders deganawidah and hiawatha.
this proud and potent league vied initially with neighboring indians for territorial supremacy then with the french english and dutch for control of the fur trade.
ultimately infected by the white mans diseases intoxicated by his whiskey and intimidated by his muskets the iroquois struggled for their very survival as a people.
the building block of iroquois society was the longhouse.
this wooden structure deserved its descriptive name.
only twenty ve feet in breadth the longhouse stretched from eight to two hundred feet in length.
each building contained three to ve replaces around which gathered two nuclear families consisting of parents and children.
all families residing in the longhouse were related their connections of blood running exclusively through the maternal line.
a single longhouse might shelter a womans family and those of her mother sisters and daughters with the oldest woman being the honored matriarch.
when a man married he left his childhood hearth in the home of his mother to join the longhouse of his wife.
men dominated in iroquois society but they owed their positions of prominence to their mothers families.
40n 40n 72w map 2 3 iroquois lands and european trade centers ca.
1590 1650 interactive map an iroquois canoe in frail but artfully constructed craft like this the iroquois traversed the abundant waters of their confederacy and traded with their neighbors indians as well as whites.
the longhouse reconstruction the photo shows a modernday reconstruction of a delaware indian longhouse almost identical in design and building materials to the iroquois longhouses at historic waterloo village on winakung island in new jersey.
the iroquois conquered the delawares in the late 1600s.
bent saplings and sheets of elm bark made for sturdy weathertight shelters.
longhouses were typically furnished with deerskin covered bunks and shelves for storing baskets pots fur pelts and corn.
as if sharing one great longhouse the ve nations joined in the iroquois confederacy but kept their own separate res.
although they celebrated together and shared a common policy toward outsiders they remained essentially independent of one another.
on the eastern ank of the league the mohawks known as the keepers of the eastern fire specialized as middlemen with european traders whereas the outlying senecas the keepers of the western fire became fur suppliers.
after banding together to end generations of violent warfare among themselves the five nations vanquished their rivals the neighboring hurons eries and petuns.
some other tribes such as the tuscaroras from the carolina region sought peaceful absorption into the iroquois confederacy.
the iroquois further expanded their numbers by means of periodic mourning wars whose objective was the large scale adoption of captives and refugees.
but the arrival of gun toting europeans threatened iroquois supremacy and enmeshed the confederacy in a tangled web of diplomatic intrigues.
throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries they allied alternately with the eng lish against the french and vice versa for a time success fully working this perpetual rivalry to their own advantage.
but when the american revolution broke out the confederacy could reach no consensus on which side to support.
each tribe was left to decide independently most though not all sided with the british.
the ultimate british defeat left the confederacy in tatters.
many iroquois especially the mohawks moved to new lands in british canada others were relegated to reservations in western new york.
reservation life proved unbearable for a proud people accustomed to domination over a vast territory.
morale sank brawling feuding and alcoholism became rampant.
out of this morass arose a prophet an iroquois called handsome lake.
in 1799 angelic gures clothed in traditional iroquois garb appeared to handsome lake in a vision and warned him that the moral decline of his people must end if they were to endure.
he awoke from his vision to warn his tribespeople to mend their ways.
his socially oriented gospel inspired many iroquois to forsake alcohol to af rm family values and to revive old iroquois customs.
handsome lake died in 1815 but his teachings in the form of the longhouse religion survive to this day.
chapter 2 the planting of english america 1500 1733 chronology elizabeth i becomes queen of eng land ca.
1565 eng lish crush irish uprising drake circumnavigates the globe raleigh founds lost colony at roanoke island eng land defeats spanish armada james i becomes king of eng land spain and eng land sign peace treaty 1640s large scale slave labor system established in eng lish west indies second anglo powhatan war act of toleration in maryland charles i beheaded cromwell rules eng land charles ii restored to eng lish throne barbados slave code adopted carolina colony created 1711 tuscarora war in north carolina virginia colony founded at jamestown rolfe perfects tobacco culture in virginia north carolina formally separates from south carolina first anglo powhatan war ends 1715 yamasee war in south carolina first africans arrive in jamestown virginia house of burgesses established georgia colony founded virginia becomes royal colony maryland colony founded key terms protestant reformation 27 roanoke island 28 spanish armada 29 primogeniture 30 joint stock company 30 charter 30 jamestown 30 first anglo powhatan war 32 second anglo powhatan war 33 people to know act of toleration 36 barbados slave code 37 squatters 40 tuscarora war 40 yamasee indians 40 buffer 41 iroquois confederacy 42 henry viii elizabeth i sir francis drake sir walter raleigh james i captain john smith powhatan pocahontas lord de la warr john rolfe lord baltimore oliver cromwell james oglethorpe hiawatha to learn more to learn more ira berlin generations of captivity a history of african american slaves 2003 many thousands gone the first two centuries of slavery in north america 1998 kathleen brown good wives nasty wenches and anxious patriarchs gender race and power in colonial virginia 1996 colin g calloway new worlds for all indians europeans and the remaking of america 1997 ralph davis the rise of the atlantic economies 1973 jack p greene pursuits of happiness the social development of early modern british colonies and the formation of american culture 1988 peter laslett the world we have lost 1965 edmund s morgan american slavery american freedom 1975 david b quinn england and the discovery of america 1481 1620 1974 daniel k richter facing east from indian country a native history of early america 2003 nancy shoemaker a strange likeness becoming red and white in eighteenth century north america 2004 alan taylor american colonies the settling of north america 2001 camilla townsend pocahontas and the powhatan dilemma 2004 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 god hath sifted a nation that he might send choice grain into this wilderness.
a lthough colonists both north and south were bound together by a common language and a common allegiance to mother eng land they established different patterns of settlement different economies different political systems and even different sets of values de ning distinctive regional characteristics that would persist for generations.
the promise of riches especially from golden leaved tobacco drew the rst settlers to the southern colonies.
but to the north in the fertile valleys of the middle atlantic region and especially along the rocky shores of new eng land it was not worldly wealth but religious devotion that principally shaped the earliest settlements.
the protestant reformation produces puritanism little did the german friar martin luther suspect when he nailed his protests against catholic doctrines to the door of wittenbergs cathedral in 1517 that he was shaping the destiny of a yet unknown nation.
denounc ing the authority of priests and popes luther declared that the bible alone was the source of gods word.
he ignited a re of religious reform the protestant reformation that licked its way across europe for more than a century dividing peoples toppling sovereigns and kindling the spiritual fervor of millions of men and women some of whom helped to found america.
the reforming ame burned especially brightly in the bosom of john calvin of geneva.
this somber and severe religious leader elaborated martin luthers ideas in ways that profoundly affected the thought and character of generations of americans yet unborn.
calvinism became the dominant theological credo not only of the new eng land puritans but of other american settlers as well including the scottish presbyterians french huguenots and communicants of the dutch reformed church.
calvin spelled out his basic doctrine in a learned latin tome of 1536 entitled institutes of the christian religion.
god calvin argued was all powerful and allgood.
humans because of the corrupting effect of original sin were weak and wicked.
god was also all this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website plymouth plantation knowing and he knew who was going to heaven and who was going to hell.
since the rst moment of creation some souls the elect had been destined for eternal bliss and others for eternal torment.
good works could not save those whom predestination had marked for the infernal res.
but neither could the elect count on their predetermined salvation and lead lives of wild immoral abandon.
for one thing no one could be certain of his or her status in the heavenly ledger.
gnawing doubts about their eternal fate plagued calvinists.
they constantly sought in themselves and others signs of conversion or the receipt of gods free gift of saving grace.
conversion was thought to be an intense identiable personal experience in which god revealed to the elect their heavenly destiny.
thereafter they were expected to lead sanctied lives demonstrating by their holy behavior that they were among the visible saints these doctrines swept into eng land just as king henry viii was breaking his ties with the roman catholic church in the 1530s making himself the head of the church of eng land.
henry would have been content to retain roman rituals and creeds but his action powerfully stimulated some eng lish religious reformers to undertake a total purication of eng lish christianity.
many of these puritans as it happened came from the commercially depressed woolen districts see p 30.
calvinism with its message of stark but reassuring order in the divine plan fed on this social unrest and provided spiritual comfort to the economically disadvantaged.
as time went on puritans grew increasingly unhappy over the snail like progress of the protestant reformation in eng land.
they burned with pious zeal to see the church of eng land wholly decatholicized.
the most devout puritans including those who eventually settled new eng land believed that only visible saints that is persons who felt the stirrings of grace in their souls and could demonstrate its presence to their fellow puritans should be admitted to church membership.
but the church of eng land enrolled all the kings subjects which meant that the saints had to share pews and communion rails with the damned appalled by this unholy fraternizing a tiny group of dedicated puritans known as separatists vowed to break away entirely from the church of eng land.
king james i a shrewd scotsman was head of both the state and the church in eng land from 1603 to 1625.
he quickly perceived that if his subjects could defy him as their spiritual leader they might one day defy him as their political leader as in fact they would later defy and behead his son charles i.
he therefore threatened to harass the more bothersome separatists out of the land.
the pilgrims end their pilgrimage at plymouth the most famous congregation of separatists eeing royal wrath departed for holland in 1608.
during the ensuing twelve years of toil and poverty they were increasingly distressed by the dutchication of their children.
they longed to nd a haven where they could live and die as eng lish men and women and as puried protestants.
america was the logical refuge despite the early ordeals of jamestown and despite tales of new world cannibals roasting steaks from their white victims over open res.
a group of the separatists in holland after negotiating with the virginia company at length secured rights to settle under its jurisdiction.
but their crowded mayower sixty ve days at sea missed its destination and arrived off the stony coast of new eng land in 1620 with a total of 102 persons.
one had died en route an unusually short casualty list and one had been born and appropriately named oceanus.
fewer than half of the entire party were separatists.
prominent among the nonbelongers was a peppery and stocky soldier of fortune captain myles standish dubbed by one of his critics captain shrimp he later rendered indispensable ser vice as an indian ghter and negotiator.
the pilgrims did not make their initial landing at plymouth rock as commonly supposed but undertook a number of preliminary surveys.
they nally chose for their site the shore of inhospitable plymouth bay.
this area was outside the domain of the virginia company and consequently the settlers became squatters.
they were without legal right to the land and without specic authority to establish a government.
before disembarking the pilgrim leaders drew up and signed the brief mayower compact.
although setting an invaluable precedent for later written constitutions this document was not a constitution at all.
it was a simple agreement to form a crude government and to submit to the will of the majority under the regulations agreed upon.
the compact was signed by forty one adult males eleven of them with the exalted rank of mister though not by the servants and two seamen.
the pact was a promising step toward genuine chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 a hoe a few barrels of corn a suit of clothes and perhaps a small parcel of land.
both virginia and maryland employed the headright system to encourage the importation of servant workers.
under its terms whoever paid the passage of a laborer received the right to acquire fty acres of land.
masters not the servants themselves thus reaped the benets of landownership from the headright system.
some masters men who already had at least modest nancial means soon parlayed their investments in servants into vast holdings in real estate.
they became the great merchant planters lords of sprawling riverfront estates that came to dominate the agriculture and commerce of the southern colonies.
ravenous for both labor and land chesapeake planters brought some 100 000 indentured servants to the region by 1700.
these white slaves represented more than threequarters of all european immigrants to virginia and maryland in the seventeenth century.
indentured servants led a hard but hopeful life in the early days of the chesapeake settlements.
they looked forward to becoming free and acquiring land of their own after completing their term of servitude.
but as prime land became scarcer masters became increasingly resistant to including land grants in freedom dues the servants lot grew harsher as the seventeenth century wore on.
misbehaving servants such as a housemaid who became pregnant or a laborer who killed a hog might be punished with an extended term of ser vice.
even after formal freedom was granted penniless freed workers often had little choice but to hire themselves out for pitifully low wages to their former masters.
frustrated freemen and bacons rebellion an accumulating mass of footloose impoverished freemen drifted discontentedly about the chesapeake region by the late seventeenth century.
mostly single young men they were frustrated by their broken hopes of acquiring land as well as by their gnawing failure to nd single women to marry.
the swelling numbers of these wretched bachelors rattled the established planters.
the virginia assembly in 1670 disfranchised most of the landless knockabouts accusing them of having little interest in the country and causing tumults at the election to the disturbance of his majestys peace virginias governor william berkeley lamented his lot as ruler of this rabble how miserable that man is that governs a people where six parts of seven at least are poor endebted discontented and armed berkeleys misery soon increased.
about a thousand virginians broke out of control in 1676 led by a twenty nine year old planter nathaniel bacon.
many of the rebels were frontiersmen who had been forced into the untamed backcountry in search of arable land.
they ercely resented berkeleys friendly policies toward the indians whose thriving fur trade the governor monopolized.
when berkeley refused to retaliate against a series of brutal indian attacks on frontier settlements bacon and his followers took matters into their own hands.
they fell murderously upon the indians friendly and hostile alike chased berkeley from jamestown and put the torch to the capital.
chaos swept the raw colony as frustrated freemen and resentful servants described as a rabble of the basest sort of people went on a rampage of plundering and pilfering.
as this civil war in virginia ground on bacon suddenly died of disease like so many of his fellow colonists.
berkeley thereupon crushed the uprising with brutal cruelty hanging more than twenty rebels.
back in eng land charles ii complained that old fool has put to death more people in that naked country than i did here for the murder of my father nathaniel bacon ca.
1647 1676 assailed virginias governor william berkeley 1606 1677 in 1676 for having protected favored and emboldened the indians against his majestys loyal subjects never contriving requiring or appointing any due or proper means of satisfaction for their many invasions robberies and murders committed upon us.
for his part governor berkeley declared i have lived thirty four years amongst you virginians as uncorrupt and diligent as ever a governor was while bacon is a man of two years amongst you his person and qualities unknown to most of you and to all men else by any virtuous act that ever i heard of.
i will take counsel of wiser men than myself but mr bacon has none about him but the lowest of the people.
an indentured servants contract 1746 egal documents such as this contract signed in virginia in 1746 not only provide evidence about the ever changing rules by which societies have regulated their affairs but also furnish rich information about the conditions of life and the terms of human relationships in the past.
this agreement between thomas clayton and james grif n provides a reminder that not all indentured servants in early america came from abroad.
indentured servitude could be equivalent to an apprenticeship in which a young person traded several years of ser vice to a master in exchange for instruction in the masters craft.
here clayton pledges himself to ve years in grif ns employ in return for a promise to initiate the young man into the mystery of the masters craft.
why might the masters trade be described as a mystery.
from the evidence of this contract what are the principal objectives of each of the parties to it.
what problems does each anticipate.
what obligations does each assume.
what does the consent of claytons mother to the contract suggest about the young mans situation.
l thinking globally the atlantic slave trade 1500 1860 i n the three and a half centuries following columbuss discovery slave merchants crammed more than 11 million african men women and children into the holds of ships and carried them like common cargo to the new world.
roughly 2 million souls perished midvoyage before confronting the agonies and indignities of slavery in the americas.
as table 4 1 shows some 400 000 enslaved africans came ashore in north america while the overwhelming majority were destined for latin america and the caribbean see map 4 1.
european trading companies and new england merchants reaped enormous prots from this human trafcking and the slavers were not the only ones to benet.
slave trading fed off the insatiable appetite for sugar tobacco cotton and other new world products that europeans and americans craved.
it thrived too on the willingness of africans themselves to sell their fellow africans to european and american slavers.
marketing human beings on such a vast scale required the complicity of african warlords slave ship captains and crews stevedores planters tea drinkers tailors bakers smokers bankers and a host of middlemen on four continents.
only in the nineteenth century did nations in europe and the americas begin to outlaw the international slave trade see the struggle to abolish slavery p 388 beginning with britain in 1807.
after congress banned further slave importations to the united states in 1808 a ourishing internal market developed.
masters in the upper south bred slaves for sale on the rapidly expanding cotton frontier in the old southwest.
europeans as well as americans in the free states lent indirect support to that domestic slave trade as they continued to consume slave produced goods.
an african slave cofe yoked and bound these men women and children were on their way to a coastal slave market where they would be herded aboard ship for the americas.
liverpool bristol europe north america constantinople new york baltimore azores charleston 90w 30n st ind cape verde is.
ies 4 guiana zon r am a 0 arguin senegambia sierra leone windward coast gold coast bight of benin bight of biafra equator 0.
south america brazi brazil 00 l 3 9 co n go r loango indian ocean n benguela madagascar tropic of capricorn paran r.
rio de janeiro buenos aires 60w muscat africa angola luanda recife bahia arabia.
main sources of african slaves main slave trade routes from africa main areas of slave importation in the western hemisphere we r ocean o c ea n cartagena venezuela ecuador pacif ic asia baghdad r er nig haiti spanish mainland 430 000 euro 10 0 0 p e a tla n ti c puerto rico canary is.
nile jamaica erica am 0 0 mexico mexico city damascus sea cairo tropic of cancer rra nea n tripoli tangier madeira n new orleans cuba lisbon m algiers tunis e d i t e 1 000 2 000 km.
1 000 30w 30s 2 000 mi.
0 map 4 1 main sources and destinations of african slaves c 1500 1860 more than three centuries of the african diaspora scattered blacks throughout the new world.
britains north american colonies the future united states constituted the extreme northern periphery of this system receiving about 400 000 of the nearly ten million arrivals the great majority of whom ended up in the west indies and brazil.
30e 60e interactive map the middle passage the middle passage referred to the transatlantic sea voyage that brought slaves to the new world the long and hazardous middle segment of a journey that began with a forced march to the african coast and ended with a trek into the american interior.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 the distant eng lish king could scarcely imagine the depths of passion and fear that bacons rebellion excited in virginia.
bacon had ignited the smoldering resentments of landless former servants and he had pitted the hardscrabble backcountry frontiersmen against the haughty gentry of the tidewater plantations.
the rebellion was now suppressed but these tensions remained.
lordly planters surrounded by a still seething sea of malcontents anxiously looked about for less troublesome laborers to toil in the restless tobacco kingdom.
their eyes soon lit on africa.
colonial slavery more than 7 million africans were carried in chains to the new world in the three centuries or so following columbuss landing see thinking globally the atlantic slave trade 1500 1860 pp.
only about 400 000 of them ended up in north america the great majority arriving after 1700.
most of the early human cargoes were hauled to spanish and portuguese south america or to the sugar rich west indies.
africans had been brought to jamestown as early as 1619 but as late as 1670 they numbered only about 2 000 in virginia out of a total population of some 35 000 persons and about 7 percent of the 50 000 people in the southern plantation colonies as a whole.
hard pinched white colonists struggling to stay alive and to hack crude clearings out of the forests could not afford to pay high prices for slaves who might die soon after arrival.
white servants might die too but they were far less costly.
the mennonites of germantown pennsylvania recorded the earliest known protest against slavery in america in 1688 there is a saying that we should do to all men like as we will be done ourselves.
but to bring men hither or to rob and sell them against their will we stand against.
pray what thing in the world can be done worse towards us than if men should rob or steal us away and sell us for slaves to strange countries separating husbands from their wives and children.
drastic change came in the 1680s.
rising wages in eng land shrank the pool of penniless folk willing to gamble on a new life or an early death as indentured servants in america.
at the same time the large planters were growing increasingly fearful of the multitudes of potentially mutinous former servants in their midst.
by the mid 1680s for the rst time black slaves outnumbered white servants among the plantation colonies new arrivals.
in 1698 the royal african company rst chartered in 1672 lost its crown granted monopoly on carrying slaves to the colonies.
enterprising americans especially rhode islanders rushed to cash in on the lucrative slave trade and the supply of slaves rose steeply.
more than ten thousand africans were pushed ashore in america in the decade after 1700 and tens of thousands more in the next half century.
blacks accounted for nearly half the population of virginia by 1750.
in south carolina they outnumbered whites two to one.
most of the slaves who reached north america came from the west coast of africa especially the area stretching from present day senegal to angola.
they were originally captured by african coastal tribes who traded them in crude markets on the shimmering tropical beaches to itinerant european and american esh merchants.
usually branded and bound the captives were herded aboard sweltering ships for the gruesome middle passage on which death rates ran as high as 20 percent.
terried survivors were eventually shoved onto auction blocks in new world ports like newport rhode island or charleston south carolina where a giant slave market traded in human misery for more than a century.
a few of the earliest african immigrants gained their freedom and some even became slaveowners themselves.
but as the number of africans in their midst increased dramatically toward the end of the seventeenth century white colonists reacted remorselessly to this supposed racial threat.
earlier in the century the legal difference between a slave and a servant was unclear.
but now the law began to make sharp distinctions between the two largely on the basis of race.
beginning in virginia in 1662 statutes appeared that formally decreed the iron conditions of slavery for blacks.
these earliest slave codes made blacks and their children the property or chattels for life of their white masters.
some colonies made it a crime to teach a slave to read or write.
not even conversion to christianity could qualify a slave for freedom.
thus did the god fearing whites put the fear of god into their hapless black laborers.
slavery might have begun in america for economic reasons the origins of american slavery the slave ship albatross 1846 this eyewitness painting captures the dankness gloom and despair that reigned in the slavers cargo hold.
but by the end of the seventeenth century it was clear that racial discrimination also powerfully molded the american slave system.
africans in america in the deepest south slave life was especially severe.
the climate was hostile to health and the labor was life draining.
the widely scattered south carolina rice and indigo plantations were lonely hells on earth where gangs of mostly male africans toiled and perished.
only fresh imports could sustain the slave population under these loathsome conditions.
blacks in the tobacco growing chesapeake region had a somewhat easier lot.
tobacco was a less physically demanding crop than those of the deeper south.
tobacco plantations were larger and closer to one another than rice plantations.
the size and proximity of these plantations permitted the slaves more frequent contact with friends and relatives.
by about 1720 the proportion of females in the chesapeake slave population had begun to rise making family life possible.
the captive black population of the chesapeake area soon began to grow not only through new imports but also through its own fertility making it one of the few slave societies in history to perpetuate itself by its own natural reproduction.
native born african americans contributed to the growth of a stable and distinctive slave culture a mixture of african and american elements of speech religion and folkways see makers of america from african to african american pp.
on the sea islands off south carolinas coast blacks evolved a unique language gullah probably a corruption of angola the african region from which many of them had come.
it blended eng lish with several african languages including yoruba igbo and hausa.
through it many african words have passed into american speech such as goober peanut gumbo okra and voodoo witchcraft.
the ringshout a west african religious dance performed by shuf ing in a circle while answering a preachers shouts was brought to colonial america by slaves and eventually contributed to the development of jazz.
the banjo and the bongo drum were other african contributions to american culture.
slaves also helped mightily to build the country with their labor.
a few became skilled artisans carpenters bricklayers and tanners.
but chiey they performed the sweaty toil of clearing swamps grubbing chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 rice cultivation in the colonial south rice growing imported from africa along with african slaves to work the swampy rice elds made south carolina the rice basket of the british empire.
out trees and other menial tasks.
condemned to life under the lash slaves naturally pined for freedom.
the new york slave revolt that erupted in 1712 cost the lives of nine whites and caused the execution of twenty one blacks some of them burned at the stake over a slow re.
a south carolina slave revolt erupted in 1739 when more than fty resentful blacks along the stono river tried to march to spanish florida only to be stopped by the local militia.
but in the end enslaved africans in the south proved to be a more tightly controlled labor force than the white indentured servants they gradually replaced.
no slave uprising in american history matched the scale of bacons rebellion.
southern society as slavery spread the gaps in the souths social structure widened.
the rough equality of poverty and disease of the early days was giving way to a de ned hierarchy of wealth and status in the early eighteenth century.
at the top of this southern social ladder perched a small but powerful covey of great planters.
owning gangs of slaves and vast domains of land the planters ruled the regions economy and virtually monopolized political power.
a clutch of extended clans such as the fitzhughs the lees and the washingtons possessed among them horizonless tracts of virginia real estate and together they dominated the house of burgesses.
just before the revolu tionary war 70 percent of the leaders of the virginia legislature came from families established in virginia before 1690 the famed rst families of virginia or ffvs yet legend to the contrary these great seventeenthcentury merchant planters were not silk swathed cavaliers gallantly imitating the ways of eng lish country gentlemen.
they did eventually build stately riverfront manors occasionally rode to the hounds and some of them even cultivated the arts and accumulated distinguished libraries.
but for the most part they were a hard working businesslike lot laboring long hours over the problems of plantation management.
few problems were more vexatious than the unruly often surly servants.
one virginia governor had such difculty keeping his servants sober that he struck a deal allowing them to get drunk the next day if they would only lay off the liquor long enough to look after his guests at a celebration of the queens birthday in 1711.
beneath the planters far beneath them in wealth prestige and political power were the small farmers the largest social group.
they tilled their modest plots and might own one or two slaves but they lived a ragged hand to mouth existence.
still lower on the social scale were the landless whites most of them luckless former indentured servants.
beneath them were those persons still serving out the term of their indenture.
their numbers gradually diminished as black slaves increasingly replaced white indentured servants toward the end of the seventeenth century.
the op the colonial south a merchant planters home and its dining room simple by later standards this house was home to the family of a substantial planter in the early eighteenth century.
it stands on land in the virginia tidewater region rst acquired by adam thoroughgood who arrived in the virginia colony as an indentured servant in 1621.
by 1635 as a freeman he had recruited 105 settlers to the colony and was rewarded according to the practice of the headright system with the title to some 5 250 acres along the lynnhaven river.
there his great grandson erected this house in about 1720.
it was continuously occupied by the thoroughgood family for more than a century until the 1860s.
pressed black slaves of course remained enchained in societys basement.
few cities sprouted in the colonial south and consequently an urban professional class including lawyers and nanciers was slow to emerge.
southern life revolved around the great plantations distantly isolated from one another.
waterways provided the principal means of transportation.
roads were so wretched that in bad weather funeral parties could not reach church burial grounds an obstacle that accounts for the development of family burial plots in the south a practice unlike anything in old eng land or new eng land.
charleston south carolina founded in 1680 charleston grew to become the bustling seaport pictured in this drawing done in the 1730s.
charleston was by then the largest city in the mostly rural southern colonies.
it ourished as a seaport for the shipment to england of slave grown carolina rice.
makers of america from african to the great africanafrican american american migration d ragged in chains from west african shores the rst african americans struggled to preserve their diverse heritages from the ravages of slavery.
their children the rst generation of american born slaves melded these various african traditions guinean igbo yoruba angolan into a distinctive african american culture.
their achievement sustained them during the cruelties of enslavement and has endured to enrich american life to this day.
with the arrival of the rst africans in the seventeenth century a cornucopia of african traditions poured into the new world handicrafts and skills in numerous trades a plethora of languages styles of music and cuisines even rice planting techniques that conquered the inhospitable soil of south carolina.
it was north americas rice paddies tilled by experienced west africans that introduced rice into the english diet and furnished so many eng lish tables with the sticky staple.
these rst american slaves were mostly males.
upon arrival they were sent off to small isolated farms where social contact with other africans especially women was an unheard of luxury.
yet their legal status was at rst uncertain.
a few slaves were able to buy their freedom in the seventeenth century.
one anthony johnson of northampton county virginia actually became a slaveholder himself.
but by the beginning of the eighteenth century a settled slave society was emerging in the southern colonies.
laws tightened slave traders stepped up their deliveries of human cargo large plantations formed.
most signicantly a new generation of american born slaves joined their forebears at labor in the elds.
by 1740 large groups of slaves lived together on sprawling plantations the american born outnumbered the africanborn and the importation of african slaves slowed.
forging a common culture and nding a psychological weapon with which to resist their masters and preserve their dignity were daunting challenges for american born slaves.
plantation life was beastly an endless cycle of miserable toil in the eld or foundry from sunup to sundown.
female slaves were forced to above africans destined for slavery this engraving from 1830 is an example of antislavery propaganda in the pre civil war era.
it shows hapless africans being brought ashore in america under the whips of slave traders and ironically under the gurative shadow of the national capitol.
right advertisements for slave sales in charleston south carolina 1753 charleston had the largest slave market in the colonies.
left yarrow mamout by charles willson peale 1819 when peale painted this portrait mamout was over one hundred years old.
a devout muslim brought to maryland as a slave he eventually bought his freedom and settled in georgetown.
right the emergence of an african american culture in this scene from the mid nineteenth century african americans play musical instruments of european derivation like the ddle as well as instruments of african origin like the bones and banjo a vivid illustration of the blending of the two cultures in the crucible of the new world.
perform double duty.
after a days backbreaking work women were expected to sit up for hours spinning weaving or sewing to clothe themselves and their families.
enslaved women also lived in constant fear of sexual exploitation by predatory masters.
yet eventually a vibrant slave culture began to ower.
and precisely because of the diversity of african peoples represented in america the culture that emerged was a uniquely new world creation.
it derived from no single african model and incorporated many western elements though often with signicant modications.
slave religion illustrates this pattern.
cut off from their native african religions most slaves became christians but fused elements of african and western traditions and drew their own conclusions from scripture.
white christians might point to christs teachings of humility and obedience to encourage slaves to stay in their place but black christians emphasized gods role in freeing the hebrews from slavery and saw jesus as the messiah who would deliver them from bondage.
they also often retained an african denition of heaven as a place where they would be reunited with their ancestors.
at their sunday and evening time prayer meetings slaves also patched african remnants onto conventional christian ritual.
black methodists for example ingeniously evaded the traditional methodist ban on dancing as sinful three or four people would stand still in a ring clapping hands and beating time with their feet but never crossing their legs thus not ofcially dancing while others walked around the ring singing in unison.
this ringshout derived from african practices modern american dances including the charleston in turn derived from this african american hybrid.
christian slaves also often used outwardly religious songs as encoded messages about escape or rebellion.
good news the chariots comin might sound like an innocent hymn about divine deliverance but it could also announce the arrival of a guide to lead fugitives safely to the north.
similarly wade in the water taught eeing slaves one way of covering their trail.
the negro spirituals that took shape as a distinctive form of american music thus had their origins in both christianity and slavery.
indeed much american music was born in the slave quarters from african importations.
jazz with its meandering improvisations and complex syncopations and rhythms constitutes the most famous example.
but this rich cultural harvest came at the cost of generations of human agony.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 the new england family nature smiled more benignly on pioneer new englanders than on their disease plagued fellow colonists to the south.
clean water and cool temperatures retarded the spread of killer microbes.
in stark contrast to the fate of chesapeake immigrants settlers in seventeenth century new eng land added ten years to their life spans by migrating from the old world.
one settler claimed that a sip of new englands air is better than a whole draft of old eng lands ale the rst generations of puritan colonists enjoyed on the average about seventy years on this earth not very different from the life expectancy of present day americans.
in further contrast with the chesapeake new englanders tended to migrate not as single individuals but as families and the family remained at the center of new eng land life.
almost from the outset new eng lands population grew from natural reproductive increase.
the people were remarkably fertile even if the soil was not.
early marriage encouraged the booming birthrate.
women typically wed by their early twenties and produced babies about every two years thereafter until menopause.
ceaseless childbearing drained the vitality of many pioneer women as the weather eroded colonial tombstones eloquently reveal.
a number of the largest families were borne by several mothers though claims about the frequency of death in childbirth have probably been exaggerated.
but the dread of death in the birthing bed haunted many women and it was small wonder that they came to fear pregnancy.
a married woman could expect to experience up to ten pregnancies and rear as many as eight surviving children.
massachusetts governor william phips was one of twenty seven children all by the same mother.
a new eng land woman might well have dependent children living in her household from the earliest days of her marriage up until the day of her death and child raising became in essence her full time occupation.
the longevity of the new eng landers contributed to family stability.
children grew up in nurturing environments where they were expected to learn habits of obedience above all.
they received guidance not only from their parents but from their grandparents as well.
this novel intergenerational continuity has inspired the observation that new eng land invented grandparents.
family stability was reected in low new england early acquired a reputation as a healthy environment.
urging his fellow englishmen to emigrate to the massachusetts bay colony in 1630 the reverend john white described new england somewhat fancifully as follows mrs elizabeth freake and baby mary this portrait of a boston mother and child in about 1674 suggests the strong family ties that characterized early new england society.
no country yields a more propitious air for our temper than new england.
many of our people that have found themselves always weak and sickly at home have become strong and healthy there perhaps by the dryness of the air and constant temper ature of it which seldom varies from cold to heat as it does with us.
neither are the natives at any time troubled with pain of teeth soreness of eyes or ache in their limbs.
pioneering new englanders graveyard art these new england colonists evidently died in the prime of life.
carving likenesses on grave markers was a common way of commemorating the dead.
premarital pregnancy rates again in contrast with the chesapeake and in the generally strong tranquil social structure characteristic of colonial new eng land.
still other contrasts came to differentiate the southern and new eng land ways of life.
oddly enough the fragility of southern families advanced the economic security of southern women especially of womens property rights.
because southern men frequently died young leaving widows with small children to support the southern colonies generally allowed married women to retain separate title to their property and gave widows the right to inherit their husbands estates.
but in new eng land puritan lawmakers worried that recognizing womens separate property rights would undercut the unity of married persons by acknowledging con icting interests between husband and wife.
new eng land women therefore usually gave up their property rights when they married.
yet in contrast to old eng land the laws of new eng land made secure provision for the property rights of widows and even extended important protections to women within marriage.
a true wife accounts subjection her honor one massachusetts puritan leader declared expressing a sentiment then common in europe as well as america.
but in the new world a rudimentary conception of womens rights as individuals was beginning to appear in the seventeenth century.
women still could not vote and the popular attitude persisted that they were morally weaker than men a belief rooted in the biblical tale of eves treachery in the garden of eden.
but a husbands power over his wife was not absolute.
the new eng land authorities could and did intervene to restrain abusive spouses.
one man was punished for kicking his wife off a stool another was disciplined for drawing an uncivil portrait of his mate in the snow.
women also had some spheres of autonomy.
midwifery assisting with childbirths was a virtual female monopoly and midwives often fostered networks of women bonded by the common travails of motherhood.
one boston midwife alone delivered over three thousand babies.
above all the laws of puritan new eng land sought to defend the integrity of marriages.
divorce was exceedingly rare and the authorities commonly ordered separated couples to reunite.
outright abandonment was among the very few permissible grounds for divorce.
adultery was another.
convicted adulterers especially if they were women were whipped in public and forced forever after to wear the capital letter a cut out in cloth and sewed on their outer garments the basis for nathaniel hawthornes famous 1850 tale the scarlet letter.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 life in the new england towns sturdy new eng landers evolved a tightly knit society the basis of which was small villages and farms.
this development was natural in a people anchored by geography and hemmed in by the indians the french and the dutch.
puritanism likewise made for unity of purpose and for concern about the moral health of the whole community.
it was no accident that the nineteenth century crusade for abolishing black slavery with massachusetts agitators at the forefront sprang in some degree from the new eng land conscience with its puritan roots.
in the chesapeake region the expansion of settlement was somewhat random and was usually undertaken by lone wolf planters on their own initiative but new eng land society grew in a more orderly fashion.
new towns were legally chartered by the colonial authorities and the distribution of land was entrusted to the steady hands of sober minded town fathers or proprietors after receiving a grant of land from the colonial legislature the proprietors moved themselves and their families to the designated place and laid out their town.
it usually consisted of a meetinghouse which served as both the place of worship and the town hall surrounded by houses.
also marked out was a village green where the militia could drill.
each family received several parcels of land including a woodlot for fuel a tract suitable for growing crops and another for pasturing animals.
a colonial primer religious instruction loomed large in early colonial schools.
this eighteenth century textbook from germantown pennsylvania taught lessons of social duty and christian faith as well as reading and writing.
the massachusetts school law of 1647 stated it being one chief project of the old deluder satan to keep men from the knowledge of the scriptures as in former times by keeping them in an unknown tongue it is therefore ordered that every township in this jurisdiction after the lord has increased them in number to fty householders shall then forthwith appoint one within their town to teach all such children as shall resort to him to write and read whose wages shall be paid either by the parents or masters of such children or by the inhabitants in general.
towns of more than fty families were required to provide elementary education and roughly half of the adults knew how to read and write.
as early as 1636 just six years after the colonys founding the massachusetts puritans established harvard college today the oldest corporation in america to train local boys for the ministry.
only in 1693 eighty six years after staking out jamestown did the virginians establish their rst college william and mary.
puritans ran their own churches and democracy in congregational church government led logically to democracy in political government.
the town meeting the new england character in which the adult males met together and each man voted was a showcase and a classroom for democracy.
new eng land villagers from the outset gathered regularly in their meetinghouses to elect their ofcials appoint schoolmasters and discuss such mundane matters as road repairs.
the town meeting observed thomas jefferson was the best school of political liberty the world ever saw the half way covenant and the salem witch trials from about this time onward women were in the majority in the puritan congregations.
women also played a prominent role in one of new eng lands most frightening religious episodes.
a group of adolescent girls in salem massachusetts claimed to have been bewitched by certain older women.
a hysterical witch hunt ensued leading to the legal lynching in 1692 of twenty individuals nineteen of whom were hanged and one of whom was pressed to death.
two dogs were also hanged.
larger scale witchcraft persecutions were then common in europe and several outbreaks had already yet worries plagued the god fearing pioneers of these tidy new eng land settlements.
the pressure of a growing population was gradually dispersing the puritans onto outlying farms far from the control of church and neighbors.
and although the core of puritan belief still burned brightly the passage of time was dampening the rst generations aming religious zeal.
about the middle of the seventeenth century a new form of sermon began to be heard from puritan pulpits the jeremiad.
taking their cue from the doom saying old testament prophet jeremiah earnest preachers scolded parishioners for their waning piety.
especially alarming was the apparent decline in conversions testimonials by individuals that they had received gods grace and therefore deserved to be admitted to the church as members of the elect.
troubled ministers in 1662 announced a new formula for church membership the half way covenant.
this new arrangement modied the covenant or the agreement between the church and its adherents to admit to baptism but not full communion the children of baptized but not yet converted existing members.
on conversion see p.
by conferring partial membership rights in the once exclusive puritan congregations the half way covenant weakened the distinction between the elect and others further diluting the spiritual purity of the original settlers godly community.
the half way covenant dramatized the difculty of maintaining at fever pitch the religious devotion of the founding generation.
jeremiads continued to thunder from the pulpits but as time went on the doors of the puritan churches swung fully open to all comers whether converted or not.
this widening of church membership gradually erased the distinction between the elect and other members of society.
in effect strict religious purity was sacriced somewhat to the cause of wider religious participation.
interestingly matthew hopkinss witch finder hopkins was a seventeenth century english witch hunter whose techniques included watching suspects to see if diabolical creatures in the form of common animals fed on the alleged witchs blood.
he also urged that suspected witches be bound hand and foot and tossed in a pond.
the innocent he claimed would sink and often drown while the guilty would oat to the surface.
his methods brought death to hundreds of women men and children in eastern england in the 1640s.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 ared forth in the colonies often directed at propertyowning women.
but the reign of horror in salem grew not only from the superstitions and prejudices of the age but also from the turmoil of the wars with the indians as well as the unsettled social and religious conditions of the rapidly evolving massachusetts village.
most of the accused witches came from families associated with salems burgeoning market economy their accusers came largely from subsistence farming families in salems hinterland.
the salem witch trials thus reected the widening social stratication of new eng land as well as the fear of many religious traditionalists that the puritan heritage was being eclipsed by yankee commercialism.
the witchcraft hysteria eventually ended in 1693 when the governor alarmed by an accusation against his own wife and supported by the more responsible members of the clergy prohibited any further trials and pardoned those already convicted.
twenty years later a penitent massachusetts legislature annulled the convictions of the witches and made reparations to their heirs.
the salem witchcraft delusion marked an all time high in the american experience of popular passions run wild.
witch hunting passed into the american vocabulary as a metaphor for the often dangerously irrational urge to nd a scapegoat for social resentments.
the new england way of life oddly enough the story of new eng land was largely written by rocks.
the heavily glaciated soil was strewn with countless stones many of which were forced to the surface after a winter freeze.
in a sense the puritans did not possess the soil it possessed them by shaping their character.
scratching a living from the protesting earth was an early american success story.
backbending toil put a premium on industry and pennypinching frugality for which new eng landers became famous.
traditionally sharp yankee traders some of them palming off wooden nutmegs made their mark.
connecticut came in time to be called good humoredly the nutmeg state cynics exaggerated when they said that the three stages of progress in new eng land were to get on to get honor to get honest the grudging land also left colonial new eng land less ethnically mixed than its southern neighbors.
noneng lish immigrants were less attracted to a site where the soil was so stony and the sermons so sulfurous.
climate likewise molded new eng land where the summers were often uncomfortably hot and the winters cruelly cold.
many early immigrants complained of the regions extremes of weather.
yet the soil and climate of new eng land eventually encouraged a diversied agriculture and industry.
staple products like tobacco did not ourish as in the south.
black slavery although attempted could not exist protably on small farms especially where the surest crop was stones.
no broad fertile expanses comparable to those in the tidewater south beckoned people inland.
the mountains ran fairly close to the shore and the rivers were generally short and rapid.
and just as the land shaped new eng landers so they shaped the land.
the native americans had left an early imprint on the new eng land earth.
they traditionally beat trails through the woods as they migrated seasonally for hunting and shing.
they periodically burned the woodlands to restore leafy rst growth forests that would sustain the deer population.
the indians recognized the right to use the land but the concept of exclusive individual ownership of the land was alien to them.
the eng lish settlers had a different philosophy.
they condemned the indians for wasting the earth by underutilizing its bounty and used this logic to justify their own expropriation of the land from the native inhabitants.
consistent with this outlook the europeans felt a virtual duty to improve the land by clearing woodlands for pasturage and tillage building roads and fences and laying out permanent settlements.
some of the greatest changes resulted from the introduction of livestock.
the eng lish brought pigs horses sheep and cattle from europe to the settlements.
because the growing herds needed ever more pastureland the colonists were continually clearing forests.
the animals voracious appetites and heavy hooves compacted the soil speeding erosion and ooding.
in some cases the combined effect of these developments actually may have changed local climates and made some areas even more susceptible to extremes of heat and cold.
repelled by the rocks the hardy new eng landers turned instinctively to their ne natural harbors.
hacking timber from their dense forests they became experts in shipbuilding and commerce.
they also ceaselessly exploited the self perpetuating codsh lode off the coast of newfoundland the shy gold mines of new eng land which have yielded more wealth than all the trea sure chests of the aztecs.
during colonial the early settlers and the land days the wayfarer seldom got far from the sound of the ax and hammer or the swift rush of the ship down the ways to the sea or the smell of rotting sh.
as a reminder of the importance of shing a handsome replica of the sacred cod is proudly displayed to this day in the massachusetts statehouse in boston.
the combination of calvinism soil and climate in new eng land made for energy purposefulness sternness stubbornness self reliance and resourcefulness.
righteous new eng landers prided themselves on being gods chosen people.
they long boasted that boston was the hub of the universe at least in spirit.
a famous jingle of later days ran i come from the city of boston the home of the bean and the cod where the cabots speak only to lowells and the lowells speak only to god.
new eng land has had an incalculable impact on the rest of the nation.
ousted by their sterile soil thousands of new eng landers scattered from ohio to oregon and even hawaii.
they sprinkled the land with new communities modeled on the orderly new eng land town with its central green and tidy schoolhouse and its simple town meeting democracy.
yankee ingenuity originally fostered by the inty elds and comfortless climate of new eng land came to be claimed by all americans as a proud national trait.
and the fabled new eng land conscience born of the steadfast puritan heritage left a legacy of high idealism in the national character and inspired many later reformers.
the early settlers days and ways the cycles of the seasons and the sun set the schedules of all the earliest american colonists men as well as women northerners as well as southerners blacks as well as whites.
the overwhelming majority of colonists were farmers.
they planted in the spring tended their crops in the summer harvested in the fall and prepared in the winter to begin the cycle anew.
they usually rose at dawn and went to bed at dusk.
chores might be performed after nightfall only if they were worth the candle a phrase that has persisted in american speech.
women slave or free on southern plantations or northern farms wove cooked cleaned and cared for children.
men cleared land fenced planted and cropped it cut rewood and butchered livestock as needed.
children helped with all these tasks while picking up such schooling as they could.
life was humble but comfortable by contemporary standards.
compared to most seventeenth century europeans americans lived in afuent abundance.
life and death in colonial america by prudence punderson note the artists initials p p on the cofn.
this embroidery suggests the stoic resolve of a colonial woman calmly depicting the inevitable progression of her own life from the cradle to the grave.
chapter 4 american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 land was relatively cheap though somewhat less available in the planter dominated south than elsewhere.
in the northern and middle colonies an acre of virgin soil cost about what american carpenters could earn in one day as wages which were roughly three times those of their eng lish counterparts.
dukes dont emigrate the saying goes for if people enjoy wealth and security they are not likely to risk exposing their lives in the wilderness.
similarly the very poorest members of a society may not possess even the modest means needed to pull up stakes and seek a fresh start in life.
accordingly most white migrants to early colonial america came neither from the aristocracy nor from the dregs of european society with the partial exception of the impoverished indentured servants.
crude frontier life did not in any case permit the agrant display of class distinctions and seventeenthcentury society in all the colonies had a certain simple sameness to it especially in the more egalitarian new eng land and middle colonies.
yet many settlers who considered themselves to be of the better sort tried to re create on a modied scale the social structure they had known in the old world.
to some extent they succeeded though yeasty democratic forces frustrated their full triumph.
resentment against upper class pretensions helped to spark outbursts like bacons rebellion of 1676 in virginia and the uprising of marylands protestants toward the end of the seventeenth century.
in new york animosity between lordly landholders and aspiring merchants fueled leislers rebellion an ill starred and bloody insurgence that rocked new york city from 1689 to 1691.
for their part would be american blue bloods resented the pretensions of the meaner sort and passed laws to try to keep them in their place.
massachusetts in 1651 prohibited poorer folk from wearing gold or silver lace and in eighteenth century virginia a tailor was ned and jailed for arranging to race his horse a sport only for gentlemen but these efforts to reproduce the nely stratied societies of europe proved feeble in the early american wilderness where equality and democracy found fertile soil at least for white people.
chronology first africans arrive in virginia 1689 leislers rebellion in new york population of eng lish colonies in america about 2 000 salem witch trials in massachusetts harvard college founded college of william and mary founded half way covenant for congregational church membership established royal african company slave trade monopoly ended virginia assembly disfranchises landless freemen population of eng lish colonies in america about 250 000 bacons rebellion in virginia new york city slave revolt 1680s mass expansion of slavery in colonies south carolina slave revolt to learn more key terms indentured servants 69 headright system 70 bacons rebellion 74 royal african company 74 middle passage 74 new york slave revolt 76 south carolina slave revolt stono river 76 people to know congregational church 82 jeremiad 83 half way covenant 83 salem witch trials 84 leislers rebellion 86 william berkeley nathaniel bacon anthony johnson to learn more david cressy coming over migration and communication between england and new england in the seventeenth century 1987 william cronon changes in the land 1983 john demos entertaining satan 1982 a little commonwealth family life in plymouth colony 1970 david hackett fischer albions seed four british folkways in america 1989 richard godbeer escaping salem the other witch hunt of 1692 2005 patrick grif n the people with no name irelands ulster scots americas scots irish and the creation of a british atlantic world 1689 1764 2001 kenneth lockridge new england town dedham 1970 mary beth norton in the devils snare the salem witchcraft crisis of 1692 2002 daniel blake smith inside the great house planter family life in eighteenth century chesapeake society 1980 laurel t ulrich good wives image and reality in the lives of women in northern new england 1650 1750 1982 daniel vickers farmers and fishermen two centuries of work in essex county massachusetts 1630 1850 1994 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 driven from every other corner of the earth freedom of thought and the right of private judgment in matters of conscience direct their course to this happy country as their last asylum.
t he common term thirteen original colonies is misleading.
britain ruled thirty two colonies in north america by 1775 including canada the floridas and various caribbean islands.
but only thirteen of them unfurled the standard of rebellion.
a few of the nonrebels such as canada and jamaica were larger wealthier or more populous than some of the revolting thirteen.
why then did some british colonies eventually strike for their independence while others did not.
part of the answer is to be found in the distinctive social economic and political structures of the thirteen atlantic seaboard colonies and in the halting gradual appearance of a recognizably american way of life.
conquest by the cradle among the distinguishing characteristics that the eventually rebellious settlements shared was lusty population growth.
in 1700 they contained fewer than 300 000 souls about 20 000 of whom were black.
by 1775 2 5 million people inhabited the thirteen colonies of whom about half a million were black.
white immigrants made up nearly 400 000 of the increased number and black forced immigrants accounted for almost as many again.
but most of the spurt stemmed from the remarkable natural fertility of all americans white and black.
to the amazement and dismay of europeans the colonists were doubling their numbers every twenty ve years.
unfriendly dr samuel johnson back in eng land growled that the americans were multiplying like their own rattlesnakes.
they were also a youthful people whose average age in 1775 was about sixteen.
this population boom had political consequences.
in 1700 there were twenty eng lish subjects for each american colonist.
by 1775 the eng lish advantage in numbers had fallen to three to one setting the stage for a momentous shift in the balance of power between the colonies and britain.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website immigration to the colonies ce r en st l aw abenaki maine mass.
n h 200 mi.
new york de er i e l pennsylvania n 70w new york n j hi o sh aw ne e or.
mo un tai ns philadelphia n md.
r i newport conn la se mass.
ra ario tu wa sca ro re nt l o a mingling of the races del.
virginia to philadelphia germans scots irish to the chesapeake africans british convicts at l a n t i c oc ean ta ch north carolina ca ero ap kee pal ach ian n 35 w ba south carolina to charleston africans germans charleston scots irish scots cr colonial america was a melting pot and had been from the outset.
the population although basically eng lish in stock and language was picturesquely mottled with numerous foreign groups see map 5 1.
heavy accented germans constituted about 6 percent of the total population or 150 000 by 1775.
fleeing religious persecution economic oppression and the ravages of war they had ocked to america in the early 1700s and had settled chiey in pennsylvania.
they belonged to several different protestant sects primarily lutheran and thus further enhanced the religious diversity of the colony.
known popularly but erroneously as the pennsylvania dutch a corruption of the german word deutsch for german they totaled about onethird of the colonys population.
in parts of philadelphia the street signs were painted in both german and eng lish.
these german newcomers moved into the backcountry of pennsylvania where their splendid stone barns gave and still give mute evidence of industry and prosperity.
not having been brought up eng lish they had no deep rooted loyalty to the british crown and they clung tenaciously to their german language and customs.
the scots irish who in 1775 numbered around 175 000 or 7 percent of the population were an important non eng lish group although they spoke eng lish.
they were not irish at all but turbulent scots lowlanders.
over many decades they had been transplanted to northern ireland where they had not prospered.
the irish catholics already there hating scottish presbyterianism resented the intruders and still do the source of many of the modern day troubles in the northern ireland province of ulster.
the economic life of the scots irish was severely hampered especially when the eng lish government placed burdensome restrictions on their production of linens and woolens.
n r ne ca ca yu on ga on on dag ei a mo da ha wk the bulk of the population was cooped up east of the alleghenies although by 1775 a vanguard of pioneers had trickled into the stump studded clearings of tennessee and kentucky.
the most populous colonies in 1775 were virginia massachusetts pennsylvania north carolina and maryland in that order.
only four communities could properly be called cities philadelphia including suburbs was rst with about 34 000 residents trailed by new york boston and charleston.
about 90 percent of the people lived in rural areas.
ee k 80w georgia savannah creek indian lands 30n 75w predominant immigrant group african scots irish dutch english and welsh german scottish no european settlement map 5 1 immigrant groups in 1775 america was already a nation of diverse nationalities in the colonial period.
this map shows the great variety of immigrant groups especially in pennsylvania and new york.
it also illustrates the tendency of later arrivals particularly the scots irish to push into the backcountry.
interactive map chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era beginnings to 1763 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic 4763 4800 the living constitution chapter 3 the growth of a young nation w0 4850 chapter 4 the union in peril 1850 1877 johrerolbct as you read this textbook you will encounter various historical eras.
7ou will use your knowledge of these eras the unit s content and the major characteristics of u s history to create a webpage that identifies the eras in this unit and describes their defining characteristics.
use pages 192 197 to help you organize your thoughts.
sigdng of the constitution by howard chandler christy to 1877 ir te 1.
r yir and skills teks section 1 the americas west africa and europe main idea on the eve of their interaction native american west african and european peoples lived in complex societies.
is founded.
corresponds to b c e or before the common era a d corresponds to c e or common era 2 chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era section 2 spanish north america main idea beginning with the voyage of christopher columbus the spanish built a vast colonial empire in the americas.
section 3 early british colonies main idea beginning in the early 1600s the english established colonies along the eastern shore of north america.
section 4 the colonies come of age main idea even though both northern and southern colonies prospered many colonists began to question british authority.
c 20 000 bdh asian peoples migrate to america americas world 20 000 1000 history mexico s ancient civilizations 7 video i nt eragt you live in the 15th century.
your society hunts freely grows crops of great variety and trades with nearby cultures.
now you sense that your world is about to change the ships you see approaching are like nothing you have encountered before.
as you read the chapter and explore the issues below use the annotation tools in your ebook to record your thoughts.
explore the issues how would you react to a people whose appearance and language are unlike anything you have ever known.
what can happen when one culture imposes its values on another.
1492 columbus first reaches north america.
1521 the spanish destroy the aztec empire.
1607 jamestown is founded.
1620 pilgrims settle in plymouth.
1400 1500 1600 1440 johann gutenberg develops his printing press.
1534 the reformation begins in england with the act of supremacy.
jl681 william penn founds pennsylvania.
117541 french and indian war begins.
3 588 1642 english civil england war begins between i defeats royalist forces and spanish parliamentary forces armada.
led by oliver cromwell.
17631 with the treaty of paris britain acquires a vast north american empire.
review unit 3 the americas west africa and europe main idea j why it matters now j.
terms names on the eve of their interaction native american west african and european peoples lived in complex societies.
the interaction of these cultures helped create the present day culture of the united states.
nomadic aztec anasazi pueblo iroquois benin kongo islam christianity reformation renaissance one american sstory taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how trade and commerce affected particular societies.
essie parrish a native american spiritual leader and healer kept alive stories from a time when her people the kashaya porno flourished along the northern california coast.
one day in 1958 she invited robert oswalt an anthropologist at the university of california to time travel with her to the 1540s.
as parrish spoke the centuries rolled back.
a personal voice essie parrish in the old days before the white people came up here there was a boat sailing on the ocean from the south.
because before that the kashaya porno had never seen a boat they said our world must be coming to an end.
couldnt we do something.
this big bird floating on the ocean is from somewhere probably from up high t hey promised our father a feast saying that destruction was upon them.
when they had done so they watched the ship sail way up north and disappear.
they were saying that nothing had happened to them the big bird person had sailed northward without doing anything because of the promise of a feast consequently they held a feast and a big dance 99 quoted in kashaya texts dressed for a ceremony in the 1950s spiritual leader essie parrish wears a feathered headdress and holds two bead covered staffs.
in this chapter you will learn about three complex societies that met in north america in the late 1400s the european the west african and the native american.
however it is with the ancient peoples of the americas that american history actually begins.
ancient cultures in the americas no one knows for sure when the first americans arrived but it may have been as long as 22 000 years ago.
at that time the glaciers of the last ice age had frozen 4 chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era main idea analyzing effects what were the effects of agriculture on the hunting and gathering people of the americas.
vast quantities of the earth s water lowering sea levels and possibly creating a land bridge between asia and alaska across what is now the bering strait.
ancient hunters may have trekked across the frozen land known as beringia into north america.
hunting and gathering archaeologists believe that the earliest americans lived as big game hunters.
that way of life changed around 12 000 to 10 000 years ago when temperatures warmed glaciers melted and sea levels rose once again.
the land bridge disappeared under the bering sea bringing to an end land travel between the asian and north american continents.
as the climate grew warmer the large animals no longer thrived.
people gradually switched to hunting smaller game and fish and gathering nuts and berries.
agriculture develops while many ancient groups settled in north america others continued south into what is now mexico and south america.
between 10 000 and 5 000 years ago an agricultural revolution quietly took place in what is now central mexico.
there people began to plant crops.
eventually agricultural techniques spread throughout the americas.
the introduction of agriculture made it possible for people to settle in one place and to store surplus food.
from this agricultural base developed larger communities.
however some native american cultures never adopted agriculture and remained nomadic moving from place to place in search of food and water.
other tribes mixed nomadic and non nomadic lifestyles.
maya aztec and inca societies flourish the first empire of the americas emerged as early as 1200 b c.
in what is now southern mexico where the olmec people created a thriving civilization.
in the wake of the olmec s mysterious collapse around 400 b c the maya built a dynamic culture in guatemala and the yucatan peninsula between a d 250 and 900.
later the aztec settled the valley of mexico in the 1200s and developed a sophisticated civilization.
in south america the most prominent empire builders were the inca.
around a d 1400 the inca created a glittering empire that stretched nearly 2 500 miles along the mountainous western coast of south america.
complex societies arise in north america in time several north american groups including the hohokam and the anasazi a ne sa ze introduced crops into the arid deserts of the southwest.
later between 300 b c.
and a d 1400 each group had established its own culture.
hunters roaming over 10 000 years ago in what is now southern arizona may have used this spear point to kill large prey.
artists rendering of tenochtitlan the aztec capital in the middle of lake texcoco.
review unit 5.
history video secret mounds of pre historic america a northwest powwow or multitribal gathering in cashmere washington state 1989.
gatherings like these preserve a 500 year cultural tradition.
to the east and west of the mississippi river another series of complex societies developed the adena the hopewell and the mississippian.
these societies excelled at trade and at building massive earthen mounds as tombs and as platforms for temples and other buildings.
bj these early peoples were the ancestors of the many native american groups that inhabited north america on the eve of its encounter with the european world.
native american societies of the 1400s the varied regions of the north american continent provided for many different ways of life.
the native groups that populated the continent s coasts deserts and forests 500 years ago were as diverse as their surroundings.
diverse peoples the inhabitants of california adapted to the region s varied environments.
the kashaya porno lived in marshlands along the central coast hunting waterfowl with slingshots and nets.
to the north of them the yurok and hupa searched the forests for acorns and trapped fish in mountain streams.
the waterways and forests of the northwest coast sustained large communities year round.
on a coastline that stretched from what is now southern alaska to northern california groups such as the kwakiutl nootka and haida collected shellfish from the beaches and hunted the ocean for whales sea otters and seals.
in the dry southwest the pueblo and pima tribes descendants of the anasazi and hohokam lived in multistory houses made of stone or adobe a sun dried brick of clay and straw and grew maize corn beans melons and squash.
beneath the forest canopy of the northeast members of the iroquois tr e kwof nation hunted fish and game such as wild turkeys deer and bear.
in the northeast where winters could be long and harsh northeast peoples relied heavily on wild animals for clothing and food.
in the warmer southeast groups lived mainly off the land growing such crops as maize squash and beans.
main idea summarizing in what ways did early native american societies leave their mark upon the landscape.
chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era 0 gjjg southeastern southwest o great basin mesoamerican caribbean major trade routes 500 miles kwakiutl of the northwest coast subarctic northwest coast california r 1 plateau r plains e j eastern woodlands 0 250 250 500 kilometers geography skillbuilder 1.
region what does this map reveal about north america in the 1400s.
location why do you think some regions had more trade routes than others.
review unit 7 common characteristics many of the native american cultures had in common certain patterns of trade attitudes toward land use religious beliefs and social values.
as in other parts of the world trade helped the spread of customs and beliefs.
tribes traded among each other both locally and over long distances.
so extensive was the network of forest trails and river roads that an english sailor named david ingram claimed in 1568 to have walked along native american trade routes all the way from the gulf of mexico to nova scotia.
native americans traded many things but land was not one of them.
land was regarded as the source of life not as a commodity to be sold.
we cannot sell the lives of men and animals said one blackfoot chief in the 1800s therefore we cannot sell this land.
nearly all native americans thought of the natural world as filled with spirits.
every object both living and nonliving possessed a voice that might be heard if one listened closely.
some cultures worshiped one supreme being variously called great spirit great mystery or the creative power.
the basic unit of organization among all native american groups was the family which included aunts uncles cousins and other relatives.
some tribes further organized the families into clans or groups of families descended from a common ancestor.
in the late 1400s on the eve of the first encounter with europeans the rhythms of native american family life were highly developed.
all phases of a person s life birth marriage and death were guided by traditions that often went back hundreds or perhaps thousands of years.
on the other side of the atlantic in west africa customs equally ancient guided another diverse group of people.
goods that passed through their realms.
in 1067 an arab geographer in spain named a1 bakri described the duties import and export taxes levied in ghana.
main idea making inferences why would native american attitudes toward land ownership lead to conflict with europeans.
a personal voice al bakri for every donkey loaded with salt that enters the country the king takes a duty of one golden dinar about one eighth ounce of gold and two dinars from every one that leaves.
from a load of copper the duty due to the king is five mithquals also about one eighth ounce of gold and from a load of merchandise ten mithquals.
the gold nuggets found in all the mines.
are reserved for the king only gold dust being left for the people.
quoted in africa in the days of exploration with such wealth the rulers who controlled the north south trade routes could raise large armies and conquer new territory.
they could also build cities administer laws and support the arts and education.
kingdoms of benin and kongo at its height in the 1500s songhai s power extended across much of west africa.
however it did not control the forest kingdoms along the southern coast.
in the 1400s one of these kingdoms benin dominated a large region around the niger delta.
leading the expansion was a powerful oba or ruler named ewuare who developed benin city.
within another stretch of rain forest in west central africa the powerful kingdom of kongo arose on the lower congo zaire river.
in the late 1400s kongo consisted of a series of small kingdoms ruled by a single leader called the manikongo who lived in what is today angola.
west african societies of the 1400s a desert caravan approaches the fabled songhai city of timbuktu.
like north america west africa in the 1400s was home to a variety of long established sophisticated societies.
from this region especially from the coasts originated most of the people who were enslaved and brought to the americas in the centuries that followed.
their african traditions and beliefs played a major role in forming american history and culture.
notable among west african societies in the late 1400s were three powerful kingdoms songhai benin and kongo.
the kingdom of songhai from about 600 to 1600 a succession of empires first ghana then mali and finally songhai gained power and wealth by controlling the trans sahara trade.
the rulers of these empires grew rich by taxing the main idea comparing what did the kingdoms of west africa have in common.
west african culture most west africans lived in small villages where life revolved around family the com munity and tradition.
bonds of kinship that is family ties formed the basis of most aspects of life.
political leaders claimed authority on the basis of religion.
although west africans might worship a variety of gods and ancestral spirits most believed in a single creator.
throughout west africa people supported themselves by farming herding hunting fishing and by mining and trading.
almost all groups believed in collective ownership of land.
individuals farmed the land but it reverted to family or village ownership when not in use.
trading patterns with the wider world by the 1400s west africa had long been connected to the wider world through trade.
the city of timbuktu was the hub of a well established trading network that connected most of west africa to the ports of north africa and through these ports to markets in europe and asia.
along trade routes across the sahara desert merchants carried goods from mediterranean cities and salt from saharan mines to exchange for gold ivory and dyed cotton cloth.
along with goods traders from north africa also brought across the sahara the islamic faith which increasingly influenced west african cultures.
islam is a monotheistic religion that is one based on the belief in a single god.
the religion of islam was founded in arabia in 622 by muhammad and spread quickly across the middle east and north africa.
spotlight historical islam islam was founded by muhammad about a d 570 632 who worked as a merchant in mecca a trading city on the arabian peninsula.
when he was about 40 he believed the angel gabriel appeared to him and told him to preach a new religion to the arabs.
this religion became known as islam which in arabic means surrender to allah allah is the arabic word for god.
the followers of islam are called muslims those who submit to gods will the words that muhammad claimed he had received from the angel were recorded by his followers in the quran the holy book of islam.
the quran teaches that there is no god but allah and muhammad is his prophet the quran also sets forth certain duties for righteous muslims including a series of daily prayers the giving of charity and a pilgrimage to the holy city of mecca.
review unit 9 play king isabella 1451 1504 queen isabella who played a central role in european exploration by sponsoring christopher columbuss voyages to the americas made her mark on the old world as well.
as co ruler of spain isabella actively participated in her countrys religious and military affairs.
in championing spains catholicism the queen often fought openly with the pope to make sure that her candidates were appointed to positions in the spanish church.
in addition isabella had tasted battle far more than most rulers either male or female.
the queen rode among her troops in full armor personally commanding them in ferdinands absence.
whenever isabella appeared on a horse her troops shouted castile castile for our king isabella the portuguese mariners from portugal made trading contacts along the west african coast starting in the 1440s.
these early contacts with portuguese traders had two significant consequences for west africa and the americas.
first direct trade between the portuguese and the coastal people of west africa bypassed the routes across the sahara and pulled the coastal region into a closer relationship with europe.
second the portuguese began the european trade m enslaved west africans.
european societies of the 1400s in the late 1400s most europeans like most native americans and most africans lived in small villages bound to the land and to rhythms of life that had been in place for centuries.
for the majority of europeans change came slowly.
the social hierarchy european communities were based on social hierarchy that is they were organized according to rank.
at the top of the hierarchy were monarchs and the aristocracy the landowning elite who held most of the wealth and power.
members of the clergy also ranked high in the social order.
at the bottom were agricultural laborers or peasants.
few individuals rose above the social position of their birth.
one group that did achieve mobility was the growing number of artisans and merchants the people who created and traded goods for money.
there were relatively few members of this group in the 1400s.
however the profit they earned from trade would eventually make them a valuable source of tax revenue to monarchs seeking to finance costly overseas exploration and expansion.
o christianity shapes the european outlook the dominant religion in western europe was christianity a religion based on the life and teachings of jesus.
the leader of the church the pope and his bishops held great political as well as spiritual authority.
as the influence of christianity and islam spread the two religions came into conflict.
in 1096 christian armies from all over western europe responded to the church s call to force the muslims out of the holy land around jerusalem.
over the next two centuries europeans launched the crusades a series of military expeditions to the middle east in the name of christianity.
in the end these bloody crusades failed to rescue the holy land but they resulted in two consequences that encouraged european exploration and expansion.
first the crusades opened up asian trade routes supplying europeans with luxuries from the east especially spices such as cinnamon cloves nutmeg and pepper.
second the crusades weakened the power of european nobles many of whom lost their lives or fortunes in the wars.
monarchs eventually took advantage of the nobles weakened ranks to consolidate their own power.
by the early 1500s many church leaders and ordinary people were eager for reforms.
this desire for change led to a movement called the reformation which criticized church practices and challenged the authority of the pope.
main idea making inferences why were merchants able to achieve social mobility.
background spices were important in the middle ages when european farmers preserved meat by packing it between layers of salt.
spices helped disguise the bad taste of the meat.
10 chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era history through arty june from les tres riches heures du duc de berry this miniature painting representing the month of june is a page from a prayer book calendar begun by the limbourg brothers around the year 1412.
the book was made for a younger son of the french king and tells us a great deal about the aristocratic view of the european social order.
in the background the walls of the city of paris protect a palace and the royal chapel buildings that represent the two most powerful institutions in medieval european society church and aristocracy.
in the foreground peasants mow the fields in an orderly world of peace and tranquility.
however the image is a fantasy an idealized vision painted to please the aristocracy.
there is no hint of the peasants grinding poverty or of the violence of the hundred years war that was at that moment devastating northern france.
skillbuilder interpreting visual sources 1.
what does the painting tell you about the importance of gender in the division of labor during the 1400s.
why might images of poverty have displeased the aristocracy.
main idea analyzing causes how did religious events in europe help spur exploration and settlement of new lands.
vocabulary medieval of or during the middle ages often dated from a d 476 to 1453 the reformation led to a religious schism or split throughout europe those who supported the reformation became known as protestants because of their opposition to the established catholic church.
this split deepened the rivalries among european nations during the period of north american colonization a century later and sent some protestants and some catholics across the atlantic to seek religious freedom.
european nations take shape during the 1400s four major nations were taking shape in europe portugal spain france and england.
ambitious monarchs extended their reach by collecting new taxes raising professional armies and forming stronger governments.
among their new allies were the merchants who paid taxes in exchange for the protection and expansion of trade.
the renaissance the 1400s also saw a cultural awakening in europe known as the renaissance rent sans a term meaning rebirth of the kind of interest in the physical world that had characterized ancient greece and rome.
in the arts this meant rejecting the flat two dimensional images of medieval painting in favor of the deep perspectives and fully rounded forms of ancient sculpture and painting.
starting in italy a region stimulated by commercial contact with asia and africa the renaissance soon spread throughout europe.
renaissance artists created works of lasting influence while european scholars reexamined the texts of ancient philosophers mathematicians geographers and scientists.
although their themes were still often religious in nature renaissance artists portrayed their subjects more realistically than had medieval artists using new review unit 11 the caravel the caravel the ship used by most early portuguese and spanish explorers had many advantages over earlier vessels p it was lighter swifter and more maneuverable than other ships.
techniques such as perspective.
leonardo da vinci investigating how things worked kept notebooks in which he made detailed drawings of human anatomy and of his inventions including a flying machine.
this energetic spirit of inquiry infused the early explorers and adventurers who like christopher columbus grew up during the renaissance.
the spread of the renaissance was advanced by johann gutenberg s introduction of printing from movable type in the 1450s.
this development made books easier and cheaper to produce which aided the spread of ideas.
the renaissance encouraged people to think of themselves as individuals to have confidence in their capabilities and to look forward to the fame their achievements might bring.
this attitude prompted many to seek glory through adventure discovery and conquest.
europe enters a new age of expansion the european interest in overseas expansion probably began in the 1200s with the journey of marco polo to china.
later the publication in 1477 of the first printed edition of polo s vivid and sometimes exaggerated account caused renewed interest in the east.
like other merchants polo traveled to asia by land.
the expense and peril involved in such journeys led europeans to seek alternative routes.
in the 1400s europeans used the work of ptolemy a second century scholar along with the work of arab and j main idea developing historical perspective how did renaissance attitudes encourage the european age of exploration.
2 chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era vocabulary bureaucracies government departments staffed with nonelected officials main idea summarizing what military advantages did europeans have over africans and native americans.
the best ships that jewish scholars to revive the art of cartography or mapmaking.
although imper fect the new maps inspired europeans to start exploring for water routes to asia.
european monarchs had powerful motives to finance the search for new lands and trading routes they needed money to maintain their growing armies and administrative bureaucracies.
by the mid 1400s europe s gold and silver mines were running low.
so the monarchs of portugal spain france and england began looking overseas for wealth.
beginning in the 1300s monarchs invested some of their tax revenues in new weapons such as longbows and cannons which they used to limit the power of the independent nobles.
these new weapons along with the hand held firearms that were developed in the 1400s also gave them military advantages over the africans and native americans whom they later encountered.
sailing technology improves european ship captains in the 1400s experimented with new sailing vessels such as the car avel and navigating tools such as the compass and the astrolabe sailed the seas.
which helped sailors plot direction at sea.
they also took advan alvise da cadamosto of the caravel tage of sailing innovations like those that allowed caravels to sail against the wind.
one leader in developing and employing these innovations was prince henry the navigator of portugal who gathered mariners geographers and navigators to his court.
according to a contemporary chronicler gomes eanes de zurara the prince s driving motivation was the need to know.
for almost 40 years prince henry sent his captains sailing south along the west coast of africa.
exploration continued after the prince s death.
in 1488 portuguese sailor bartolomeu dias rounded the southern tip of africa fellow portuguese explorer vasco da gama reached india ten years later.
by sailing around africa to eastern asia via the indian ocean portuguese traders were able to cut their costs and increase their profits.
as cartographers redrew their maps to show this eastern route to asia an italian sea captain named christopher columbus believed there was an even shorter route one that headed west across the atlantic.
yj assessment 1.
terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
nomadic pueblo kongo aztec iroquois islam anasazi benin christianity reformation renaissance main idea using your notes for each region and time period shown write two or three sentences to describe how it was affected by trade and commerce.
critical thinking making inferences why do you think other european nations lagged behind portugal in overseas exploration.
support your reasons with details from the text.
think about the geography of portugal the power of monarchs in the 1400s the economic and political situation of european nations during this time analyzing causes what factors do you think contributed to the thriving trade system that flourished in west africa.
use evidence from the text to support your response.
analyzing effects what effects did portuguese trade have on west africa.
review unit 13 spanish north america main idea why it matters now terms names beginning with the voyage of christopher columbus the spanish built a vast colonial empire in the americas.
the spanish left an impact on the cultures of north and south america that helped to shape present day america.
christopher columbus taino treaty of tordesillas columbian exchange conquistador hernando cortes montezuma mestizo encomlenda new spain new mexico one.
europeans stor.
taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on significant dates of columbus s voyages and the spanish exploration of the new world.
on august 3 1492 the genoese mariner christopher columbus set out on a bold expedition to find a route to asia by sailing west across the atlantic ocean.
it was a journey destined to change the course of world history.
a seeker of fame and fortune columbus began his travel journal by restating the deal he had struck with the spanish rulers financing his voyage.
a personal voice christopher columbus based on the information that i had given your highnesses about the land of india and about a prince who is called the great khan of china.
your highnesses decided to send me to the regions of india to see.
the peoples and the lands and to learn of.
the measures which could be taken for their conversion to our holy faith.
i was to go by way of the west whence until today we do not know with certainty that anyone has gone.
the log of christopher columbus columbus never reached asia.
he landed on an island he thought was off the christopher coast of asia but was actually in the caribbean sea.
instead of finding the great columbus from khan columbus set in motion a process that brought together the american a painting done european and african worlds.
columbus crosses the atlantic in october 1492 roughly two months after leaving spain columbus s small fleet of ships the nina the pinta and the santa maria reached land.
columbus went ashore where he encountered a group of people who would become known as the taino tfno from their word for noble ones.
he planted spanish banners and renamed their island san salvador holy savior claiming it for spain.
columbus spent 96 days exploring four coral islands in the bahamas and the coastlines of two larger caribbean islands known today as cuba and hispaniola.
chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era vocabulary colonize to establish settlements under the control of a parent country main idea analyzing events what did spain and portugal agree to do in the treaty of tordesillas.
convinced that he had landed on islands off asia known to europeans as the indies columbus called the people he met los indios.
thus the name indian came to be mistakenly applied to all the diverse peoples of the americas.
the spanish monarchs were thrilled with columbus s discoveries and funded three more of his voyages this time to colonize the lands he had claimed.
the impact on native americans by the time columbus set sail for his return to hispaniola in 1493 europeans had already developed a pattern for colonization.
they had glimpsed the profitability of the plantation system realized the economic benefits of using native or local peoples for forced labor and learned to use european weapons to dominate native peoples.
these tactics would be used in the americas.
the arrival of the europeans devastated native americans by another means disease.
the taino for example had not developed any natural immunity to measles mumps chickenpox smallpox typhus or other diseases europeans had unknowingly brought with them.
consequently the taino died by the thousands once they were exposed.
the impact on africans with the decline of the native work force the european settlers of the americas eventually turned to africa for slaves.
the atlantic slave trade devastated many african societies particularly in west africa.
starting in the 1500s african cultures lost many of their young and more able members.
before the atlantic slave trade ended in the 1800s it had drained africa of at least 12 million people.
the impact on europeans columbus s voyages had profound effects on europeans as well.
in search of new lives europeans began to cross the atlantic by the thousands in what would become one of the biggest voluntary migrations in world history.
overseas expansion inflamed national rivalries in europe.
in 1494 spain and portugal signed the treaty of tordesillas tor de se es in which they agreed to divide the western hemisphere between them.
the columbian exchange the voyages of columbus and those after him led to the discovery of plants and animals in the americas that were new to europeans and africans.
ships took items such as corn potatoes and tobacco from the americas to europe and to africa.
from these countries they brought back livestock grains fruit and coffee.
this global transfer of living things called the columbian exchange began with columbus s first voyage and continues today.
history video christopher columbus explorer of the new world i i i i i j sweet vcorn avocado c0ssava peanut k t0 ericas a whgspple peppers rkey atlantic ocean coffee geography skillbuilder onioncitrus nai human environment afk ca and asia to interaction how do you think tho r l.
the columbian exchange rn avocaao vaooava reanut r otato ff ttope a am asia nilla beans uvcmvuint nuw uu yuu 1111 j the columbian exchange has enriched each hemisphere.
review unit 15 the spanish claim a new empire in the wake of columbus s voyages spanish explorers took to the seas to claim new colonies for spain.
these explorers were lured by the prospect of vast lands filled with gold and silver.
known as conquistadors kong ke sta dorz conquerors they conquered much of the americas.
cortes subdues the aztec soon after landing in mexico in 1519 hernando cortes learned of the vast and wealthy aztec empire in the region s interior.
with a force of 600 soldiers 17 horses 10 cannons and numerous dogs the video the arrival of the spanish v y playfl hernando cortes 1485 1547 conquistador marched inland.
the spaniards marveled at tenochtitlan the aztec capital with its towering temples and elaborate engineering works including a system that brought fresh water into the city.
we were amazed one of cortes s soldiers said of his first glimpse of tenochtitlan.
some of our soldiers even asked whether the things we saw were not a dream.
while the aztec city astonished the spaniards the capital s glittering gold stock seemed to hypnotize them.
they picked up the gold and fingered it like monkeys one native witness recalled.
they hungered like pigs for that gold.
the aztec emperor montezuma convinced at first that cortes was an armor clad god agreed to give the spanish explorer a share of the empire s existing gold supply.
the conquistador was not satisfied.
cortes eventually forced the aztec to mine more gold and silver.
in the spring of 1520 the aztec rebelled against the spaniards intrusion.
regarding montezuma as a traitor the aztec are believed to have stoned their ruler to death before driving out cortes s forces.
while they had successfully repelled the spanish invaders the aztec were falling victim to the diseases that the spanish had brought with them.
by the time cortes launched a counterattack in 1521 the spanish and their native allies overran an aztec force that had been greatly reduced by smallpox and measles.
after several months of fighting the invaders sacked and burned tenochtitlan and the aztec surrendered.
while flames still flickered in the shattered capital cortes laid plans for the colony of new spain.
the spanish pattern of conquest in building their american empire the spaniards lived among the native people and sought to impose their own culture upon them.
the settlers mostly men tended to intermarry with native women.
this practice eventually created a large mestizo mestizo or mixed spanish and native american population in the spanish colonies.
nonetheless the spanish also oppressed the people among whom they lived.
in their effort to exploit the land for its resources they forced native american workers to labor in an encomienda eng ko myen da system.
under that system natives farmed ranched or mined for spanish landlords who received the rights to their labor from spanish authorities.
cortes made himself the enemy of thousands of native americans but the daring conquistador did not have many friends among spaniards.
spanish authorities on cuba where cortes owned land accused the conquistador of murdering his wife catalina juarez.
there were ugly accusations but none proved wrote juarezs biographer.
in addition the cuban governor diego velazquez who resented cortess arrogance relieved him of the command of a gold seeking expedition to the mainland.
cortes left cuba anyway.
as he fought his way through mexico cortes had to battle not only the native americans but also the spanish forces that velazquez sent to arrest him.
main idea summarizing jj what factors enabled the spanish to conquer the aztec.
chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era 120w european exploration of the americas.
1492 1682 cabeza de vaca 1528 36 tenochtitlan mexico city 120 jw 1q0w columbus 4 french english dutch 0 1 000 2 000 miles pacific dx s.
ocean tropic of cancer 20n nt juan de la cosa pilot navigator on columbuss ship nina drew the known world on this oxhide map in 1500.
1 000 2 000 kilometers geography skillbuilder 1.
movement how many voyages to the americas did columbus make.
place in what years did england and france sail to the americas and which regions did they explore.
review unit 17 i missions are still standing and some are still in use.
they remain as lasting memorials to the great cultures reflected in their architecture.
resistance to the spanish the impact of the spanish missions on native american cultures has been a subject of much historical controversy.
recent his i i torians assert that the mission system negatively affected many native american communities in several ways.
the spanish required native americans who converted to christianity to live inside the missions separating them from their families and cultures.
native americans who tried to leave were punished.
the spanish also forced native americans to provide labor for farming and construction give up their self government and adopt european dress diet and living arrangements.
during the 1670s priests and soldiers around santa fe began forcing native americans to help support the missions by paying a tribute an offering of either goods or services.
the tribute was usually a bushel of maize or a deer hide but the spanish also forced native americans to work for them and sometimes abused them physically.
native americans who practiced their native religion or refused to pay a tribute were beaten.
spanish priests punished the pueblo religious leader pope for his worship practices which they interpreted as witchcraft.
in 1680 the angered leader led a well organized uprising against the spanish that involved some 17 000 warriors from villages all over new mexico.
the triumphant fighters destroyed catholic churches executed priests and settlers and drove the spaniards back into new spain.
for the next 12 years until the spanish regained control of the area the southwest region of the future united states once again belonged to its original inhabitants.
but spain would never again have complete control of the americas.
in 1588 england had defeated the spanish armada a naval fleet assembled to invade england ending spain s naval dominance in the atlantic.
in time england began forging colonies along the eastern shore of north america thus extending its own empire in the new world.
but spain s influence continues in the people and customs of the southeast and southwest.
the heathen have concealed a mortal hatred for our holy faith and enmity for the spanish nation.
spanish officer writing of popes rebellion sb 1.
christopher columbus taino treaty of tordesillas terms names for each term or name write a sentence columbian exchange conquistador hernando cortes explaining its montezuma mestizo encomienda significance.
new spain new mexico main idea using your notes create a time line of the major events and significant dates of columbuss voyages and the spanish exploration of the new world.
use the dates already plotted on the time line below as a guide.
11492 11494 11513 i l1493 f 1520 211 critical thinking analyzing effects what do you think were the most important long term consequences of columbuss encounters in the americas.
think about conquering and claiming land forced labor of native americans and africans the impact on africa europe and the americas drawing conclusions state three conclusions about spanish exploration and settlement north of mexico and the spaniards interaction with native americans there.
why did the native americans of new mexico revolt against the spanish settlers.
chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era early british colonies main idea why it matters now terms names beginning in the early 1600s the english established colonies along the eastern shore of north america.
the original 13 english colonies in north america formed the foundation of what would become the united states of america.
john smith john winthrop jamestown king philips war joint stock william penn companies quaker indentured mercantilism servant navigation acts puritan one.
european s story a john smith was a self proclaimed soldier of fortune sea captain and poet.
john smith craved adventure.
smith s father had urged him to be a merchant but the restless englishman wanted to see the world.
in 1606 he offered his services as a colonist to the virginia company a group of merchants charged with starting an english colony in north america.
he later recalled his vision of the opportunities that awaited those who settled the americas.
a personal voice john smith what man who is poor or who has only his merit to advance his fortunes can desire more contentment than to walk over and plant the land he has obtained by risking his life.
here nature and liberty.
give us freely that which we lack or have to pay dearly for in england.
what pleasure can be greater than to grow tired from.
planting vines fruits or vegetables.
the general history of virginia smith would need all of his abilities to steer the new colony jamestown through what turned out to be a disastrous beginning.
in time however the colony survived to become england s first permanent settlement in north america.
bbq taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the cause and effect relationships identified in the section.
the english settle at jamestown in april of 1607 nearly four months after the virginia company s three ships had left england they reached the north american shore.
sailing part way up a broad river leading into chesapeake bay the colonists selected a small defensible peninsula and built fort james to protect the settlement of jamestown named for their king.
a disastrous start unlike spanish colonies which were funded by spanish rulers the english colonies were originally funded by joint stock companies.
stock companies allowed several investors to pool their wealth in support of a colony that would they hoped yield a profit.
investors in the jamestown colony demanded a quick return on their investment and the colonists hoped to find gold to satisfy them.
consequently they neglected farming and soon review unit 21 n rediscovering fort james about ten feet from the forts walls.
houses measured sixteen by forty feet and several colonists lived in each.
erosion turned the jamestown peninsula into an island and for many years the site of the original fort james was assumed to be under water.
however in 1996 archaeologists from the association for the preservation of virginia antiquities discovered artifacts on what they concluded was the original site of the fort.
since then archaeologists have discovered armor weapons even games used by the first colonists.
archaeologists and historians are constantly learning more and more about this long buried treasure of american history this illustration re creates what historians and archaeologists now believe fort james looked like early in its history.
chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era main idea analyzing causes why was the early settlement at jamestown a near disaster.
suffered the consequences.
disease from contaminated river water struck them first followed soon by hunger.
after several months one settler described the terrifying predicament thus we lived for the space of five months in this miserable distress.
our men night and day groaning in every corner of the fort most pitiful to hear.
smith held the colony together by forcing the colonists to farm and by securing food and support from the native powhatan peoples.
then smith was injured and returned to england.
without smith s leadership the colony eventually deteriorated to the point of famine.
the settlement was saved however by the arrival of new colonists and by the development of a highly profitable crop tobacco.
main idea analyzing issues why were virginias frontier settlers frustrated with their government.
tobacco requires a supply of labor in order to grow tobacco the virginia company needed field laborers.
immigration jumped in 1618 when the company introduced the headright system offering 50 acres of land to adventurers who would pay their own or another s transportation from england.
many of those who arrived in virginia however came as indentured servants.
in exchange for passage to north america and food and shelter upon arrival an indentured servant agreed to a limited term of servitude usually four to seven years.
indentured servants were main ly from the lower classes of english society and therefore had little to lose by leaving for a new world.
the first enslaved africans arrived in virginia aboard a dutch merchant ship in 1619.
after a few years most of them received land and freedom.
it would be several decades before the english colonists in north america began the systematic use of enslaved africans as laborers.
colonists clash with native americans the colonists desire for more land to accommodate their growing population and the demand for more crop space led to warfare with the original inhabitants of virginia.
unlike the spanish the english followed a pattern of driving away the people they defeated.
their conquest over the native peoples was total and complete which is one reason a large mestizo like population never developed in the united states.
economic differences split virginia the english colonists who migrated to north america in increasing numbers battled not only native americans but sometimes each other.
by the 1670s one quarter of the free white men in virginia were poor former indentured servants who lived mainly on the western frontier of virginia where they constantly fought with native americans for land.
although virginia s governor william berkeley proposed building forts to protect the settlers the settlers refused to pay taxes to maintain these forts.
the colonists under the leadership of a young planter named nathaniel bacon marched on jamestown in september of 1676.
bacon confronted colonial leaders with a number of grievances including the frontier s lack of representation in virginia s colonial legislature or law making body the house of burgesses.
although bacon s rebellion ultimately failed it exposed the restlessness of the colony s former indentured servants.
historical spotlight early representative government as the english settlers colonized north america they sowed the seeds of the representative style of government that would become the foundation of american democracy.
virginias house of burgesses served as the first representative body in colonial america.
the house first met in jamestown in 1619 and included two citizens or burgesses from each of virginias eleven districts.
the body claimed the authority to raise taxes and pass legislation subject to veto by the english governor.
the mayflower compact which the pilgrims crafted as they sailed to north america in 1620 created a civil government and pledged loyalty to the king.
it stated that the purpose of their government in america would be to frame just and equal laws for the general good of the colony created in 1639 the fundamental orders of connecticut extended voting rights to a greater number of white males in that colony.
it also declared that the colonial legislature could assemble without a call by the governor.
review unit 23 puritans cherished their bibles passing them down as family treasures from one generation to the next.
this bible belonged to governor william bradford of the plymouth colony.
puritans create a new england after king henry viii 1491 1547 broke with roman catholicism in the 1530s the church of england was formed.
although the new church was free of catholic control one religious group the puritans felt that the church had kept too much catholic ritual.
they wanted to purify or reform the church by eliminating all traces of catholicism.
some puritans called separatists wanted to separate from the english church.
they often met in secret to avoid the punishment inflicted upon those who did not follow the anglican form of worship.
jg one congregation of separatists known today as the pilgrims eventually migrated to america.
there in 1620 this small group of families founded the plymouth colony the second permanent english colony in north america.
their mayflower compact named for the ship on which they sailed to north america became an important landmark in the development of american democracy.
the massachusetts bay colony other puritans who were not separatists turned their thoughts toward new england in the 1620s.
they felt the burden of increasing religious persecution political repression and dismal economic conditions.
in 1630 a group of puritans established the massachusetts bay colony along the upper coast of north america.
the port town of boston soon became the colony s thriving capital.
settlers established other towns nearby and eventually incorporated the plymouth colony into the massachusetts bay colony.
the puritans believed they had a special covenant or agreement with god.
to fulfill their part they were to create a moral society that would serve as a beacon for others to follow.
puritan leader john winthrop expressed the sense of mission that bound the puritans together in a sermon delivered aboard the flagship arbella we in new england shall be as a city upon a hill the eyes of all people are on us.
although puritans made no effort to create a democracy the massachusetts bay company extended the right to vote to all adult male members of the puritan church 40 percent of the colony s men.
as their system of self government evolved so did the close relationship between the government and the puritan church.
the puritan view dominated massachusetts society taxes supported the puritan church and laws required church attendance jgy dissent in the puritan community the puritans came to america to follow their own form of worship and they were intolerant of people who had dissenting religious beliefs.
one such dissenter was roger williams an extreme separatist who expressed two controversial views.
first he declared that the english settlers had no rightful claim to the land unless they purchased it from native americans.
second he argued that every person should be free to worship according to his or her conscience.
main idea analyzing issues why were the puritans unhappy with the church of england.
vocabulary repression the act of putting down by force main idea forming generalizations what type of society did the puritans want to create.
24 chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era main idea analyzing issues jy in what principles did the government of providence differ from that of massachusetts.
when officials tried to deport williams back to england he fled massachusetts and traveled south.
he negotiated with a local native american group for a plot of land and set up a new colony which he called providence.
in providence later the capital of rhode island williams guaranteed religious freedom and separation of church and state.
another dissenter anne hutchinson taught that worshippers did not need the church or its ministers to interpret the bible for them.
banished from the colony hutchinson with her family and a band of followers fled first to rhode island and after her husband died to new netherland which later became part of new york where she died in a war with native americans.
native americans resist colonial expansion while williams and his followers were settling rhode island thousands of other white settlers fanned out to western massachusetts and to new colonies in new hampshire and connecticut.
from the beginning native americans had helped the colonists providing them with land and giving them agricultural advice.
soon however disputes between the puritans and native americans arose over land and religion.
as native americans saw their lands taken over by settlers they feared an end to their way of life.
in addition native americans resented the puritans efforts to convert them and bristled under puritan laws such as the prohibition of hunting and fishing on sunday.
king philips war great tension continued between native americans and settlers for nearly 40 years.
eventually the wampanoag chief metacom whom the english called king philip organized his tribe and several others into an alliance to wipe out the invaders.
the eruption of king philip s war in the spring of 1675 startled the puritans with its intensity.
native americans attacked n new england colonies to 1675 middle colonies to 1700 xa new netherland iczj ceded to england in 1664 0 50 100 miles 50 100 kilometers 1.
location wnai was uic oldest english settlement in new england.
region what major river formed part of the border separating new netherland from the english middle colonies.
review unit 25 yjorld stxq and burned outlying settlements throughout new england.
within months ey were striking the outskirts of boston.
the alarmed and angered colonists responded by killing as many native americans as they could even some from friendly tribes.
for over a year the two sides waged a war of mutual brutality and destruc tion.
finally food shortages disease and heavy casualties wore down the native americans resistance and they gradually surrendered or fled.
settlement of the middle colonies while english puritans were establishing colonies in new england the dutch were founding one to the south.
as early as 1609 henry hudson an englishman employed by the dutch had sailed up the river that now bears his name.
the dutch soon established a fur trade with the iroquois and built trading posts on the hudson river.
the dutch found new netherland in 1621 the dutch government granted the newly formed dutch west india company permission to colonize new netherland and expand the thriving fur trade.
new amsterdam now new york city founded in 1625 became the capital of the colony see map on page 25.
in 1655 the dutch extended their claims by taking over new sweden a tiny colony of swedish and finnish settlers that had established a rival fur trade along the delaware river.
to encourage settlers to come and stay the colony opened its doors to a variety of ethnic and religious groups.
in 1664 the english took over the colony without a fight.
the duke of york the new proprietor or owner of the colony renamed it new york.
the duke later gave a portion of this land to two of his friends naming this territory new jersey for the british island of jersey.
the quakers settle pennsylvania the acquisition of new netherland was one step in england s quest to extend its american empire after 1660 when the english monarchy was restored after a period of civil war and puritan rule.
the new king charles ii owed a debt to the father of a young man named william penn.
as payment charles gave the younger penn a large property that the king insisted be called pennsylvania or penn s woods after the father.
following this in 1682 penn acquired more land from the duke of york the three counties that became delaware.
william penn belonged to the society of friends or quakers a protestant sect that held services without formal ministers allowing any person to speak as the spirit moved him or her.
they dressed plainly refused to defer to persons of rank opposed war and refused to serve in the military.
for their radical views they were scorned and harassed by anglicans and puritans alike.
penn wanted to establish a good and fair society in keeping with quaker ideals of equality cooperation and religious toleration.
penn guaranteed every adult male settler 50 acres of land and the right to vote.
his plan for government called for a representative assembly and freedom of religion.
like roger williams before him penn believed that the land belonged to the native americans and he saw to it that they were paid for it.
j main idea predicting effects what long term effects would you predict followed king philips war.
main idea analyzing events how did the dutch create an ethnically diverse colony.
the english civil war and restoration from 1642 to 1651 england was torn apart by great wars between loyalist supporters of king charles i and those who supported parliament many of whom were puritans.
the parliamentary armies were victorious and charles i was tried for treason and executed in 1649.
for a decade england became a commonwealth or republic headed first by oliver cromwell a puritan and then by his son richard.
however the english grew weary of the rather grim and sober puritan rule and in 1660 the monarchy was restored under charles ii.
the restoration would have a profound effect on america leading to the creation of new colonies and to more direct involvement by the crown in colonial affairs.
6 chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era history through colonial meetinghouses the puritans of the northeast the quakers of pennsylvania and the anglicans of the southern colonies held profound but often different convictions about community social responsibility and individual freedom.
these convictions were often expressed in the religious services of each group as well as the architecture of the places of worship where these services were held.
mens seats womens seats architecture a quaker meetinghouse quaker services which were called meetings relied on the inspiration of the inner light meetings reflected a respect for conscience and freedom of speech.
men and women entered by separate doors and sat on opposite sides facing each other.
in some meetinghouses women sat in slightly elevated seats.
both men and women could speak during the meeting.
puritan meetinghouse puritan services focused on preaching.
sermons which sometimes lasted for hours instructed the individual conscience to be mindful of the common good.
the pulpit was the focal point of the meetinghouse.
a plain interior reflected a value for austerity and simplicity.
meetinghouses were also used for town meetings.
anglican church the head of the anglican church was the british monarch.
anglican services valued ritual.
their churches stressed the importance of authority and status.
anglican churches emphasized the altar through ornamentation and elaborate windows.
a screen separated the altar from the congregation.
elaborate pews were reserved for wealthy church members.
skillbuilder interpreting visual sources 1.
in what ways do the puritan and quaker meetinghouses resemble each other.
in what ways are they different.
how does the interior of the anglican church show a respect for hierarchy.
review unit 27 penn himself spent only about four years in pennsylvania.
meanwhile his idealistic vision had faded but did not disappear.
the quakers became a minority in a colony thickly populated by people from all over western europe.
slavery was introduced and in fact many prominent quakers in pennsylvania owned slaves.
however the principles of equality cooperation and religious tolerance on which he had founded his vision would eventually become fundamental values of the new american nation.
england and its colonies prosper thirteen colonies throughout the 1600s and 1700s more british colonies in north america were founded each for very different reasons.
in 1632 king charles i granted land north of chesapeake bay to george calvert the first lord baltimore.
calvert s son cecil the second lord baltimore named the colony maryland after queen henrietta maria charles s wife.
in 1663 king charles ii awarded a group of key supporters the land between virginia and spanish florida a territory that soon became north and south carolina.
in 1732 an english philanthropist named james oglethorpe along with several associates received a charter for a colony he hoped could be a haven for those imprisoned for debt.
oglethorpe named the colony georgia after king george ii.
few debtors actually came to georgia and the british crown assumed direct control of the colony in 1752.
by that time the crown had begun to exercise more and more control over colonial economies and governments.
the thirteen british colonies existed primarily for the benefit of england.
the colonies exported to england a rich variety of raw materials such as lumber and furs and in return they imported the manufactured goods that england produced.
the thirteen colonies that became the original united states were founded over a period of 125 years.
together the colonies represented a wide variety of people skills motives industries resources and agricultural products.
mercantilism and the navigation acts beginning in the 16th century the nations of europe competed for wealth and power through a new economic system called mercantilism muf ken te liz em in which the colonies played a critical role.
according to the theory of mercantilism a nation could increase its wealth and power in two ways by obtaining as much gold and silver as possible and by establishing a favorable balance of trade in which it sold more goods than it bought.
a nation s ultimate goal was to become self sufficient so that it did not have to depend on other countries for goods.
the key to this process was the establishment of colonies.
colonies provided products especially raw materials that could not be found in the home country.
in 1651 england s parliament the country s legislative body moved to tighten control of colonial trade by passing a series of measures known as the navigation acts.
these acts enforced the following rules no country could trade with the colonies unless the goods were shipped in either colonial or english ships.
all vessels had to be operated by crews that were at least three quarters english or colonial.
the colonies could export certain products including tobacco and sugar and later rice molasses and furs only to england.
almost all goods traded between the colonies and europe first had to pass through an english port.
the system created by the navigation acts obviously benefited england.
it proved to be good for most colonists as well.
by restricting trade to english or colonial main idea contrasting how did penns actions toward native americans differ from those of the puritans in massachusetts.
vocabulary charter a document issued by a monarch or other authority creating a public or private corporation chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era 85 w 75w the thirteen colonies to the 1700s massachusetts plymouth 1620 mass.
bay 1630 economic activities new england colonies massachusetts.
shipbuilding shipping fishing lumber rum meat products new hampshire.
ship masts lumber fishing trade shipping livestock foodstuffs connecticut.
rum iron foundries shipbuilding rhode island snuff livestock middle colonies new york.
furs wheat glass shoes livestock shipping shipbuilding rum beer snuff delaware trade foodstuffs new jersey trade foodstuffs copper pennsylvania flax shipbuilding southern colonies virginia tobacco wheat cattle iron maryland.
tobacco wheat snuff north carolina.
naval supplies tobacco furs south carolina.
rice indigo silk georgia.
indigo rice naval supplies lumber geography skillbuilder region which colonies are noted for their industrial activity such as building rather than agricultural activity.
new england colonies j middle colonies southern colonies other british possessions i french possessions spanish possessions 0 100 200 miles 0 100 200 kilometers the date provided for each colony indicates the date of the first permanent settlement.
review unit 29 ships the acts spurred a boom in the colonial shipbuilding industry and helped support the development of numerous other colonial industries.
colonial governments whatever their form of charter by the mid 1700s most colonies were similar in the structure of their governments.
in nearly every colony a governor appointed by the crown served as the highest authority.
the governor presided over an advisory council usually appointed by the governor and a local assembly elected by landowning white males.
the governor had the authority to appoint and dismiss judges and oversee colonial trade.
in addition to raising money through taxes the colonial assembly initiated and passed laws.
the governor could veto any law but did so at a risk because in most colonies the colonial assembly not the crown paid the governor s salary.
using this power of the purse liberally the colonists influenced the governor in a variety of ways from the approval of laws to the appointment of judges.
growing spirit of self determination the colonies were developing a taste for self government that would ultimately create the conditions for rebellion.
nehemiah grew a british mercantilist voiced one of the few early concerns when he warned his compatriots about the colonies growing self determination in 1707.
main idea analyzing effects what effects did the navigation acts have on both britain and its colonies.
a personal voice nehemiah grew the time may come.
when the colonies may become populous and with the increase of arts and sciences strong and politic forgetting their relation to the mother countries will then confederate and consider nothing further than the means to support their ambition of standing on their own legs.
quoted in the colonial period of american history aside from a desire for more economic and political breathing room however the colonies had little in common that would unite them against britain.
in particular the northern and southern colonies were developing distinct societies based on sharply contrasting economic systems.
assessment 1.
terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
john smith jamestown joint stock companies indentured servant puritan john winthrop king philip s war william penn quaker mercantilism navigation acts main idea using your notes identify the effects of each of the causes listed in the chart below.
cause effect virginia colonists need labor to grow tobacco puritans are persecuted in england william penn acquires pennsylvania parliament passes the navigation acts critical thinking 3.
evaluating in your judgment what were the benefits and drawbacks of using indentured servants for labor in virginia.
support your judgment with references to the text.
think about the labor demands of growing tobacco the characteristics and cost of indentured servants the causes and consequences of bacons rebellion predicting effects reread nehemiah grews prediction for the colonies in the personal voice above.
how do you think the british government would respond to his prediction.
what issues do you see arising as potential sources of tension between the colonies and great britain.
hapter 1 exploration and the colonial era the colonies come of age main idea why it matters now j j terms names even though both northern and southern colonies prospered many colonists began to question british authority.
regional differences between northern and southern colonies have survived in the culture and politics of the modern united states.
triangular trade middle passage enlightenment benjamin franklin great awakening jonathan edwards french and indian war william pitt pontiac proclamation of 1763 oneamerican s storyj h taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on developments in the colonies during the 18th century.
in 1773 philip vickers fithian left his home in princeton new jersey for the unfamiliar world of virginia.
fithian a theology student had agreed to tutor the children of robert carter iii and his wife at their magnificent brick manor house.
in fithian s journal of his one year stay there he recalled an evening walk along the property.
a personal voice philip vickers fithian we strolld down the pasture quite to the river admlr ing the pleasantness of the evening the delightsome prospect of the river hills huts on the summits low bottoms trees of various kinds and sizes cattle sheep feeding some near us others at a great distance on the green sides of the hills.
journal letters of philip vickers fithian the shirley plantation house in virginia is representative of many old southern mansions.
built in 1723 it was the birthplace of ann hili carter the mother of civil war general robert e lee.
plantations or large farms like the carters played a dominant role in the south s economy which had come to rely heavily on agriculture.
the development of this plantation economy led to a largely rural society in which enslaved africans played an unwilling yet important role.
a plantation economy arises in the south while there were cities in the south on the whole the region developed as a rural society of self sufficient plantations.
plantations sprang up along the rivers making it possible for planters to ship their goods directly to the northern colonies and europe without the need for public dock facilities.
because plantation owners produced much of what they needed on their property they did not often need shops bakeries and markets.
review unit 31 plantations specialized in raising a single cash crop one grown primarily for sale rather than for livestock feed.
in maryland virginia and north carolina planters grew tobacco.
planters in south carolina and georgia harvested rice and later indigo for blue dye as cash crops.
life in a diverse southern society in addition to english settlers thousands of german immigrants as well as scots and scots irish settled in the south.
women in southern society as in the north endured second class citizenship.
for the most part they could not vote preach or own property.
while small farmers made up the majority of the southern population prosperous plantation owners controlled much of the south s economy as well as its political and social institutions.
at the bottom of southern society were enslaved africans.
in the 18th century southerners turned increasingly to slavery to fill the labor needs of their agricultural economy.
by 1690 about 13 000 slaves were working in the southern colonies.
by 1750 the number of slaves had increased to around 200 000.
the middle passage during the 17th century africans had become part of a transatlantic trading network described as the triangular trade.
this term refers to a trading process in which goods and enslaved people were exchanged across the atlantic ocean.
for example merchants carrying rum and other goods from the new england colonies exchanged their merchandise for enslaved africans.
africans were then transported to the west indies where they were sold for sugar and molasses.
these goods were then sold to rum producers in new england and the cycle began again.
the voyage that brought africans to the west indies and later to north america was known as main idea summarizing describe the social structure of southern society.
stowage of the british slave ship brookes under the regulated slave trade attof uaa.
r r plan of lower otck with the stowage of 294 slaves f these seiko stowed under the shelves as shewn in figure s afiovrc j sb the middle passage after the middle leg of the transatlantic trade triangle.
extreme cruelty characterized this journey.
in the ports of west africa european traders branded africans for identification and packed them into the dark holds of large ships.
on board a slave ship africans were beaten into submission and often fell victim to diseases that spread rapidly.
some committed suicide by jumping overboard.
nearly 13 percent of the africans aboard each slave ship perished during the this plan and section of the british slave ship brookes was published in london around 1790 by a leading british antislavery advocate named thomas clarkson.
the image effectively conveys the degradation and inhumanity of the slave trade which reduced human beings to the level of merchandise.
i tr h mtwino the atmast fi aothttmal su rouflo the wmm or sims of tmt lower otck st meah of flatforme m shelve heamofoallrh naohrch outttsfow b0 tht h wmaho k t wihafeohlt hh htxf t zht ottwcrk tmt caim ans aar lu under the beam.
chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era brutal trip to the new world.
one enslaved african olaudah equiano recalled the inhumane conditions on his trip from west africa to the west indies in 1762 when he was 12 years old.
a personal voice olaudah equiano the closeness of the place and the heat of the climate added to the number in the ship which was so crowded that each had scarcely room to turn himself almost suffocated us.
this produced copious perspirations so that the air soon became unfit for respiration from a variety of loathsome smells and brought on a sickness among the slaves of which many died.
the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano africans cope in their new world africans who survived the ocean voyage entered an extremely difficult life of bondage in north america.
probably 80 to 90 percent worked in the fields.
the other 10 to 20 percent worked as domestic slaves or as artisans.
domestic slaves worked in the houses of their masters main idea making inferences if 13 percent of the enslaved africans died on the journey to america why did the merchants treat them so badly.
main idea drawing conclusions cj how did enslaved africans maintain their sense of self esteem.
vocabulary tallow fat from livestock used to make candles and soap olaudah equiano cooking cleaning and helping to raise the master s children.
artisans developed skills as carpenters blacksmiths and bricklayers and were sometimes loaned out to the master s neighbors.
in the midst of the horrors of slavery africans developed a way of life based on their cultural heritage.
they kept alive their musical dance and storytelling traditions.
when a slave owner sold a parent to another plantation other slaves stepped in to raise the children left behind.
slaves also resisted their position of subservience.
throughout the colonies planters reported slaves faking illness breaking tools and staging work slowdowns.
a number of slaves tried to run away even though escape attempts brought severe punishment.
some slaves even pushed their resistance to open revolt.
one uprising the stono rebellion began on a september sunday in 1739.
that morning about 20 slaves gathered at the stono river just south of charles town later charleston south carolina.
wielding guns and other weapons they killed several planter families and marched south beating drums and inviting other slaves to join them in their plan to flee to spanish held florida.
many slaves died in the fighting that followed.
those captured were executed.
despite the rebellion s failure it sent a chill through many southern colonists and led to the tightening of harsh slave laws already in place.
commerce grows in the north the development of thriving commercial cities and diverse economic activities gradually made the north radically different from the south.
grinding wheat harvesting fish and sawing lumber became thriving industries.
by the 1770s the colonists had built one third of all british ships and were producing more iron than england did.
many colonists prospered.
in particular the number of merchants grew.
by the mid 1700s merchants were one of the most powerful groups in the north.
in contrast to the south where charles town was the only major port the north boasted boston new york and philadelphia.
colonial cities and trade the expansion of trade caused port cities to grow.
philadelphia became the second largest port in the british empire after london.
toward the end of the 1700s yankee traders were sailing around cape horn at the tip of south america to trade with spanish missionaries as far away as california.
there they exchanged manufactured goods for hides tallow wine olive oil and grain raised with the help of the native american labor on the missions.
review unit 33 daily urban life in colonial times by the mid 18th century colonial cities were prosperous and growing.
brick rowhouses were replacing the wooden structures of the 17th century while large mansions and churches built of brick or stone were rising everywhere.
english colonists had brought with them a preference for houses as opposed to apartments which were the norm in the cities of other european countries.
as in britain the size of the house indicated the social position of its occupant.
in contemporary philadelphia elfreths alley preserves the scale and appearance of a mid 18th century city street.
narrow rowhouses like these were occupied by artisans and shopkeepers.
a neighborhood like this could have commercial and residential uses.
many people lived above the shops where they worked.
the house known as cliveden also in philadelphia was completed in 1767.
in contrast to the artisan or lower middle class housing of elfreths alley this large freestanding mansion shows the kind of building that the rich could afford.
the northern colonies attracted a variety of immigrants.
during the 18th century about 463 000 europeans migrated to america.
before 1700 most immigrants came as indentured servants from england but by 1755 over one half of all european immigrants were from other countries.
they included large numbers of germans and scots irish.
other ethnic groups included the dutch in new york scandinavians in delaware and jews in such cities as newport and philadelphia.
farming in the north unlike southern plantations a farm in new england and the middle colonies typically produced several cash crops rather than a single one.
because growing wheat and corn did not require as much labor as did growing tobacco and rice northerners had less need to rely on slave labor.
however slavery did exist in new england and was extensive throughout the middle colonies as was racial prejudice against blacks free or enslaved.
as in the south women in the north had extensive work responsibilities but few legal or social rights.
the enlightenment during the 1700s the enlightenment an intellectual movement that began in europe and the great awakening a colonial religious movement influenced people s thinking throughout the thirteen colonies.
european ideas inspire the colonists during the renaissance in europe scientists had begun looking beyond religious beliefs and traditional assumptions for answers about how the world worked.
careful observation and reason or rational thought led to the discovery of some of the natural laws and principles governing the world and human behavior.
the work of nicolaus copernicus galileo galilei and sir isaac newton established that the earth chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era bmaini ie ea analyzing effects what effects did the enlightenment have on political thought in the colonies.
vocabulary revival a time of reawakened interest in religion revolved around the sun and not vice versa.
this observation which challenged the traditional assumption that the earth was the center of the universe was at first fiercely resisted.
it was thought to contradict the bible and other religious teachings.
the early scientists also concluded that the world is governed by fixed mathematical laws rather than solely by the will of god.
these ideas about nature led to a movement called the enlightenment in which philosophers valued reason and scientific methods.
enlightenment ideas spread from europe to the colonies where people such as benjamin franklin embraced the notion of obtaining truth through experimentation and reason.
for example franklin s most famous experiment flying a kite in a thunderstorm demonstrated that lightning is a form of electrical power.
enlightenment ideas spread quickly through the colonies by means of books and pamphlets.
literacy was particularly high in new england because the puritans had long supported public education partly to make it possible for everyone to read the bible.
however enlightenment views were disturbing to some people.
the enlightenment suggested that people could use science and logic rather than the pronouncements of church authorities to arrive at truths.
as the english poet john donne had written the new philosophy calls all in doubt.
the enlightenment also had a profound effect on political thought in the colonies.
colonial leaders such as thomas jefferson reasoned that human beings are born with natural rights that governments must respect.
enlightenment principles eventually would lead many colonists to question the authority of the british monarchy.
lak history video did you know ben franklin i.
the great awakening by the early 1700s the puritans had lost some of their influence.
under the new massachusetts charter of 1691 puritans were required to practice religious tolerance and could no longer limit voting privileges to members of their own church.
furthermore as puritan merchants prospered they developed a taste for fine houses stylish clothes and good food and wine.
as a result their interest in maintaining the strict puritan code declined.
a series of religious revivals aimed at restoring the intensity and dedication of the early puritan church swept through the colonies.
these came to be known collectively as the great awakening.
the british minister george whitefield was a major force behind the great awakening.
in his seven journeys to the american colonies between 1738 and 1769 whitefield preached dramatic sermons that brought many listeners to tears.
review unit 35 1 key players benjamin franklin 1706 1790 a true student of the enlightenment benjamin franklin devised an orderly method to develop moral perfection in himself.
in his autobiography he records how he decided on a list of virtues he thought he should have.
then every night he reviewed whether his behavior lived up to those standards and recorded his faults in a notebook.
originally he concentrated on only 12 virtues until a quaker friend told him he was too proud.
franklin promptly added a 13th virtue to the list the virtue of humility which he felt he never quite achieved.
franklin took great pleasure in seeing his character improve.
he wrote i was surprisd to find myself so much fuller of faults than i had imagined but i had the satisfaction of seeing them diminish jonathan edwards 1703 1758 unlike benjamin franklin jonathan edwards did not believe that humans had the power to perfect themselves.
descended from a long line of puritan ministers he believed that however you may have reformed your life in many things all were sinners who were destined for hell unless they had a great change of heart edwards was a brilliant thinker who entered yale college when he was only 13.
his preaching was one of the driving forces of the great awakening.
ironically when the religious revival died down edwardss own congregation rejected him for being too strict about doctrine.
edwards moved to stockbridge massachusetts in 1751 where he lived most of his remaining years as a missionary to a native american settlement.
religious revivals among those clergy who sought to revive the fervor of the original puritan vision was jonathan edwards of northampton massachusetts.
one of the most learned religious scholars of his time edwards preached that it was not enough for people simply to come to church.
in order to be saved they must feel their sinfulness and feel god s love for them.
in his most famous sermon delivered in 1741 edwards vividly described god s mercy toward sinners.
a personal voice jonathan edwards the god that holds you over the pit of hell much as one holds a spider or some loathsome insect over the fire abhors hates you and is dreadfully provoked his wrath towards you burns like fire he looks upon you as worthy of nothing else but to be cast into the fire.
and yet it is nothing but his hand that holds you from falling into the fire every moment.
sinners in the hands of an angry god while the great awakening which lasted throughout the 1730s and 1750s restored many colonists christian religious faith the movement also challenged the authority of established churches.
preachers trav eled from village to village attracting thousands to outdoor revival meetings giving impassioned sermons and stirring people to rededicate themselves to god.
some colonists abandoned their old puritan or anglican congregations while independent denominations such as the baptists and methodists gained new members.
effects of the great awakening and enlightenment although the great awakening emphasized emotionalism and the enlightenment emphasized reason the two movements had similar consequences.
both caused people to question traditional authority.
moreover both stressed the importance of the individual the enlightenment by emphasizing human reason and the great awakening by de emphasizing the role of church authority.
because these movements helped lead the colonists to question britain s authority over their lives they were important in creating the intellectual and social atmosphere that eventually led to the american revolution.
main idea analyzing effects what effects did the great awakening have on organized religion in the colonies.
iapter 1 exploration and the colonial era background hats made from beaver skin were popular in europe beginning in the late 16th century.
because of the demand for beaver the fur trade was enormously successful.
main idea contrasting how was the french colony in north america unlike the british colonies.
the french and indian war amsaw awwwiibmbwaweabewamik9wwssa9sw r.
as 3bb as the french empire in north america expanded it collided with the growing british empire.
during the late 17th and first half of the 18th centuries france and great britain had fought three inconclusive wars.
each war had begun in europe but spread to their overseas colonies.
in 1754 after six relatively peaceful years the french british conflict reignited.
this conflict is known as the french and indian war.
rivals for an empire from the start the french colony in north america called new france differed from the british colonies.
typical french colonists were young single men who engaged in the fur trade and catholic priests who sought to convert native americans.
the french were more interested in exploiting their territories than in settling them.
however they usually enjoyed better relations with native americans in part because they needed the local people as partners in the fur trade.
in fact several military alliances developed out of the french native american trade relationship.
jf war erupts one major area of contention between france and great britain was the rich ohio river valley just west of pennsylvania and virginia.
in 1754 the french built fort duquesne in the region despite the fact that the virginia government had already granted 200 000 acres of land in the ohio country to a group of wealthy planters.
in response the virginia governor sent militia a group of ordinary citizens who performed military duties to evict the french.
this was the opening of the french and indian war the fourth war between great britain and france for control of north america.
in the first battle of the war the french delivered a crushing defeat to the outnumbered virginians and their leader an ambitious 22 year old officer named george washington.
a year after his defeat washington again headed into battle this time as an aide to the british general edward braddock.
braddock s first task was to relaunch an attack on fort duquesne.
as braddock and nearly 1 500 soldiers neared the fort french soldiers and their native american allies ambushed them.
the startled british soldiers turned and fled.
in this scene from the french and indian war the british general edward braddock meets defeat and death on his march to fort duquesne in july of 1755.
i european claims in north america mm a 1wvv i il7vv i i llg l il li l ls uc i ioil7i i vi the british empire have affected its relationship with the colonies.
the weakness of the british army surprised washington who showed great courage.
as washington tried to rally the troops two horses were shot from under him and four bullets pierced his coat yet he escaped unharmed.
many other colonists began to question the competence of the british army which suffered defeat after defeat during 1755 and 1756.
britain defeats an old enemy angered by french victories britain s king george ii selected new leaders to run his government in 1757.
one of these was william pitt the elder an energetic self confident politician.
under pitt the british and colonial troops finally began winning battles.
these successes earned britain the support of the powerful iroquois giving britain some native american allies to counterbalance those of france.
in september 1759 the war took a dramatic and decisive turn on the plains of abraham just outside quebec.
under cover of night british troops scaled the high cliffs that protected the city and defeated the french in a surprise attack.
the british triumph at quebec brought them victory in the war.
the war officially ended in 1763 with the signing of the treaty of paris.
great britain claimed canada and virtually all of north america east of the mississippi river.
britain also took florida from spain which had allied itself with france.
the treaty permitted spain to keep possession of its lands west of the mississippi and the city of new orleans which it had gained from france in 1762.
france retained control of only a few islands and small colonies near newfoundland in the west indies and elsewhere.
38 chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era main idea making inferences how did great britains victory over france affect native americans.
changes for native americans others who lost ground in the war were the native americans who found the victorious british harder to bargain with than the french had been.
native americans resented the growing number of british settlers crossing the appalachian mountains and feared the settlers would soon drive away the game they depended on for survival.
in the spring of 1763 the ottawa leader pontiac recognized that the french loss was a loss for native americans.
a personal voice pontiac when i go to see the english commander and say to him that some of our comrades are dead instead of bewailing their death as our french brothers do he laughs at me and at you.
if i ask for anything for our sick he refuses with the reply that he has no use for us.
for all this you can well see that they are seeking our ruin.
therefore my brothers we must all swear their destruction and wait no longer.
quoted in red and white led by pontiac native americans captured eight british forts in the ohio valley and the great lakes area and laid siege to another.
in response british officers deliberately presented blankets contaminated with smallpox to two delaware chiefs during peace negotiations and the virus spread rapidly among the native americans.
weakened by disease and tired of fighting most native american groups negotiated treaties with the british by the summer of 1766.
to avoid further costly conflicts with native americans the british government prohibited colonists from settling west of the appalachian mountains.
the proclamation of 1763 established a proclamation line along the appalachians which the colonists were not allowed to cross.
however the colonists eager to expand westward from the increasingly crowded atlantic seaboard ignored the proclamation and continued to stream onto native american lands.
terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its signficance.
triangular trade benjamin franklin french and indian war middle passage great awakening william pitt enlightenment jonathan edwards pontiac proclamation of 1763 i main idea using your notes re create the tree diagram below.
fill in the diagram to show developments that took place in the colonies during the 18th century.
critical thinking analyzing causes why did the plantation system come to play such an important role in the southern economy.
summarizing how did the enlightenment affect the colonies.
analyzing primary sources read the following quotation written in 1774 by the african american poet phillis wheatley.
how does the quotation express both religious belief and enlightenment thought.
analyzing issues in what ways was slavery a brutal system.
support your statement with examples from the text.
think about how people were taken from africa the working conditions of enslaved people the attitudes toward enslaved people which events or developments helped prepare the colonies for independence.
for in every human breast god has implanted a principle which we call love of freedom review unit 39 daily life 1630 1763 colonial courtship the concept of dating among teenagers was nonexistent in colonial times.
young people were considered either children or adults and as important as marriage was in the colonies sweethearts were older than one might suspect.
the practices of courtship and marriage varied among the different communities.
frontier or backcountry people andrew jackson depicted with his wife in the painting below stole his wife she was willing from her family.
jackson was following a custom of the backcountry people who lived along the western edge of the colonies.
these colonists mostly scots irish based their marriages on the old custom of abduction stealing the bride often with her consent.
even regular marriages began with the groom and his friends coming to steal the bride.
much drinking and dancing accompanied these wild and hilarious weddings.
quakers quaker couples intent on marrying needed the consent not only of the parents but also of the whole quaker community.
quakers who wanted to marry had to go through a 16 step courtship phase before they could wed quaker women however were known to reject men at the last minute.
is puritans for puritans marriage was a civil contract not a religious or sacred union.
although adults strictly supervised a couples courting parents allowed two unusual practices.
one was the use of a courting stick a long tube into which the couple could whisper while the family was in another room.
the other was the practice of bundling a young man spent the night in the same bed as his sweetheart with a large bundling board shown above between them.
before marrying the couple had to allow for puritan leaders to voice any objections to the marriage at the meeting house.
passing that the couple would marry in a very simple civil ceremony and share a quiet dinner.
chapter 1 data file who married.
puritans 98 of males and 94 of females married grooms were usually a few years older than brides discouraged marriages between first cousins virginians 25 of males never married most females married grooms nearly 10 years older than brides allowed first cousin marriages quakers 16 of women single at age 50 forbade first cousin marriages the south many african slaves married in a jumping the broomstick ceremony in which the bride and groom jumped over a broomstick to seal their union.
although there is disagreement among african american scholars some suggest that the above painting depicts a slave wedding on a south carolina plantation in the late 1700s.
frontier people almost all women and most men married ages of bride and groom about the same youngest group to marry virginia in virginia marriage was a sacred union.
since the marriage often involved a union of properties and love was not necessary parents were heavily involved in the negotiations.
in this illustration from a dance manual above a young upper class couple work to improve their social graces by practicing an elaborate dance step.
average age at marriage group males females puritan 26 23 virginians 26 19 quakers in delaware 31 29 in penn.
n j 26 22 philadelphians 26 23 frontier people 21 19 modern americans 27 25 i review unit 41 review chapter terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its connection to exploration and the colonial era.
1 nomadic 2.
reformation 3.
christopher columbus 4.
columbian exchange 5 indentured servant 6.
navigation acts 8 triangular trade 9.
enlightenment 10.
french and indian war main ideas use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
the americas west africa and europe pages 4 13 1.
what effects did portuguese trade routes have on west africa.
in what ways did renaissance ideas and attitudes inspire and motivate european explorers.
spanish north america pages 14 20 3.
what impact did the columbian exchange have on peoples lives throughout the world.
why did the spanish want to colonize the americas.
early british colonies pages 21 30 5.
how did the goals of the jamestown colonists differ from those of the puritan colonists in massachusetts.
why did the english parliament pass the navigation acts.
what effects did they have.
the colonies come of age pages 31 39 7.
how did immigration contribute to the ethnic diversity of the american colonies after 1700.
how did the differences between the northern and southern economies lead to the development of two distinct cultural regions.
critical thinking using your notes in a chart like the one shown compare and contrast spanish and british colonial policies toward native americans.
colonial policies toward native americans spanish british developing historical perspective what were some of the cultural characteristics of the ancient civilizations that flourished in the americas.
interpreting maps look at the map on page 29.
compare the economic activities of the three regions of british colonies in the americas new england middle and southern.
42 chapter 1 exploration and the colonial era texas test practice use the cartoon below and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1.
benjamin franklin drew and published this cartoon in 1754 soon after the start of the french and indian war.
the cartoon depicts a snake divided into eight parts representing the eight colonies at the time.
what message did franklin intend.
a the colonies have been broken apart by the war.
b the colonies should unite to protect themselves from the french and the native americans.
c the colonies should join with the french to protect themselves from the native americans.
d the colonies should unite to declare independence from britain.
anne hutchinson was banished from massachusetts because she taught that f colonists should remain loyal to the english king.
g individuals could interpret the bible for themselves.
h the colonists should not trade with local native americans.
j the puritans should break away from the church of england.
3 in the 1700s an intellectual movement known as the enlightenment developed in europe and spread to the colonies.
benjamin franklin and thomas jefferson were among those colonists heavily influenced by enlightenment ideas.
in which of the following ways did the enlightenment affect the colonists.
a enlightenment ideas led people to expand the trade in enslaved persons.
b enlightenment ideas stirred people to rededicate themselves to god.
c enlightenment ideas persuaded people to establish colonies in order to generate a favorable balance of trade.
d enlightenment ideas convinced people of the importance of civil rights.
71 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history writesmart collaborative learni think about the issues you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter.
now that you know how native americans way of life was changed by the arrival of the europeans form small groups and discuss the following question would you have resisted or helped the europeans if you had been a native american during the days of european colonization.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write a paragraph summarizing your groups discussion.
working in small groups do library or internet research to learn more about the history of one of the 13 colonies.
create an exhibit documenting the first 100 years of the colonys development.
find images and write text to highlight key events and important people in the early history of the colony.
mvwritesmart you have been living in the massachusetts bay colony for nearly a year.
you have been asked by leaders of the colony to write an advertisement that will persuade new settlers to come to massachusetts.
focus your advertisement on the advantages of living in the massachusetts bay colony.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write your advertisement.
review unit 43 end of chapter skill activity using academic and social studies vocabulary defining the skill within this textbook there are two main types of words.
the first academic words includes words that are important in all classes not just in social studies.
these are words that your teacher may use during classroom instruction such as interpret or distribute.
a second type social studies words include words and phrases you will see as you read social studies materials.
words like civilization century and democracy are considered social studies words and are used primarily to describe social studies content.
understanding the skill strategy identify and use social studies terms to identify the social studies terms locate boldface terms and other key terms that explain the historical content.
this excerpt is about life in the early american colonies.
read the strategies to learn how to identify and use social studies terms in a historical context.
life in the early american colonies slavery existed in all the colonies but it became a vital source of labor in the south during the 1600s enslaved africans were brought to north america through a network of transatlantic trade also known as the triangular trade.
through this trading network goods and enslaved africans were exchanged between three points england its colonies and africa.
by contrast the new england and middle colonies did not rely on slave labor or the production of a single commodity also called a single staple crop such as tobacco or rice.
most people were farmers but they grew a wide variety of crops the new england colonies traded actively with the islands of the west indies.
in addition to foods they ex ported all kinds of other items ranging from barrels to horses.
in return they imported sugar and molasses.
all this trade resulted in the growth of small towns and larger port cities.
identify academic and social studies words.
look for terms that are in boldface print or are defined in the margin.
sometimes specialized academic or social studies words are highlighted.
ask questions to understand what each term means.
reread text to understand the meaning of each term.
look for words that indicate a definition or key term is approaching.
often terms such as called and known as indicate that a definition is coming up.
in this case single staple crop is a definition of single commodity.
read the surrounding text to further clarify meaning.
why was the transatlantic trade called the triangular trade.
think about what you know about the time frame or ideas being discussed.
use your prior knowledge to put the idea into context.
what do you already know about slavery in the colonies in the 1600s and 1700s.
consider the topic at hand.
what words help convey the topic.
this alerts you to their relevance to the topic and helps you better understand the historical concept being discussed.
what is a trading network.
43 ski strategy make a diagram making a diagram can help you to understand the vocabulary terms that you will encounter throughout the text.
sometimes your own background knowledge or the use of context clues may not be enough to determine what a word means.
in that case ask a teacher or classmate to help you develop your background knowledge so that you can understand the definition of the word.
you may also look the word up in a dictionary to find the actual definition.
applying the skill turn to page 28 in your book and read the section titled mercantilism and the navigation acts.
choose one of the unfamiliar vocabulary terms that you encounter in this section and use a diagram to help you understand it.
identify academic and social studies words.
what social studies terms can you find in the text and in the margin.
you may recognize a term from seeing it in the section opener.
what is mercantilism.
ask questions to understand what each term means.
what does mercantalism mean.
what terms and grammatical marks help you know what it means.
why did colonies play a critical role in mercantilism.
read the surrounding text to help further clarify meaning.
which sentence helps you better understand what the theory of mercantilism entails.
how does reading this help your understanding of the term.
think about what you know about the time frame or ideas being discussed.
use your prior knowledge to help put the term or idea into context.
what do you already know about how and when the colonies in north america were established.
consider the topic at hand.
what words help convey the concept of economic growth and expansion.
how does knowing the topic of economics help your understanding of this section.
43 sk2 history the maya developed one of the most advanced civilizations in the americas but their story is shrouded in mystery.
around a d 250 the maya began to build great cities in southern mexico and central america.
they developed a writing system practiced astronomy and built magnificent palaces and pyramids with little more than stone tools.
around a d 900 however the maya abandoned their cities leaving their monuments to be reclaimed by the jungle and for a time forgotten.
explore some of the incredible monuments and cultural achievements of the ancient maya online.
you can find a wealth of information video clips primary sources and more at watch the video to learn how the actions of one spanish missionary nearly destroyed the written record of the maya world.
thus let it he done.
let the emptiness he filled.
let the water recede and make a void let the earth appear and become solid let it he done.
they said and instantly it was made.
finding the city of palenque watch the video to learn about the great maya city of palenque and the european discovery of the site in the eighteenth century.
vst essential question mynotebook what were the causes and major events of the american revolution and how did the new american republic develop.
texas essential knowledge and skills teks a 1c 21b 23a 23c 26e 26f 29c section 1 colonial resistance and rebellion main idea conflicts between great britain and the american colonies escalated until the colonists finally declared their independence.
section 2 the war for independence main idea key american victories reversed british advances during the american revolutionary war.
section 3 confederation and the constitution main idea american leaders created the constitution as a blueprint of government for the united states.
section 4 launching the new nation main idea with george washington as its first president the united states began creating a working government for its new nation.
the sons of liberty pull down a statue of george iii on the bowling green new york july 9 1776.
usa world 1760 george 111 becomes king of great britain.
17651 british parliament passes the stamp act.
1765 1773 colonists stage the boston tea party.
1774 parliament passes the intolerable acts.
first continental congress convenes.
1774 reign of louis xvi begins in france.
1775 second continental congress convenes.
1776 colonies declare independence.
1775 1776 adam smiths the wealth of nations is published.
