chapter 3 settlement alliances and resistance 1607 1718 the english settle in north america england s wars england s colonies france takes control of the heart of the continent developments in spanish colonies north of mexico chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 1689 1754 england s glorious revolution and the rights of englishmen the plantation world from a society with slaves to a slave society stability and instability in the british world the international context i settlements alliances and resistance chapter objective trade in goods for furs from native americans and in colonial products especially barrels of tobacco to europe was key to the success of european colonies in the 1600s as illustrated by this encounter between an american indian trapper and demonstrate an understanding of the motivations for and results of the european settlements in north america.
learning objectives the english settle in north america explain why the english began to settle in north america and how slavery was introduced in the english colonies.
england s wars england s colonies analyze the relationship between politics in england internal colonial tensions and life in the english colonies in north america during the 1600s.
france takes control of the heart of a continent explain france s growing role and power in north america and its impact on english and spanish colonies.
3 4 developments in spanish colonies north of mexico analyze the impact of indian uprisings and the expansion of other european powers on spain s colonies in new mexico texas and california.
for well over 100 years after columbus europeans spent more time trying to get around or through north america to reach asia than they spent paying attention to the lands that would become the united states or canada.
spains vast american empire was based in mexico and peru.
the spanish found mexico central and south america and the caribbean more rewarding than they did north america which lacked gold or silver and which they considered barren and icy.
for decades most european contact with north america was limited to filling the enormous european demand for codfish.
fishermen from france england and the basque regions of spain spent summers off the coast of canada and maine.
they set up temporary stations in newfoundland repaired their boats and dried their fish.
few stayed the winter and no permanent colonies were founded.
the native americans found the fishermen intrusive.
the fishermen resented that the indians plundered stores left behind over the winter.
but most of the time both sides simply avoided each other.
nevertheless occasional contact was all it took to begin the spread of european diseases among the tribes of north america well in advance of more sustained settlement.
by the late 1500s however some in england and france as well as spain were developing new interests in north america.
in 1585 richard hakluyt the elder wrote pamphlet for the virginia enterprise in an effort to convince his countrymen that a settlement or planting as he called it was in their interests.
he recognized that the native peoples might not welcome the english but he said we may if we will proceed with extremity conquer fortify and plant in soils most sweet most pleasant most strong and most fertile and in the end bring them all in subjection and to civility.
for hakluyt subjection and conversion of the native americans to protestant christianity meant a rich profit and a military base for england against catholic spain.
others agreed including king james i who succeeded elizabeth i in 1603.
with the settlement of jamestown virginia in 1607 the english came to america to stay.
only 1 year later france established a permanent settlement at quebec on the saint lawrence river.
in 1610 spanish authorities also moved to a new permanent capital for their vast new mexico territory that they named santa fe.
spain may have been first but england and france were not far behind in establishing north american colonies.
from the settlements of jamestown and quebec england and france claimed huge tracts of lands that they would eventually come to dominate.
the english expanded from tiny jamestown to control most of the atlantic coast north of florida and west toward the allegheny mountains.
from quebec the french built trade and military centers all along the saint lawrence river and down the mississippi to new orleans on the gulf of mexico a vast region they called new france.
after 1610 the spanish expanded their settlements in new mexico though florida was generally ignored.
in the 1500s explorers had come and quickly departed from north america.
in the 1600s the europeans began to stay.
initially some indian tribes saw europeans as welcome trading partners or military allies against other tribes.
especially in the later 1600s when settlements grew too quickly disease spread too rapidly or the europeans became too demanding indian resistance stiffened.
the story of the growth of european communities in north america and the responses by american indian tribes sometimes friendly trade and sometimes open warfare is the heart of this chapter.
the english settle in north america explain why the english began to settle in north america and how slavery was introduced in the english colonies.
when james i became king of england in 1603 he was anxious to make peace with spain.
he quickly ended the royal support for legalized piracy that queen elizabeth i had provided though piracy itself flourished throughout the 1600s.
but many in england wanted a larger role in the americas.
if they were not going to steal americas wealth from the spanish on the seas then they would need to find other ways to gain it.
investors seeking financial gain created the virginia company.
they told those they sent to america to try if they can find any mineral and to seek passage to the other sea the longed for shortcut to china.
the investors also advised them to build settlements at some distance from the coast to avoid a spanish attack and to gain as much knowledge and food from the indians as possible before that they perceive you mean to plant among them within about 30 years england had settled or claimed large territories and their claims continued to expand into the 1700s see map 3 1.
3 1 significant oates 3 1 1607 jamestown virginia founded by english 1608 i s quebec founded by french 1610 santa fe founded as spanish capital of j j new mexico 1619 african slaves sold in jamestown 1620 plymouth massachusetts founded by bj english pilgrims 1624 fort orange later albany new york founded by the dutch 5 1626 new amsterdam later new york city founded by dutch 1630 boston massachusetts founded by english puritans 1634 maryland founded by lord baltimore as a haven for english catholics 1636 rhode island founded 1637 pequot war in new england 1638 first african slaves brought to boston massachusetts 1639 fundamental orders of connecticut confirm government for hartford based colony founded in 1637 1642 1649 english civil war 1649 1658 england governed as a puritan commonwealth 1660 charles ii begins to rule in england 1661 maryland law defines slavery as lifelong and inheritable 1663 carolina colony founded by england 1664 english capture new netherlands colony rename it new york 1675 king philip s war in massachusetts 1676 bacon s rebellion in virginia 1680 pueblo indian revolt in new mexico 1681 pennsylvania founded by william penn as a haven for english quakers 1682 lasalle claims the mississippi river valley for france 1718 french establish new orleans spanish found san antonio texas colonizing virginia jamestown in 1607 105 men from the virginia company arrived in north america.
they named their new community jamestown in honor of king james the company appomted a council of six to govern the colony and left t to the council to elect its own president.
but things in jamestown did not go well.
i6 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 57 maine assachusetts plymouth eft plymouth newport rhode island connecticut long island sound w amsterdam netherland jamestown roano roanoke cape hatteras atlantic ocean chesapeake bay map 3 1 spread of settlement atlantic coast european colonies 1607 1639.
the earliest european colonies on the atlantic coast north of florida began as very small settlements close to the coast and then spread into the interior.
new sweden became the core of delaware while new netherland stretching along the hudson river later became the core of both new york and new jersey.
massachusetts bay and plymouth were separate colonies until merged with massachusetts in 1686.
ihe unhealthy conditions at the site the colonists selected along the janies river probably killed more of them than any other cause.
although they thought they had selected a very fit place they had in fact chosen land with a terrible water supply.
the water from the james river was tidal.
at high tide it was salt water.
at low tide it was full of slime and filth ihe years 1607 and 1608 were drought years leading to a severe shortage of food.
ihe winter of 1607 1608 was extremely cold.
ihe indians were suffering from the same drought and cold and were reluctant to trade food with the colonists.
waterborne disease and starvation weakened bodies and few of the english escaped terrible bouts of sickness.
ihe members of the council constantly disagreed they ended up executing one of the councilors as a spanish spy and the rest of the colonists fought each other bitterly.
although the colonys primary purpose was to enrich investors in london those who were actually in virginia found little reason to care whether the investors were enriched or not.
england seemed far away.
john smith the only member of the council not from the british nobility complained much they blamed us for not converting the savages when those colonists they sent us were little better if not worse by 1608 only 38 of the 105 colonists were still alive.
the founders of jamestown faced a different situation from what columbus had encountered in 1492 when the indians of hispaniola gasped in awe at the ships swords and men with beards.
by 1607 generations of atlantic coast indians had substantial experience with europeans.
they had seen their ships traded with them and fought them.
some had even traveled to europe and brought back reports of how these white adventurers lived.
europeans who were shipwrecked or from failed colonies perhaps even from roanoke had melded into the indian tribes and shared their knowledge with them.
ihe spanish at st augustine had tried to establish a northern outpost in the region.
ihe indians opinion of europeans was not favorable.
for the paspahegh tribe on whose land jamestown was built the english were trespassing.
and relationships between jamestown and all of the local indians a confederation of algonquian speaking tribes of 13 000 to 15 000 people were tense.
during its first weeks the colony was attacked and only after that did the settlers build a stockade.
ihe english came to understand that the paspahegh and some 30 other nearby tribes were under the rule of an overlord they called powhatan whom the english described as functioning something like an emperor over the tribal chiefs.
if the colonists wanted to make a lasting accommodation it needed to be with him.
by his own account his autobiography the true travels adventures and observations ofcaptaine john smith published in 1630 john smith saved the colony.
smith was an experienced soldier who had fought in austria against the muslim turks had been captured and sold into slavery in istanbul escaped and had made his way through russia germany and north africa before coming home to england.
he brought all of this experience to virginia.
early in his virginia career smith had one of the most famous indian encounters in american history.
during the early months of the settlement while powhatan was trying to understand what these englishmen wanted smith was exploring the countryside.
he was taken prisoner by the algonquians and brought before powhatan.
in smiths telling he was about to be executed he was laid on the ground with his head on a rock and men with clubs stood around him.
then powhatans daughter pocahontas already known to smith for her work as a negotiator with jamestown suddenly got his head in her armes and laid her owne upon his to save him from death powhatan granted smith a reprieve.
most historians now believe that powhatan scripted the whole event.
after his rescue powhatan part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 told smith that now they were friends and gave him an algonquian name.
far from being executed smith had been adopted.
perhaps powhatan aimed to make smith one of the many chiefs who reported to him.
smith did not accept powhatan s offer of a place within the algonquian confederation though he did not formally reject it either.
the english offered powhatan an english crown that would symbolize his place in a world ruled by king james.
each side was jockeying for signs of submission from the other.
in the early years powhatan could easily have destroyed jamestown either by a direct attack or simply by withholding food.
instead the powhatan confederation fed the english and saw benefit in trading with them.
the english brought valuable new goods.
powhatan meant to use the english to strengthen his position against other tribes.
the english avoided war and starvation and survived only by making an alliance with powhatan.
smiths success in dealing with powhatan was only part of his contribution to the colony.
after he became governor in 1608 he instituted a policy that he who does not work does not eat in a tiny colony far from home there could be no leisure class and no slackers.
to survive the colony needed the back breaking labor of farming and stockade building.
smith set everyone to it.
jamestown would have gone the way of roanoke or other failed ventures without his leadership.
but smith returned to england in 1609.
as a result he was not in jamestown for the starving time of the winter of 1609 1610 when the colony was almost wiped out by starvation and disease.
realizing that the peaceful trade he hoped for was not materializing.
powhatan withdrew from contact with the europeans.
consequently the english could not rely on the indians for food.
the english attacked the indians burned their houses plundered their sacred sites and stole their valuables.
but the english could not eat the valuables and another party seeking food was found dead with their mouths stuffed with bread by the indians.
in the spring of 1610 the surviving colonists decided to abandon jamestown.
they burned the town and sailed down the james river.
however before they reached the sea they were met by an english fleet with 400 men led by the newly appointed governor lord de la warr and enough supplies to last a year.
the colony was rebuilt where it had been.
while the colonists in virginia had been starving the virginia company in london had reorganized itself and sold stock to raise funds.
it also enlisted clergy across england to preach on the importance of colonizing virginia.
the venture was no longer described as a way to acquire quick riches but as a kind of national mission.
it was englands duty the ministers said to send missionaries and build a permanent protestant base in the americas that would convert indians and serve england in future confrontations with spain.
jamestown survived.
but for another decade life remained precarious.
thousands of colonists arrived in virginia having fled england after being thrown off their land but disease and limited food decimated their numbers.
a new economic foundation for the colonys survival had to be found if jamestown was to be of use.
after a decade of investing in jamestown its backers in london were frustrated.
no route to china had been found and there were no precious metals in the colony.
farming kept the colonists alive but returned little to the investors and there was conflict not lucrative trade with the indians.
that something new turned out to be a product that columbus had discovered tobacco.
before 1492 no europeans knew anything about tobacco though the peoples of north and south america had used it for medicinal and religious purposes for hundreds of years.
but columbus took some tobacco leaves with him on his first return voyage.
within a few decades smoking tobacco became popular in europe.
spaniards smoked tobacco from cuba.
king james who found smoking tobacco loathsome to the eye hateful to the nose harmful to the brain dangerous to the lungs also saw in it a chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance this illustration was published in 1624 as part of john smith s book about his time in virginia showing among other things his battles with the american indians his rescue by pocahontas and his map of the colony.
way to make significant profits and created a royal monopoly and virginia its settlers discovered had the ideal climate and conditions for producing tobacco.
the settlers might have preferred to find silver or gold but tobacco quickly became valuable.
in 1622 led by openchancanough powhatans brother and the tribes new leader the algonquians attacked and killed some 300 of the 1 200 english settlers.
the indians had lost patience with the continual encroachment of the english and the lack of trade or other benefits.
attacks continued for more than a decade.
the conflict eventually bankrupted the virginia company but in 1624 virginia had been converted to a royal colony by the king so efforts to settle the area continued.
the shift from trade with indians to tobacco based agriculture in the 1620s sealed the fate of the indians who had been essential to the colonys early survival.
indian land became more valuable to the english than the indians themselves and disease was decimating indian populations.
the new emphasis on agriculture also meant that many from england would settle and farm the land.
the shift also changed the lives of thousands of africans who were brought to the americas as slaves to produce the new crops.
tobacco was a key factor in reshaping who would be a part of this new english speaking nation and the role they would play in the society that emerged.
the massachusetts colonies plymouth boston and beyond during the first two decades of the 1600s many in england were coming to see the country as overpopulated.
changes in agriculture were forcing people out of subsistence farming and into cities.
englands economy was stagnating.
what better outlet for excess population than the new colonies across the ocean.
it was a great service some argued to ship the poor to do the agricultural work that was so badly needed across the sea.
king james especially wanted to see one group on its way across the ocean the protestant extremists who were forever agitating for more change within the church of england also known as the anglican or episcopal church.
0 part ii settlements old and new 1607 protestants who wanted a more complete reformation than the church of england represented came to be known as puritans.
when henry viii and his successors had broken with the pope they maintained a religious liturgy much like the catholic mass and a church governed by bishops.
queen elizabeth i had sought religious peace by tolerating differences in viewpoints as long as people accepted her religious authority and agreed to use the form of worship prescribed in the book of common prayer.
but the puritans wanted change much more change.
they believed that the office of bishop had no base in the bible and that each individual congregation should be self governing.
they believed each individual was responsible for reading and understanding the bible.
those who opposed the church of englands demands for religious uniformity also had major differences among themselves.
some believed it was their duty to stay within the anglican church and work for change.
others thought that change could come only from leaving the established church.
the former tried to purify the church of england and were known as puritans.
the latter group called separatists thought that the church was hopelessly corrupt and that they needed to form their own separate religious communities.
the separatists were constantly in trouble with the authorities since everyone in england was expected to belong to the anglican church and attend its worship every sunday.
to separate oneself from the church to worship in a place or form not authorized by the church was treason.
no wonder king james wanted to harry them out of the land and that so many of the separatists wanted to leave.
separatists also known as pilgrims founded the second permanent english colony in north america at plymouth massachusetts in 1620.
the origins of plymouth colony lay in a small community of separatists who left england for holland in 1607 where they were welcomed along with other english religious dissenters.
but the separatists still considered themselves english and they worried about raising children in holland who would become more dutch than english.
eventually they decided that english north america would be a happier place for them.
in 1619 these separatist pilgrims secured a grant of land from the virginia company got financial backing from investors and hired a ship.
after many delays the mayflower sailed from plymouth england on september 6 1620 with 102 passengers.
half the passengers were members of the congregation.
the others were strangers along for adventure or profit.
as william bradford who became plymouths historian wrote of this congregation they knew they were pilgrims after a stormy 2 month voyage they reached land far north of where they meant to go.
realizing that they were outside of the virginia territory and that their new community was split between its religious members and others they promised to combine ourselves together into a civil body politic for our better ordering and preservation future generations would see the mayflower compact as the beginning of government by the consent of the people.
but historians have seen it as something more modest an agreement among a diverse group of people to try to get along with each other through what they knew would be a hard winter in a strange land.
the pilgrims first landing in november 1620 was on the outer end of cape cod at what is now provincetown massachusetts.
by december however they had moved across cape cod bay to a place they named plymouth where a high hill offered protection and a large level area leading down to the harbor was a good place to build a town.
plymouth was empty when the pilgrims landed.
as recently as 1616 1 000 or more indians had lived around plymouth but an epidemic had wiped them out.
as had happened elsewhere in the americas disease traveled faster than people.
enough european fishermen and traders had been traveling along the coast to ensure a plentiful supply of microbes.
the new community quickly built on the smoking tobacco quickly became a popular symbol of sophistication in europe making the production of tobacco in virginia very profitable.
pilgrims a name given to the separatists within the church of england who settled plymouth massachusetts.
mayflower compact the 1620 agreement made among the pilgrims and others whom the pilgrims called strangers on board the ship that brought them to plymouth.
now empty land.
the pilgrims had arrived too late to build the kind of shelter they needed for a new england winter.
during the winter of 1620 1621 about half the community died from disease cold and malnutrition.
some families were wiped out altogether.
they had no contact with native americans but they knew they were being watched constantly.
chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 61 3 1 this modern recreation of the pilgrim village at plimoth plantation note old style spelling has been built using extensive original records from 1627 seven years after the colony s founding when life had reached a bit of stability on the site of the first pilgrim colony in plymouth massachusetts.
then in spring 1621 their luck changed.
an indian walked very boldly into the heart of the small plymouth community.
and when he arrived to their utter amazement he said welcome englishmen the visitor was samoset a native of what is now maine where english fishermen had been landing for a century hence his knowledge of the language.
more important he had been asked to visit them by massasoit the ruler of the wampanoag indians of the area.
massasoit was also familiar with english ships that had sailed along the coast and had sent exploring parties ashore.
he was now ready to make contact.
soon after samosets visit massasoit himself arrived with many warriors and a translator named squanto who had been captured by previous english explorers and who had lived in london.
he became a go between for massasoit with the pilgrim community even though neither side ever fully trusted him.
squanto surprised the pilgrims when he described parts of london and more important when he taught them how to find hibernating eels in nearby creeks.
they had their best meal in months that evening.
he also taught them to catch herring in the town brook and use them as fertilizer for planting corn.
it proved to be the salvation of the colony.
the pilgrims concluded an agreement with massasoit that led to 54 years of peace an amazing development in the americas.
in the fall of 1621 with peace concluded and the first successful harvest accomplished governor bradford announced that it was time to rejoice together with the people who had helped indeed allowed them to survive.
the first thanksgiving the pilgrims never actually used that word was a weeklong time of feasting on the fruits of the harvest and on turkeys ducks geese deer and stews.
the pilgrims were recreating something they knew well a traditional english harvest festival.
most of those present at the first thanksgiving however were wampanoags including massasoit himself who brought gifts of freshly killed deer to the festivities.
part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 american voices of plymouth plantation by william bradford 1630 1651 ufiham bradford was one of the original pilgrims.
he wrote his tw classic book over a period of many years to inform an english audience and english investors of the state of the new colony or plantation.
being thus arrived in a good harbor and brought safe to land they fell upon their knees and blessed the god of heaven who had brought them over the vast and furious ocean and delivered them from all the perils and miseries thereof again to set their feet on the firm and stable earth.
being thus passed the vast ocean and a sea of troubles before in their preparation as may be remembered by that which went before they had now no friends to welcome them nor inns to entertain or refresh their weatherbeaten bodies nor houses or much less towns to repair to to seek for succor and for the season it was winter and they that know the winters of that country know them to be sharp and violent and subject to cruel and fierce storms besides what could they see but a hideous and desolate wilderness full of wild beasts and wild men and what multitudes there might be of them they knew not.
but that which was most sad and lamentable was that in two or three months time half of their company died being infected with the scurvy and other diseases which this long voyage had brought upon them so there died sometimes two or three of a day in the aforesaid time that of 100 and odd persons scarce fifty remained.
the spring now approaching it pleased god the mortality began to cease amongst them and the sick and lame recovered afterwards they began to plant their corn in which service squanto stood them in great stead showing them both how to set it and after how to dress and tend it and where to get other provisions necessary for them all which they found true by trial and experience.
they began now to gather in the small harvest they had and to fit up their houses and dwellings against winter being well recovered in health and strength and had all things good plenty.
source william bradford a history of plymouth plantation boston massachusetts historical society 1856 thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what challenges did the first plymouth settlers face.
historical interpretation what does bradford s account tell us about the importance of native american peoples to the initial survival of the settlement.
another group of religious dissidents from england were not far behind plymouths pilgrims.
puritan reformers who wanted to stay within the church of england and change it were also having a hard time in the 1620s.
king charles i r 1625 1649 was extremely hostile to the puritans.
advocating reform within the established church became more difficult and dangerous.
the puritans however were not without resources.
a group of them controlled a corporation the massachusetts bay company to explore and settle north america.
it was similar to the virginia company except that puritans led it.
they planted their first colony in salem just north of present day boston in 1629 and soon wanted to expand.
in late 1629 someone realized that wording in the charter would allow them to move the whole company its charter and the control that went with it out of england and into the colony that the massachusetts bay company controlled.
if successful this move would create not only a self governing puritan company but also a company thousands of miles from the king and his bishops who were making things so difficult for puritans in england.
john winthrop an ardent puritan was invited to be the governor of the new colony.
in spring 1630 14 ships left england for massachusetts bay with their new governor and their charter on board.
by the end of the summer more than 1 000 people and 200 cattle had landed in the massachusetts colony.
in the next decade known as the great migration some 20 000 people followed.
the puritan massachusetts bay colony soon had more people than plymouth and jamestown combined.
the massachusetts puritans also had a clear sense of purpose.
as winthrop said our immediate object is to seek out a new home under a due form of government both civil and ecclesiasticall we shall be as a citty upon a hill.
the eyes of all people are upon us.
the puritan commonwealth in new england could also be a new model for old england.
puritans a name given to those more extreme protestants within the church of england who wanted to stay in the church but purify it of what they saw as roman catholic ways.
chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 63 the charter of the massachusetts bay company the legal charter given to the london based corporation that launched massachusetts bay colony.
fundamental orders of connecticut the 1639 charter that massachusetts authorities allowed a new separate colony based in hartford to adopt which confirmed its independence from massachusetts.
this 1922 statue of anne hutchinson at the massachusetts state house commemorates a woman who caused considerable difficulties for the authorities who ruled in boston during her own time.
the pilgrims had written their mayflower compact as a simple basis for the colonys government.
ihe puritan migrants of 1630 meant to use the more detailed charter of the massachusetts bay company to organize a permanent self governing colony in massachusetts.
the first meeting of the great and general court the colony s governing body on new england soil took place in august 1630.
what had started as a business venture in england was transformed into a government in massachusetts.
annual elections chose the governor deputy governor and members of the general court as the state legislature in massachusetts is still called.
only church members in good standing could vote.
this settlement was designed to be a model religious colony.
when king charles i realized what the puritans had done he sent a ship to recover the charter.
governor winthrop called out the puritan militia and mounted cannons at the entrance to boston harbor.
those under royal command who had come for the charter decided that it would be wiser to sail back to england without it.
the puritans valued literacy.
if salvation depended on a personal encounter with the christian faith then puritans needed to be able to read the bible and have ministers and magistrates who were highly literate.
in 1636 only 6 years after boston was founded the colonys legislature ordered the creation of a college that would soon be named harvard for an early benefactor.
they created boston latin school to prepare young men for college and in 1647 the legislature required every township in the colony to provide for a school.
towns found ways to evade the law but literacy was still high in massachusetts.
the puritans of massachusetts bay however had their differences with one another.
several splits occurred during the first decade of the colony.
in 1637 puritans on the connecticut river found the government in boston too restrictive and created their own independent colony of connecticut based at hartford.
two years later with permission from the authorities in boston the hartford colonists established a formal government for their colony known as the fundamental orders of connecticut.
the document offered more men the right to vote than did the rules then in force in massachusetts bay.
some have considered it as the first written constitution in the americas though others looking at the massachusetts charter and other such documents dispute that claim.
other puritans found the boston government not strict enough and created a more theocratic colony at new haven the following year.
more troublesome to the puritans was roger williams whose advocacy of freedom of conscience for every individual was almost unique in the 1600s.
williams was a supporter of the puritan cause in england and arrived in boston in 1631 only a year after the citys founding.
but he quickly got into trouble with bostons magistrates because he asserted that civil authority could not enforce religious laws including a law against blasphemy.
in 1635 he was convicted of erroneous opinions.
in the winter of 1636 he walked from his old home in salem massachusetts to the top of narragansett bay more than 65 miles and soon established a new colony called providence where he invited all those distressed of conscience to the first colony that would separate church and state and grant full liberty to people of any religious opinion a direct slap at puritan efforts at religious uniformity.
williams established close working relationships with both the wampanoag and narragansett tribes and insisted on paying them for the land on which he established his colony unlike the settlers of boston or plymouth.
under williams leadership rhode island became a haven for religious dissenters.
in addition anne hutchinson caused a stir with her charismatic preaching and her belief that gods inspiration could be more immediate than most puritans believed.
while puritans insisted that every man and woman should read and interpret the bible they expected the interpretation to follow certain paths.
in addition only men were supposed to preach.
when hutchinson said that she herself received direct revelations from god she had moved beyond art ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 what the puritans would tolerate and was banished from the colony.
she and her followers made their way first to roger williamss colony in rhode island and then to dutch new amsterdam where she was killed in an indian attack in 1643.
while the first generation of new englands founders argued about whose version of protestant theology was correct their american born children and grandchildren sometimes wandered quite far from the theological interests of the founders.
the first massachusetts puritans saw themselves as being on an errand into the wilderness as a 1670 sermon put it.
religious fervor and conversions were less common in the next generations.
in massachusetts in the 1600s only those who could convincingly demonstrate that they had a true religious conversion could be church members and only church members could vote.
since one had to convince a congregation that he or she had truly been converted to become a church member many including the children of devout church members could not qualify for either church membership or the right to vote.
people who were excluded from these privileges did not make for happy colonial residents.
in 1662 massachusetts clergy adopted the halfway covenant which allowed adults who had been baptized as children because their parents were church members to have their own children baptized even if they were not among the members of a congregation.
the compromise was a significant one for a community in which church membership was central to all else.
in time that compromise also led to many massachusetts churches allowing any who could demonstrate familiarity with christian doctrine and led a good life to be church members and therefore also voters.
maryland after virginia and the new england colonies the next english colony to be established on the mainland of north america was maryland.
earlier colonies had been founded by corporations or were royal colonies ruled by governors appointed by the king.
maryland represented something new a proprietary colony.
a proprietary colony of which maryland was the model was essentially owned by one person and heirs who were as the maryland charter said true and absolute lords and proprietaries the proprietor might allow others to own land and might take advice from local officials but the whole colony was private property and as such could be passed from generation to generation within the proprietors family.
king charles i established this model when he offered to give maryland to george calvert the first lord baltimore.
maryland was also different in another way.
lord baltimore was a devout catholic and catholics were persecuted in england.
but king charles was sympathetic despite popular opposition.
lord baltimore with the kings support was determined to establish maryland as a haven for english catholics.
after george calvert died his son cecil calvert the second lord baltimore developed the colony.
he realized that he had to recruit more people than a catholic only colony would attract.
so in 1649 maryland granted freedom of worship to all christians including protestants of any persuasion.
while the proprietors retained final authority in maryland they agreed in 1635 to call a representative assembly.
after initially establishing a colony of large estates they also decided following virginias lead to give every european settler 100 acres another 100 for each additional adult member of the family and 50 acres for each child.
this headright system as it came to be called made moving to maryland very popular.
from the beginning marylanders also knew that as in virginia tobacco would be the key to their economic success.
with tobacco came the need for more workers.
thus african slavery came early to maryland.
in 1661 maryland was the first colony to formalize laws governing slavery.
the laws included the stipulations that slaves inherited their status from their mother and that slavery for those born into it was for life.
halfway covenant plan adopted in 1662 by new england clergy that allowed adults who had been baptized because their parents were church members but who had not yet experienced conversion to have their own children baptized.
proprietary colony a colony created when the english monarch granted a huge tract of land to an individual as his private property.
headright system a system of land distribution during the early colonial era that granted settlers a set amount of land for each head or person who settled in the colony.
chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 6 additional colonies continued settlement and development ihe first english colonies of jamestown and plymouth on the north american mainland were models for what came later.
plymouth and boston learned from mistakes made at jamestown.
all of those who established later english colonies studied jamestown plymouth and boston borrowing what they liked and ignoring the rest.
in addition those colonies also studied the prosperous english colonies that were developing on the island of bermuda and in the caribbean.
those island colonies attracted their own settlers from england and brought far more slaves from africa than did the mainland colonies.
on the islands slaves worked on the expanding sugar plantations.
table 3 1 shows all of the english colonies that were eventually established in north america and in the islands.
connecticut and new hampshire after the creation of the colonies at plymouth massachusetts bay connecticut and new haven the new england colonies continued table 3 1 england s american and island colonies colony founded virginia bermuda island colony plymouth st christopher island colony barbados island colony nevis island colony massachusetts included maine did not include plymouth new hampshire 1607 1612 1620 merged with mass 1685 1624 1627 1628 1630 antigua island colony montserrat island colony maryland separate colony 1630 1643 part of mass 1643 79 separate after 1679 1632 1632 1634 rhode island connecticut hartford new haven jamaica island colony carolina new york 1636 new jersey pennsylvania delaware georgia 1636 1638 became part of connecticut in 1665 1655 captured from spanish 1663 split into north and south carolina 1729 settled by dutch as new netherlands colony 1624 1626 became english and renamed new york 1664 1664 split from new york 1681 1701 split from pennsylvania but shared single governor until 1776 1732 official religion crop government anglican tobacco corporation royal after 1625 anglican.
mixed corporation puritan farming corporation anglican s sugar i i royal anglican i sugar royal anglican sugar royal puritan farming corporation based in j fishing boston 1 puritan.
farming corporation 1630 1679 royal after 1679 anglican sugar royal anglican sugar royal founded as a haven for roman j tobacco proprietary 1634 1690 catholics with no established royal 1691 1715 church anglican after 1692 j proprietary again after 1715 no established church haven farming.
corporation for dissenters especially baptists puritan farming corporation from massachusetts j puritan farming corporation from massachusetts anglican sugar royal anglican rice south proprietary tobacco north none farming furs proprietary 1684 trade royal after 1685 none farming proprietary none established as a haven farming proprietary for quakers none farming proprietary none haven for the poor farming proprietary royal after 1751 rather than religious dissent nj pearson prentice hall 2011 p 56.
part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 to be reshaped.
connecticut was united with new haven in 1662.
massachusetts bay colony merged with plymouth in 1685.
new hampshire became a separate colony under a royal governor in 1691.
vermont did not separate from new york until after the american revolution and maine was part of massachusetts until 1820.
new york new york was settled before maryland but not by the english.
it became english only after the english civil war 1642 1649.
what is now new york was settled by the netherlands or holland a new protestant country carved out of what had been spanish possessions in the late 1500s.
sailing for the dutch henry hudson had explored much of the atlantic coast in 1609.
his voyage gave the netherlands the basis for its claim to land in north america.
the dutch west india company was set up in 1621 and it built a dutch trading post at fort orange now albany new york in 1624.
the economic base of the dutch colony was the fur trade.
the iroquois were happy to trade with the dutch.
they benefited from fostering competition between dutch and french traders to see who would offer the best price for furs and be the best military allies.
in 1626 the dutch built a settlement and commercial center called new amsterdam on manhattan island which according to legend was purchased from local indians for 60 dutch guilders calculated at approximately 24 by a historian in the 1840s over 1 000 today but still exceedingly cheap.
there is some debate about which tribe actually received any payment though one was recorded in holland.
the payment however reflected a european understanding of land ownership.
most native american tribes did not think in terms of someone actually owning land to them the land air and water were open to all.
despite efforts by its long time governor peter stuyvesant to enforce religious uniformity and ban jews new amsterdam soon became a haven for religious dissenters including jews catholics quakers and muslims.
it was also home to dutch german french swedish portuguese and english settlers.
the dutch were active in the slave trade.
new amsterdam had the largest number of african slaves in north america in the 1600s.
as a trading center new amsterdam also saw many native americans who came to the city to sell furs and buy european goods.
successive dutch governors banned sexual contact between the dutch residents and indians but the ban was not always honored.
while the heart of the dutch colony remained on manhattan island the dutch authorities offered large tracts of land to wealthy dutch citizens known as patroons to develop the lands along the hudson river between new amsterdam and albany.
wealthy dutch investors who promised to settle at least 50 people on their land were given huge tracts of land which they controlled as private fiefdoms.
nevertheless new netherlands never had more than 10 000 european and african residents.
in 1664 king charles ii gave new amsterdam to his younger brother the duke of york who later became king james ii.
that the dutch already had a settlement on the land did not bother either brother.
having been given the colony the duke sent a fleet to new amsterdam to take it.
there was little resistance to the english take over governor peter stuyvesant was unpopular and the english promised to respect dutch property.
the dutch briefly recaptured the colony in 1673 but it returned to english rule permanently the following year.
the heart of the dutch oceanic empire was elsewhere.
they were not going to fight the english over this remote outpost.
the duke of york divided the colony keeping new york for himself and giving new jersey to two political allies.
for the rest of the 1600s new jersey remained a colony of small farms of limited profit to its proprietors although it attracted a diverse group of european settlers because its proprietors offered land at low prices and gave settlers significant religious and political freedom.
but new york with its great harbor and access to the interior via the hudson river quickly became one of the most valuable english colonies.
patroons dutch settlers who were given vast tracts of land along the hudson river between new amsterdam and albany in return for bringing at least 50 immigrants to work the land.
pennsylvania and delaware the next english colony was pennsylvania.
like maryland pennsylvania was established as a proprietary colony and a haven for a persecuted religious group while being open to all.
pennsylvanias proprietor was william penn the son of sir william penn an admiral in the royal navy with close connections to king charles ii.
the younger william penn inherited the right to collect a chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 67 this map of new amsterdam just at the time the english first took control note the english flag flying on the fort shows the site of the fort at the tip of manhattan and the british ships off shore.
substantial debt that the king owed to the penn family.
king charles ii repaid the debt in the form of land in north america.
but while william penn inherited both fortune and royal connections unlike his admiral father he was a member of a dissident religious community known as quakers because they supposedly trembled quaked at the name of god.
quakers broke with much of the traditional theology and religious practice of the day.
when they gathered for worship quakers sat in silence until someone was moved by the spirit to speak.
they did not have formal clergy and gave women equal standing with men in their community known as the society of friends.
in addition they were absolute pacifists who would not serve in the military.
because of their refusal to serve in the military and attend the services of the church of england they were constantly in legal trouble.
penn himself was briefly jailed for following quaker practices.
penn received his land grant from king charles ii in 1681 and the next year he sailed to pennsylvania and founded philadelphia the city of brotherly love.
penn recruited settlers widely in britain and on the european continent especially in germany.
by 1700 18 000 europeans had arrived.
in keeping with his quaker beliefs penn insisted on peaceful trade with the indians.
although he had been granted land from the king penn also paid the indians for their land.
during his lifetime pennsylvania was generally a peaceful place.
tribes from other colonies found a new home there.
despite all of his commitment to peace with the indians penn did not outlaw slavery in his colony.
as early as 1684 2 years after its founding 150 african slaves arrived in philadelphia.
slaves quickly came to have a key role as household servants and by the early 1700s slaves made up one sixth of the citys population.
in rural communities slaves worked in iron furnaces mines tanneries salt works and on farms.
penn tried to create a prosperous colony based on high ideals.
but he was also an aristocrat who held absolute power.
by the 1690s many in the colony including quakers who appreciated their religious freedom demanded more political freedom.
in 1701 penn reluctantly agreed to a charter of liberties that established an elected legislature though the legislature and the penn family would continue to argue until the beginnings of the american revolution.
the 1701 charter also allowed the three most southern counties of pennsylvania to create their own assembly which became the core of the separate colony of delaware.
the first europeans to settle in delaware were from sweden and finland creating the small new sweden colony at fort christina todays wilmington delaware in 1638.
68 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 the dutch of new amsterdam conquered the colony in 1655 before themselves being defeated by the english in 1664.
the area was included in the land grant given to william penn but its separate history and geographical distance limited its relationship to the rest of pennsylvania.
carolina south of virginia the land was contested between england and spain to say nothing of the indian tribes who lived there.
but england meant to claim the area.
soon after coming to the throne charles ii rewarded eight of his supporters and sought to secure englands land claims by creating a colony named carolina based on the latin for charles.
the proprietors developed an elaborate system of government that prescribed a hierarchical society with themselves at the top followed by the local gentry then poor white servants with african slaves at the bottom.
the city of charles town later charleston became the colonys capital.
carolina was a divided colony.
in the north most of the settlers were relatively poor white farmers from virginia.
farther south large scale rice growing created a rich colony.
much of the colonys commercial success focused on the city and harbor at charleston and on trade with the british caribbean colonies especially barbados.
many of the early immigrants were from barbados both wealthy europeans who became the elite of the mainland colony and african slaves who did the actual work of the rice farming.
following the model of barbados in the caribbean which depended on plantations to grow sugarcane the southern part of carolina became one of the earliest plantation economies on the mainland of north america.
the split between the north and south was formalized when king george ii officially divided the colony into north and south carolina in 1729.
although this painting was done long after the 1682 treaty shown here was concluded it portrays penn s commitment to negotiate with the tribes in pennsylvania including these negotiations to purchase the land on which philadelphia was built.
georgia the last english colony that would later be part of the united states was georgia founded in 1733 for idealistic reasons.
james oglethorpe a war hero in england wanted to create a place where the poorest of englands poor those in debtors prisons because they could not repay what they owed could find new lives.
oglethorpe also believed that england needed a strong frontier colony on the border with spanish florida.
these settlers people whose alternative might well be prison would be inspired to be not only farmers but also soldiers within this frontier border.
given this focus oglethorpe excluded catholics who might be secretly loyal to catholic spain and africans free or slave since they might be tempted to run away.
with georgia the 13 colonies that went on to unite in 1776 were in place.
africans and indentured servants in england s colonies in 1619 a dutch ship arrived at jamestown.
john rolfe anxious to expand the work force for his tobacco farm traded food supplies to the dutch in return for 20 african slaves.
rolfes 1619 purchase of other humans is usually given as the date for the begin ning of slavery in what is now the united states.
in fact the spanish had african slaves in florida during the 1500s see chapter 2.
a census of virginia in 1620 that did not count indians listed 32 africans 17 women and 15 men out of a total population of 982.
nevertheless the exchange of american grown foodstuffs for african people that took place in 1619 was significant.
although it would have been impossible to predict it then slave labor would become the economic foundation of the colonies and of the new nation that emerged from them.
the slavery that existed in british north america in the early 1600s was profoundly different from what slavery had been in the early 1500s or from what it became in the colonies in the early 1700s.
many think of slavery as a static institution but the nature of slavery changed often.
for many americans the image of slavery is that of the large chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 69 this early picture of a virginia tobacco plantation shows the role of african slave labor in doing the work of the plantation the english elite in managing the work and the overriding presence of indians in the image of the colony.
plantations that existed in the south between 1800 and the 1860s.
but understanding the development of slavery in the united states requires more careful observation.
slavery though always terrible meant different things at different times.
in the earliest years slavery though very difficult was less harsh and hopeless than it became after about 1680.
when john rolfe purchased those 20 african slaves in 1619 it was not clear what their status would be.
slavery had not been codified either as a permanent life long status or as something associated always with race.
the first generation of african slaves in virginia often worked side by side not only with english and irish servants many of whom also had little choice about coming to america but also with captured indians.
race was always a factor but racial lines were blurred.
servants and slaves lived together created new families together and resisted together when they felt ill treated.
in the small farms of the chesapeake in the middle colonies and in new england indentured servants slaves also worked side by side with those who owned the land and with indentured an individual who contracted to serve for a servants who were working for a specified number of years to pay off the cost of their period of 4 to 7 years in return for payment of travel to america.
some of these indentured servants came seeking a better life others passage to america.
came as an alternative to prison in england.
during a term of indenture a servant was treated much like a slave.
indentured servants could be bought and sold and were often whipped.
the difference between indentured servanthood and slavery and it was significant was that at the end of their term ranging from 4 to 7 years the servants were set free.
until the late 1640s the majority died before completing their term and even after earning their freedom most of the newly freed were not able to earn much although a few prospered and joined the elite.
since an english indentured servant cost about half as much as an african slave and since neither tended to live long many virginians initially preferred indentured servants.
servants and slaves often intermarried and saw themselves as a united group.
the africans like the european servants dreamed of a day when they might be free to own their own land.
that dream was not an impossible one in the early 1600s.
for example anthony johnson was sold as a slave in jamestown in 1621.
he worked on the farm of the bennett family and became known for his hard labor and service after more than a decade of labor on the bennett property he was allowed to farm 70 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 independently while still a slave.
he married a woman named mary.
their children were baptized with the blessings of the authorities.
eventually he gained his freedom and changed his name.
when the bennetts moved to eastern virginia the johnsons moved with them.
by 1651 anthony johnson owned a 250 acre farm with his own servants and at least one slave.
his son john owned 550 acres and another son owned 100 acres.
the johnson family if not viewed as the equals of their white neighbors were in many ways part of virginias landed gentry.
during the 1600s the johnsons were not the only former slaves to achieve this status.
no slaves in virginia maryland or the carolinas however could hope to repeat this success in the 1700s or 1800s.
there was more to the experience of the johnsons than the freedom they gained to own and work their own land.
they were free to travel.
they were members of christian churches and participated in the financial and religious activities of the colony.
the total number of africans slave and free remained relatively small in virginia before 1680.
on the eastern shore where the johnsons lived there were some 40 free blacks out of a total black population of 300.
while most africans remained in slavery 30 percent of the people of african descent in parts of virginia were free in 1668.
race was not insignificant but neither race as a marker of slavery nor slavery as an institution had been determined.
slavery developed in the northern colonies as it did in those further south coming to massachusetts fairly soon after it came to virginia.
by the 1660s bostons elite lived in a slave owning world.
one third of the slaves in massachusetts lived in boston.
in the north slavery was more urban than rural.
in the cities slaves worked as household servants cooking cleaning sewing tending gardens and stables and running errands.
they also worked on wagons and wharves.
northern slaves like many southern slaves of the 1600s were much more fully integrated into european american society had less contact with fellow africans and african traditions and had much more freedom than later generations of slaves.
quick review compare the reasons for founding the different english colonies in north america during the 1600s.
how might these different reasons lead to different developments in the colonies.
englands wars england s colonies analyze the relationship between politics in england internal colonial tensions and life in the english colonies in north america during the 1600s.
the tensions that led pilgrims and puritans to flee england erupted into a full scale civil war in the 1640s in which king charles i lost his head and a puritan commonwealth ruled the country for 11 years 1649 1660.
the religious and political battles in england fueled settlement in north america.
puritans sought refuge in massachusetts when they were feeling oppressed in england supporters of the royal cause sought refuge in virginia when the puritans dominated at home while catholics moved to maryland and other dissidents found tolerant places like rhode island.
when the civil wars ended and a new king charles ii eldest son of charles i began to rule in england in 1660 he also rewarded supporters with grants of yet more colonial charters.
all of englands tensions spilled over into its american colonies.
more colonies were established and many more english settlers arrived than might have been the case if their homeland had been at peace.
as englands american colonies were founded and began to grow they were often violent places that reflected old and new tensions.
in the 1670s internal tensions burst into violence in the colonies.
king philips war in massachusetts was one of the most vicious wars ever fought in north america.
in virginia backcountry farmers took up arms against the royal governor in 1679.
the growth the tensions and the violence all helped create the political and cultural structures of the colonies of british north america in the 1700s.
12 chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 71 3 2 pequotwar conflict between english settlers and pequot indians over control of land and trade in eastern connecticut.
civil war and revolution in england when king james died in 1625 his son became king charles i r 1625 1649.
king charles was known for his religious sincerity and lack of political skill.
the king and his advisors pursued religious anglican uniformity far more strictly than any of his predecessors had.
the puritan movement however grew despite royal opposition.
by the late 1620s puritans were a majority in parliament.
as a result in 1629 king charles dismissed parliament and did not convene it again for 11 years.
but in 1640 rebellion broke out in scotland.
to suppress it charles needed new taxes and to get them he had to call parliament back into session.
that move was his undoing.
the parliament that met in november 1640 was overwhelmingly puritan and passed laws that favored the puritans and limited royal authority.
by 1642 england was in a civil war.
parliaments army defeated the king who was executed in 1649.
general oliver cromwell ruled england as a puritan commonwealth from 1649 to 1658.
by the time cromwell died in 1658 many in england were tired of puritan rule.
in 1660 parliament invited the son of charles i to reign as king charles ii r 1660 1685.
the anglican church again became the official state church but the new king was more tolerant of religious differences than his father had been.
charles ii also took an interest in expanding his north american colonies.
almost half of the colonies of the future united states new york new jersey pennsylvania north and south carolina date to his reign.
rebellion in new england king philip s war 1675 1676 the half century of peace that the pilgrims of plymouth and the wampanoag indians experienced was unusual in north america.
it seemed that the two cultures could live side by side in relative harmony.
but while there was harmony in plymouth between 1620 and 1675 there were also tensions sometimes sharp ones.
early in plymouths history one incident showed just how violent the pilgrims could be.
when word came to governor bradford that their closest indian ally massasoit was desperately ill bradford sent edward winslow to treat the wampanoag leader as a gesture of goodwill.
while he was recovering massasoit told winslow that another tribe the massachusetts indians who lived north of plymouth were preparing to attack plymouth.
whether the wily massasoit was reporting the truth or using the pilgrims to settle an old score is unclear but bradford took him seriously.
under the command of miles standish pilgrim soldiers killed two of the tribes leaders.
the massachusetts indians decided not to antagonize these violent europeans and moved further north.
other tribes saw that for good or ill the alliance between massasoit and the pilgrims ran deep.
but from holland the pilgrims spiritual guide pastor john robinson condemned the killing of those poor indians warning where blood is once begun to be shed it is seldom staunched of a long time after the massachusetts bay puritans did not maintain peace for as long as the plymouth settlers.
massachusetts bay was larger stronger and less tolerant of outsiders than plymouth.
the massachusetts bay puritans often traded with indian tribes especially the pequots of the connecticut river valley.
but when the captain of a trading vessel was killed in 1637 the puritans responded harshly.
building an alliance with the mohegans and narragansetts they attacked a pequot fortress on the mystic river set the houses on fire and attacked anyone who fled.
in the short pequot war 400 pequots were killed and their village was annihilated.
surviving pequots were sold into slavery.
from the mohegans perspective this conflict was an opportunity to expand their influence.
from the perspective of the narragansetts it was horrifying.
they were accustomed to indian warfare that focused on the skill and bravery of a few not the annihilation of the many.
europeans they discovered fought differently.
2 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 other tensions between the english settlers and indian tribes were also evident.
the english did not tend to intermarry or engage in sexual liaisons with indians as frequently as the spanish or the french.
many parts of new spain and new france were conquered by unmarried men who quickly developed intimate relationships with native women and created a mestizo mixed european and indian blood community.
these relationships often helped to strengthen ties between cultures and reduce tensions.
but new england was settled by english families and their descendants tended to intermarry within the community.
the english also had different views of appropriate sexual relationships.
the puritans were not as straight laced as later generations came to picture them but they seldom had sex outside their own community.
the result was that mixed race people who bridged cultures were rarer in english colonies than elsewhere in the americas.
additionally the english especially in new england also wanted to convert the indians to their religion.
but most indians resented and resisted missionaries whether english spanish or french.
for all of his friendship with the pilgrims massasoit distrusted christianity.
he saw the conversion of indians on cape cod as a rejection of his role as their supreme chief.
what fostered the most tension however was the constant growth of the european community.
the 40 miles between plymouth and the heart of massasoits world provided a sufficient barrier for people who generally walked everywhere but the european population was expanding.
by the 1660s english settlements were springing up in every direction and were beginning to dominate.
european livestock ate wampanoag corn.
land sales that had once seemed wise now seemed to confine a new generation of wampanoags.
a new generation of pilgrims and wampanoags were coming to power people who did not remember their early friendship.
in 1657 governor bradford who had led plymouth for 37 years died.
at about the same time massasoit was succeeded first by his son alexander and shortly after by his other son metacom who was known to the pilgrims as king philip.
throughout the 1670s rumors circulated that metacom was preparing for war.
he denied that he had anything but peaceful intentions but he was also buying arms and ammunition.
in january 1675 a christian indian john sassamon told josiah winslow bradfords successor as governor that metacom was indeed preparing for war.
winslow refused to believe sassamon and sent him on his way.
soon thereafter sassamons body was discovered.
metacom denied any role in his death and asked the authorities to allow the wampanoags to settle what he saw as an internal matter.
but instead the plymouth authorities hanged three of metacoms associates.
the first skirmishes of what was known as king philips war using metacoms english name took place within 2 weeks of the executions in june 1675.
people in outlying towns took refuge in fortresses.
abandoned homes were burned.
when a father and son left the swansea garrison and found indians vandalizing their home they fired on them.
the wampanoags did not want to draw the first blood but once shots had been fired they fought furiously.
within days at least 10 of the english were killed.
when the plymouth militia gave chase indians simply melted into the woods crossed a river and lived to fight another day and fight they did.
early encounters between europeans and natives of the americas had pitted matchlocks difficult to fire guns that were unusable in the rain against indian bows and arrows.
however in this war both sides were armed with more modern flintlocks that they could use with deadly aim against the other.
as the war escalated europeans throughout new england lived in terror and died whether in isolated settlements or larger towns.
colonial troops who did not understand indian wars marched into ambushes and died by the scores.
indians died in even larger numbers and the wampanoag community was destroyed.
other tribes even those that sought to remain neutral were decimated.
in western massachusetts after indians burned the town of springfield colonists turned on friendly or neutral tribes forcing them to join metacoms side or die.
despite pleas from the missionary chapter mestizo people of mixed bloodlines usually the children of european fathers and native american mothers and their descendants.
king philip s war conflict in new england 1675 76 between wampanoags narragansetts and other indian peoples against english settlers.
3 settlements alliances and resistance 73 american voices mary rowlandson the sovereignty and goodness of god 1682 the journal of mary rowlandson describes an indian attack on her town of lancaster massachusetts in 1676 the death of her daughter and many friends and her subsequent experience as an indian captive.
despite the terror and loss in her story the rowlandson journal also represents one of the first accounts of an american indian war dance just before her captors successful attack on the town of sudbury massachusetts.
it also relates her relatively friendly conversations with metacom philip himself.
on the tenth of february 1676 came the indians with great numbers upon lancaster.
hearing the noise of some guns we looked out several houses were burning there were five persons taken in one house.
the father and the mother and a sucking child they knocked on the head the other two they took and carried away alive some in our house were fighting for their lives others wallowing in their blood the house on fire over our heads but out we must go the fire increasing and coming along behind us roaring and the indians gaping before us with their guns spears and hatchets to devour us yet the lord by his almighty power preserved a number of us from death for there were twenty four of us taken alive and carried captive.
but now the next morning i must turn my back upon the town and travel with them into a vast and desolate wilderness i knew not whither.
it is not my tongue or pen can express the sorrows of my heart and bitterness of my spirit that i had at this departure but god was with me in a wonderful manner carrying me along and bearing up my spirit that it did not quite fail.
one of the indians carried my poor wounded babe upon a horse it went moaning all along i shall die i shall die.
i went on foot after it with sorrow that cannot be expressed this day in the afternoon about an hour by sun we came to an indian town called wenimessett today new braintree ma about two hours in the night my sweet babe like a lamb departed this life during my abode in this place after several moves philip spoke to me to make a shirt for his boy which i did for which he gave me a shilling and with it i bought a piece of horse flesh.
afterwards he asked me to make a cap for his boy for which he invited me to dinner.
i went and he gave me a pancake about as big as two fingers it was made of parched wheat beaten and fried in bear s grease but i never tasted pleasanter meat in my life.
rowlandson was released by her captors in april as part of an unsuccessful peace initiative.
source mary rowlandson the sovereignty and goodness of god 1682 in nathaniel philbrick and thomas philbrick editors the mayflower papers selected writings of colonial new england new york penguin books 2007 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what connections can you make between this passage and the title of rowlandson s work.
historical interpretation how would you explain the indians decision to take captives rather than simply killing all of the town s inhabitants.
what uses might they have had for such captives.
john eliot to protect the praying indians converts to christianity who were loyal to the massachusetts authorities they were taken to relocation centers in boston harbor where many died of exposure and malnutrition.
in one of the bloodiest battles of the war known as the great swamp fight of december 1675 a combined massachusetts and plymouth force attacked a fortress of the narragansetts after tracking through swamps to get there.
even though the narragansetts had remained neutral throughout the warfare the english force destroyed the fort killing perhaps 300 narragansett warriors and burning alive another 300 women children and old people.
humanity seemed to have vanished from these descendants of those who sought to build a new christian community.
throughout the winter of 1675 1676 the outcome of the war was unclear.
the european communities in new england risked being wiped out that winter.
but in the summer of 1676 the indians were running out of food.
some of the tribes that had been allied with metacom drifted away or shifted their allegiance.
the end came in august when metacom and a few dedicated supporters were cornered in a swamp and killed.
in a grisly end to the war king philips head was displayed on a pole in plymouth for the next 20 years.
authorities in plymouth and boston expelled many of the indians from new england.
over 1 000 wampanoags and their allies including philips wife and son were sold into slavery in the caribbean.
john eliot the longtime pastor to christian indians wrote to sell souls for money seems a dangerous merchandise but in the hatreds created by the war these voices were not heard and new 1607 1754 74 part ii settlements old of the 70 000 people of all races living in new england at the beginning of the war some 5 000 were killed 1 000 of the english and at least 4 000 native americans.
king philips war was one of annihilation each side sought to destroy the other.
in fact the percentage of people killed in king philips war was larger than corresponding percentages for the american revolution the civil war or world war ii.
for the wampanoags the war ended the independent nation that metacom and his father massasoit had led see map 3 2.
bacon s rebellion in virginia 1676 as king philips war was being fought in new england virginia was also engulfed in violence.
like the war in massachusetts bacons rebellion illustrated the instability of early colonial life and alliances that were constantly shifting.
king philips war was a battle between europeans and indians.
in virginia the conflict was more complex.
by 1660 virginia had 40 000 colonists including a small elite and many poor workers africans and indians some slave some free and current or former english 3 2 bacon s rebellion a 1676 rebellion in virginia led by a recent immigrant from england nathaniel bacon in which a militia attacked not only indian villages but also the royal governor before being defeated.
atlantic ocean massachusetts bay colony indian settlement english settlement attack on english settlement major battles aap3 2 king philips war in new england in 1675 1676.
as the map shows king philip s or wacom s war involved all of new england in brutal conflict not only n plymouth where t began but broughout rhode island massachusetts and the connecticut river towns.
chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 75 3 2 indentured servants.
at this time there were at least as many indian as african slaves in virginia.
however most of the virginia tribes kept their distance from the white settlements except for occasional trade.
sir william berkeley was the royal governor of virginia from 1642 to the 1670s.
he brought order to the colony but it was an aristocratic order.
he and an inner circle ran the government and retained most of the profits from the tobacco trade no matter who actually grew it.
the corruption generated increasing tension among others as the social divide increased between rich whites and poor whites between established landowners and newly arrived colonists who could acquire land only along the west frontiers of the territory closer to hostile tribes than colonists nearer the coast and among europeans africans and indians.
even if slaves and indentured servants did earn their freedom land was increasingly difficult to acquire and many were lim ited to becoming tenant farmers for wealthier land owners.
in 1675 resentment came to a head.
the economy was in the doldrums.
neither the corn crop which was essential for food nor the tobacco crop which was essential for money was doing well.
when indians from the doig tribe raided thomas mathews plantation because mathew supposedly had not paid for items obtained from the tribe area colonists retaliated with an attack of their own.
however the colonists mistakenly attacked the susquehanaug tribe instead of the doigs.
violence was flaring.
at that point nathaniel bacon recently arrived in virginia from a prosperous english family and already one of the largest landowners in the western part of the colony organized a militia to attack the indians.
bacon and his followers had heard news of king philips war where many tribes had united.
they feared unity among virginias tribes and had no intention of discriminating between friendly and unfriendly indians.
bacon and his militia began attacking indians indiscriminately seeing every indian as an enemy.
governor berkeley however believed that virginia needed friendly tribes on its frontier to protect it from hostile tribes thinking historically the declaration of the people by nathaniel bacon general 1676 as the rebellion in virginia continued governor berkeley complained about trying to govern people who were poor discontented and armed.
bacon had the support of most of the people white and black who were poor indebted unhappy and well armed.
he issued a declaration of the people stating the many reasons from high taxes to elite control of the fur trade to lack of support in his indian wars for the rebellion.
for having upon specious pretences of public works raised unjust taxes upon the commonality for the advancement of private favourites and other sinister ends but no visible effects in any measure adequate for having wronged his majesty s prerogative and interest by assuming the monopoly of the beaver trade for having protected favoured and emboldened the indians against his majesty s most loyal subjects never contriving requiring or appointing any due or proper means of satisfaction for their many invasions murders and robberies committed upon us.
for having the second time attempted the same thereby calling down our forces from the defence of the frontiers and most weak exposed places for the prevention of civil mischief and ruin amongst ourselves whilst the barbarous enemy in all places did invade murder and spoil us his majesty s most faithful subjects.
of these we accuse sir william berkeley as guilty.
source selections from louis b wright and elaine w fowler documents of modem history english colonization of north america new york st martin s press pp.
thinking critically 1.
historical interpretation what does the excerpt from bacon s declaration tell us about the underlying causes of social tensions during the mid 1600s in virginia.
contextualization what role did bacon and his followers believe the colonial government should play in virginia.
how might their views have differed from those of berkeley and his supporters.
nn settlements old and new 1607 1754 who lived further west.
he refused to support bacons militia and bacon refused to have his militia disperse.
berkeley had bacon arrested and then released him.
bacon marched his ragtag army of free africans slaves and poor whites into jamestown and set it on fire.
in the face of the militia governor berkeley fled calling for help from england.
the crown sent 1 000 english troops it had no patience with rebels.
most rebels surrendered and were pardoned.
in 1676 bacon died at age 29 from dysentery.
twenty three leaders of the short lived rebellion were hanged.
virginias poor had been crushed.
bacons rebellion illustrates the complexity of american history.
berkeley was among the most overbearing aristocrats ever to govern a colony.
during his more than 30 years as governor he made evident his disrespect for the majority of people in his colony.
bacons militia represented a racially diverse army of the dispossessed.
but even as the rebels were demanding more equal treatment from berkeley for themselves they were also demanding the right to kill indians indiscriminately and steal their land.
bacons rebellion was a major turning point in the history of slavery in virginia.
wealthy landowners now feared uprisings among current and former indentured servants and they began to prefer slave labor which they could more strongly control.
among the greatest losers in virginia were the native american tribes.
while bacon and his followers were defeated the arrival of so many well trained british troops reduced the power of the tribes to bargain.
in 1677 the indians of western virginia ceded their remaining lands in the colony and moved west continuing a process of indian removal that would eventually span a continent.
quick review identify two significant differences between the conflicts in new england and virginia.
how did the population and past events of each colony lead to the violence that occurred.
france takes control of the heart of a continent 33 explain france s growing role and power in north america and its impact on english and spanish colonies.
french explorers had been among the earliest europeans to see much of the northern atlantic coast of north america in the early 1500s.
little came of their discoveries however until a new european demand for beaver fur led french traders to set up trading outposts that became the permanent if small towns of quebec and montreal.
during the long reign of king louis xiv r 1643 1715 new france expanded from a tiny isolated community around quebec to dominate the st lawrence river valley.
french communities were founded throughout the heartland of north america from detroit and chicago to new orleans.
by 1715 new france claimed far more of north america than either the english or spanish see map 3 3.
early french settlement quebec montreal and the fur trade with the news that there seemed to be no way around north america france like england lost interest in the land that verrazano and cartier had explored in the 1520s and 1530s.
later in the 1500s however a new trade emerged between europeans and native americans to compete with the cod that had been the only north american resource of interest to most europeans since before the days of columbus.
beaver pelts were becoming popular for fur hats in europe.
trade in beaver fur transformed the economies of both europe and the tribes of north america as surely as the greed for gold and silver transformed south america.
as tribes like the montagnais and hurons developed trading partnerships with the french and the iroquois with the english trade and tribal warfare became more intense.
ancient rivalries among the indians escalated as each tribe fought to control the supply of beaver furs that seemed in insatiable demand in europe.
while these tribes had long fought each other for honor living space and chapter 3 1 la salle s party 1687 iberville 1699 st denis 1714 la harpe 1719 french for f spanish missions 1716 1717 si spanish settlements present state boundaries provided for orientation la salle 1670 jolliet and marquette 1673 la salle 1679 1682 la salle and colonists from france 1685 map 3 3 france in the american interior 1670 1720.
as this map shows french exploration and claims to montreal the saint lawrence river valley the great lakes and the mississippi river all the way to the gulf of mexico gave it claim to the heart of north america but also completely encircled the english colonies on the atlantic coast and challenged the spanish for control of texas.
captives they now had european weapons acquired through trades that further fueled the warfare.
for the first time tribes seemed bent on annihilating their opponents.
even though the french and british fur traders preferred to make alliances with the indians rather than enslave them the results for many tribes were nevertheless disastrous.
the trade in beaver pelts also encouraged europeans to make permanent settlements.
samuel de champlain began exploring the st lawrence river in 1603 and founded the city of quebec in 1608 as a representative of a private fur company just 1 year after the english founded jamestown.
with only 28 men in his colony champlain knew that he needed alliances if quebec was to succeed.
so he joined the montagnais and hurons in a war against the iroquois and solidified an alliance that would be the foundation of quebecs trade.
the huron alliance also allowed champlain to travel further west.
he spent 1615 1616 exploring the great lakes.
after 1612 champlain was also appointed as the kings viceroy for new france uniting his commercial and governmental positions.
as late as 1635 when champlain died quebec had a population of only 300 but it was there to stay.
montreal was part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 this picture of champlain and a group of hurons attacking the iroquois was published with champlain s account of the battle.
it is unlikely that champlain was as heroic as the picture implies or that there were any palm trees in what is now canada.
settled in 1642 to expand trade.
jesuit missionaries arrived and lived among the hurons learning their ways and seeking to convert them to catholic christianity.
new france and the missions it sponsored were as deeply catholic as most of the english settlements were protestant fueling tensions between the french and english colonies that would last throughout their histories.
during the early 1600s quebec and montreal were small french towns thousands of miles from any other such town but with their own european families parishes and culture.
these isolated centers were surrounded by villages of french farmers who had decided to make a life in new france.
new france came close to being wiped out in the late 1640s when the iroquois confederation overran huron villages torturing killing or taking prisoner everyone in sight.
jesuit missionaries died along with their huron hosts.
once a nation of over 10 000 people the hurons disappeared as a recognizable group after 1648.
the defeat of the hurons was a huge blow to french missionaries and to the fur trade that was the economic anchor of new france.
ihe iroquois also attacked french villages and besieged montreal itself.
two hundred french settlers were killed.
many more of the villagers left for france as quickly as they could.
the future of new france was far from clear in 1650.
montreal and quebec however remained militarily secure and the algonquians replaced the hurons as the major french allies and the source of access to the fur trade.
exploring and claiming the mississippi river valley in 1663 louis xiv made new france into a royal province and sent 1 000 french soldiers to protect quebec from iroquois attack and establish it once and for all as the seat of what he expected to be a vast french empire.
plans were laid to make this expansion happen.
in 1672 governor louis de frontenac sent louis joliet who spoke a number of indian languages and father jacques marquette a jesuit missionary to find and explore a great waterway spoken of in indian stories the mississippi or mitchisipi great water which he hoped might be the route to china.
in june 1673 marquette and joliet paddled into the mississippi the first europeans known to do so.
early in their trip they were welcomed by the illinois tribe and given a great feast.
the encounter was the beginning of a long term french indian alliance in the region.
joliet and marquette determined that the mississippi flowed south into the gulf of mexico not west to the pacific and china as had been hoped.
but they understood that they were in the midst of a land of great potential.
they could develop a french colony that would allow a rich trade with the indians and block the expansion of the english.
chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 79 1 i 33 fear of hostile tribes and of being captured by the spanish led joliet and marquette to turn back before reaching the mouth of the mississippi.
on the return trip they visited other indian villages including a miami indian village of checagou or chicago.
joliet returned to quebec to report and draw maps of their travels.
marquette continued his missionary work until he died in 1675.
what would some two centuries later become the midwest of the united states was first described for europeans and mapped by these two explorers.
while the authorities in france wanted to strengthen the settlements in the st lawrence river valley surrounding montreal and quebec before expanding further governor frontenac had no patience with such caution.
in young robert de la salle he found a perfect ally for exploring the mississippi valley.
la salle led a much larger expedition than that of joliet and marquette down the illinois and mississippi rivers in 1679.
la salles goals were to build an alliance with the illinois and other tribes against the iroquois and to establish a permanent french presence throughout the mississippi valley.
in 1681 1682 he and his men traveled down the mississippi to the gulf of mexico.
in the name of king louis xiv he claimed possession of this country of louisiana and of the seas harbors ports bays adjacent straits and all the nations peoples provinces cities towns villages mines minerals fisheries streams and rivers within it it was a claim to more than one third of north america.
not content with reaching the mouth of the mississippi la salle then continued as far west on the gulf of mexico as texas.
eventually he pushed his followers too hard and some of them murdered him in 1687.
american voices journal of the voyage of father jacques gravier of the society of jesus jesuits in 1700 from the country of the illinois to the mouth of the mississippi river the jesuit relations was a publication that gave regular reports on jesuit missionary work and provided an extraordinary glimpse of the countryside and of the people who lived together along the mississippi from modern day wisconsin to the gulf of mexico between the 1690s and the mid 1700s.
i started in 1700 on the 8th of september to come here.
i was accompanied by 5 canoes manned by frenchmen we made only 4 leagues the 1 st day because one of our canoes was split by a snag hidden in the water and we had to halt in order to repair it i embarked in my canoe to visit monsieur davion a missionary priest who was sick in his mission 3 different languages are spoken the lakou with 30 cabins the ounspik with 10 or 12 cabins and thetoumika who are in 7 hamlets consisting in all of 50 or 60 small cabins another village is on the crest of a steep mountain precipitous on all sides.
there are 80 cabins in it and in the middle of the village is a fine and very level open space where from morning to night young men exercise themselves.
they run after a flat stone which they throw in the air from one end of the square to the other and try to make it fall on two cylinders which they roll wherever they think the stone will fall.
there is nothing fine about the temple except the vestibule which is embellished with the most pleasant and best executed grotesque figures that one can see the old man who keeps up the fire the name of which he told us was louak ouloughe the sacred fire.
since we have left the natches we have lived only on indian corn with a few squashes for it is a long time since either wild oxen deer or bears have been seen in this quarter and if we have found a few bustards or wild geese they have been so lean that they were as tasteless as wood this has caused our canoemen very often to sigh for the river of the illinois and the beauty of the country and of the landing places and for the numbers of wild oxen and deer and all kinds of fat and excellent game.
the navigation of the mississippi is very slow and tedious and very difficult especially in ascending it.
it is also very troublesome on account of the gnats and other insects called mosquitoes midges and black flies at last on the 17th of december i reached fort mississippi after 68 days of navigation in descending the river the commandant monsieur de bienville has there a small and very neat house.
source reuben gold thwaites editor travels and explorations of the jesuit missionaries in new france 1610 1791 vol.
lxv lower canada mississippi valley 1696 1702 cleveland the burrows brothers 1900 pp.
101 105 127 129 145 147 159 161.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what kinds of communities did father gravier encounter on his journey.
historical interpretation what does father gravier s account suggest about the nature of french settlement along the mississippi river in 1700.
ml 80 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 other french explorers and settlers followed in la salles wake.
working independently french trappers and traders known as coureurs de bois or runners of the woods established relationships with various native american tribes and brought wealth back to new france.
some of them established a base called fort arkansas at the confluence of the arkansas and mississippi rivers.
french jesuits built a mission at chicago.
inl698 the bishop of quebec appointed missionary priests to a new mission at the natchez post on the arkansas river.
the french communities that dotted the mississippi in the late 1600s and early 1700s were small.
they included american indians and french trappers families and missionaries.
but they were there to stay.
creating the french gulf coast biloxi mobile and new orleans as a result of the reports from explorers and missionaries louis xiv decided to secure the french claim to the mouth of the mississippi.
pierre dlbreville was commissioned in 1698 to scout the area.
diberville landed on the east bank of the mississippi river and built a fort near a bilochi indian settlement which came to be called biloxi.
diberville and his crew moved up the mississippi river until they found a trail connecting the mississippi to lake ponchartrain and promised to return.
to his surprise diberville also found a group of free blacks who were living with indians and who did not take kindly to the arrival of europeans.
queen annes war of 1702 1713 see chapter 4 between england france and spain made travel difficult and dangerous.
with the coming of peace in 1713 dibervilles younger brother jean baptiste de bienville expanded the colony.
when a veteran of lasalles trip down the mississippi arrived in the area in 1713 diberville gave the intrepid french explorer command of another french city on the gulf coast which they named la mobile now mobile alabama.
in 1718 de bienville built a colony that he called new orleans on the land between the mississippi and lake pontchartrain.
new orleans appeared on french maps and stock was sold to develop it well before any town existed.
in march and april 1718 bienville led some 50 men in tearing out cypress swamps and laying out a town on the crescent turn in the mississippi river.
after a hurricane destroyed the village in 1722 a new street grid was laid out the french quarter for which new orleans is famous today.
the only contact the residents of new orleans had with france was the occasional arrival of supply ships.
few volunteers moved to this isolated spot even though french speculators led by john law the most powerful banker in france invested 3 1 3 2 33 3 4 a french visitor to new orleans painted this view of illinois indians engaged in trade with the europeans in 1735.
note that one of the tribe is most likely an escaped african slave.
chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 81 3 1 32 33 3 4 heavily in the new orleans venture and were desperate for the new colony to succeed.
most of the early immigrants from france were prostitutes and criminals who literally left france in chains.
many died in transit but by 1721 new orleans had 178 european residents who enjoyed the freedom their isolation gave them.
the french also introduced african slavery into the mississippi valley.
while there had been slaves in quebec none of the early explorers coming south from canada brought african slaves with them.
but after 1700 slavery grew in french louisiana.
ihe first slave ships arrived in new orleans in 1719.
in 1721 ships brought 925 slaves from haiti.
a census in 1732 indicated that of the 471 people living in the french towns in the illinois river country 168 were africans.
most slaves brought to new orleans were from senegal in west africa.
these africans if not muslim themselves were familiar with islam and muslim music that used chanting accompanied by stringed instruments.
this music became part of the culture of new orleans.
the senegalese also knew how to cultivate indigo which thrived in louisiana and how to process it into dye.
in addition early slave ships brought sugar and rice which the slaves also knew how to grow.
europe and africa had been shaping each others cultures for generations by the time new orleans was founded but the mix was especially deep in that city.
with the french securely in control of both the headwaters and the mouth of the mississippi river france was in a strong position to be the dominant european power in north america just as spain was dominant further south.
3 3 quick review how did france s role in north america evolve from small settlements in canada to become the dominant european power.
justify your answer.
developments in spanish colonies north of mexico 3 4 analyze the impact of indian uprisings and the expansion of other european powers on spain s colonies in new mexico texas and california.
spain had established the first permanent settlements in the future united states florida in 1565 and new mexico in 1598.
both remained isolated but while st augustine florida remained small spain claimed vast lands in new mexico surrounding the new capital they built at santa fe in 1610.
from santa fe which was close to many of the indian pueblos over which spain claimed authority the spanish ruled with an iron hand demanding more and more work from the indians and trying to stamp out traditional indian religious practices.
for many years the spanish seemed to accomplish their goals but eventually to the surprise of the spanish the result was a large scale rebellion.
while the spanish authorities reasserted their presence in new mexico they also worried about the territorial claims that england and france were making to other parts of north america.
to counter those claims the government of new spain established small but permanent colonies across the southwest from texas to california see map 3 4.
the pueblo revolt new mexico 1680 pueblo revolt rebellion in 1680 of pueblo indians in new mexico against their spanish overlords sparked by spanish suppression of native religious activity and excessive spanish demands for indian labor.
in august 1680 an uprising of the normally peaceful pueblo indians of northern new mexico led by a charismatic leader pope resulted in the greatest defeat of a european colony in the history of the americas.
in the pueblo revolt nearly all of the spanish who lived on isolated ranches and farms were killed.
survivors from the outlying communities poured into santa fe which was then besieged.
the indians cut the citys water supply and burned outlying buildings.
on august 21 governor antonio de otermin decided to retreat to mexico with the survivors.
during the retreat one indian told otermin that the revolt happened because his people were tired of the work they had to do for the spaniards and the clergy who did not allow them to plant to do other things for their own needs another old man 1754 82 part ii settlements old and new 1607 southwest in the era of the pueblo revolt hhi spanish colonization up to 1680 m pueblo revolt 1680 navajo settlements 1600 hm navajo settlements 1800 i fr.
kinos missionary travels 1681 1711 navajo reservation boundaries 2000 indian pueblos spanish towns mission at san xavier del bac present state names and boundaries are provided for orientation and navajo indian relocation is shown over 400 years map 3 4 changes in the southwest.
the heart of spain s empire in the americas always remained south of the future united states in mexico and peru.
however by the 1600s authorities based in mexico had authorized the development of an important spanish colony in territory they called new mexico among the pueblo indians in the area around santa fe and taos.
spanish settlers also established a mission near the future tucson arizona though it would be after 1700 before there was spanish settlement in texas or california.
told the governor that it was because the spaniards had tried to take away the ways of their ancestors the faith by which they have lived and thrived.
both of these grievances the harsh workloads and religious repression were crucial in fueling the revolt as was hope that life might return to a happier day before the spanish arrived.
after the success of the revolt indian leaders lived in the governor s mansion in santa fe.
churches were leveled statues destroyed.
pueblo life returned more or less to what it had been before 1598.
the distant and defeated spanish were mocked.
the spanish eventually regained control of new mexico but it took 12 years.
nowhere else in the americas not even among the powerful aztecs and incas was a revolt so successful or long lasting.
in 1690 the spanish viceroy in mexico city appointed a new governor for new mexico don diego de vargas who had an ability to compromise that many of his predecessors had lacked.
vargas left el paso with his army in 1692.
he offered each pueblo a fall pardon in exchange for their reconversion to christianity but he did not try to stamp out tribal religion.
the indians could retain both faiths and agreed to his terms.
f uumiicugiu chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 83 map 3 5 california missions.
once they had founded san diego in 1769 the spanish authorities in mexico commissioned a franciscan priest father junipero serra to create a string of missions along the pacific coast of what they called alta or upper california.
serra and his successors created these missions as far north as san francisco the farthest northern reach of spanish settlement into the americas.
san francisco 1776 ijti j san jose 1797 t santa clara 1777 santa cruz 1791 jt 2 san juan bautista 1797 san carlos 1770 44 i 2 soledad 1771 s 2 san antonio 1771 4 2 an miguel 1797 2 san luis obispo 1772 aj la purisima 178 2 santa ines 1804 santa barbara 1786 s.
san buenaventura 1782 2 los angeles 17 1 principal spanish missions and settlements 2 san fernamdo 1797 2 san gabriel 1771 san juan capistrano 1776 x2 founded 1751 1775 founded 1751 1775 founded 1751 1775 spanish territorial claim 2 san luis rey 1798 2 san diogo 1769 yuma 780 t f t spain s response to france and england san antonio texas and the missions of california word that la salle had claimed the coast of texas for france frightened authorities in new spain.
when the french founded new orleans in 1718 the spanish decided to act.
they built a new city of their own san antonio to assert their claims to texas.
san antonio remained a small and isolated outpost of a great empire but it was the first permanent european settlement in present day texas.
by 1769 the spanish were also worried about english explorations and russian fur trading activities on the pacific coast.
in response the spanish established a fort and then a mission in san diego the first permanent european settlement in what is now the u s state of california.
from there spanish franciscan missionaries created a string of missions from san diego to san francisco to convert the indians and develop the economy of california.
before the american revolution permanent spanish communities could be found on the atlantic coast in florida in texas and new mexico and on the pacific coast in california see map 3 5.
it would be many more years before any of these were much more than small dusty outposts.
nevertheless they were the foundation for the much more extensive settlement that would follow.
quick review why was spain so concerned about english and french colonization.
conclusion the nations of europe showed little interest in establishing settlements north of mexico until the early 1600s the coast of what is now the united states served as little more than a way station for cod fishermen throughout all of the 1500s.
after richard hackluyt published his pamphlet for the virginia enterprise in 1585 some english investors began to take a second look and see the merit of establishing colonies in north america not only to trade with the indians but also to christianize them and enlist them as an ally against englands rival spain.
the first successful english colony was established at jamestown virginia in 1607.
the colony would not have lasted without the leadership of the english adventurer john smith or the assistance of 84 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 powhatan an algonquian chief who saw an advantage in establishing trade with the english and using them as allies against other indian tribes.
unlike jamestown which had been established as a commercial enterprise by the virginia company the colonies in the areas of present day new england were established as refuges for england s persecuted and restive religious nonconformists including the puritans and pilgrims who founded colonies in plymouth and boston in massachusetts.
soon dissenters from these colonies founded their own new english colonies in connecticut and rhode island.
the new england colonies coexisted for some time with nearby indian groups.
however unlike the french and spanish colonists very little intermarriage took place which might have increased the degree of animosity that soon developed as the new england colonies grew in size and encroached on indian lands.
this hostility ultimately led to king philips war in the 1670s in which the english colonists destroyed indian settlements ending the era of coexistence that some in the first generation had enjoyed.
while king philips war was being fought in new england a different kind of violence engulfed the virginia colony.
white immigrants mostly poor people living at a distance from the coast made alliances with africans slave and free in attacks on the nearby native american tribes.
these allied groups also attacked the royal government based on the atlantic coast which sought peaceful relationship with the indian tribes as a way of preserving the colony.
the revolt was soon defeated but it resulted in the expulsion of most tribes from virginia as well as a decision by the authorities to limit the immigration of poor whites and rely more on african slave labor in the colony.
after the establishment of virginia and the new england colonies other english colonies became established in quick succession.
maryland became a haven for catholics who were also being persecuted in england.
carolina began to expand production of rice and tobacco.
new york was acquired from the dutch and new jersey split off of new york.
pennsylvania was established initially for the quakers and delaware eventually split from that colony.
finally georgia was founded thus establishing englands 13 colonies on the mainland of north america.
all of the english colonies permitted slavery of africans and american indians and slaves were found in all of the english colonies on the north american mainland and in even greater numbers on the english controlled islands of the caribbean.
however during most of the 1600s slaves worked and lived alongside and even rebelled with white indentured servants and members of the white lower classes.
some slaves were even able to farm their own land and in some cases earn their freedom something that would be much more difficult to achieve after 1700.
meanwhile as england monitored its colonies france and spain had claimed control over much of the rest of north america.
new france claimed not only vast areas surrounding quebec but also a huge slice of the interior along the entire length of the mississippi river down to new orleans.
new spain expanded into the southwest of the future united states from texas to california.
new france and new spain exploited their territories and related to indians in far different ways.
french explorers along with jesuit missionaries created small settlements and expanded the fur trade throughout their vast territory.
spain also created settlements in their region and sent priests to live with many of the tribes.
in one case however spanish efforts to subjugate the indians of new mexico led to the pueblo revolt of 1680.
in spite of revolts wars and tensions however by the end of the 1600s settlements established by england france and spain dotted the land that would one day be the united states.
individual colonies might prosper or fail but the territory that most europeans had ignored for a hundred years after columbus was slowly becoming a permanent home to generations of european immigrants and the african peoples they brought with them.
how did the english french and spanish interaction with american indians and africans differ.
identify two reasons for this difference in relations and explain your choices.
chapter review chapter 3 settlements alliances and resistance 85 chapter 3 chapter review 3 1 the english settle in north america explain why the english began to settle in north america and how slavery was introduced in the english colonies.
review questions 1.
chronological reasoning how and why did the relationship between the jamestown colonists and the local indians change during the settlements first two decades.
contextualization what kind of society did the puritans of massachusetts hope to establish.
in this context why did north america seem like a good place to settle.
historical interpretation what was the nature of slavery in british north america before the 1680s.
england s wars england s colonies analyze the relationship between politics in england internal colonial tensions and life in the english colonies in north america during the 1600s.
review questions 4.
historical interpretation how did civil war in england shape the development of british north america.
comparison compare and contrast maryland new york and pennsylvania in the 1600s.
how would you explain the differences you note.
crafting an argument why did friendly relations collapse between indians and colonists in new england during the 1600s.
3 2 france takes control of the heart of a continent 3 3 explain france s growing role and power in north america and its impact on english and spanish colonies.
review questions 7.
historical interpretation how did the fur trade reshape relations between the indian peoples who participated in it.
comparison compare and contrast anglo indian and franco indian relations.
how would you explain the differences you note.
3 4 developments in spanish colonies north of mexico analyze the impact of indian uprisings and the expansion of other european powers on spain s colonies in new mexico texas and california.
review question 9.
crafting an argument what role did religion play in the pueblo revolt.
86 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 creating the culture of chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how local and global developments shaped the lives and thoughts of those residing in british north america from the glorious revolution to the beginnings of the american revolution.
raw materials most of which were produced with slave labor from britain s colonies in north america and the caribbean were bringing great wealth to the nation as illustrated in this picture of sailing ships from north america unloading at london s old custom house dock.
in 1733 a young apprentice john peter zenger was hired to start a new newspaper in new york the new york weekly journal.
newspapers though long popular in england were still fairly new in british north america.
the first regularly published colonial newspaper the boston news letter began publication in 1704 but it was subsidized by the british government.
later newspapers including james franklins new england courant that began publication in 1722 were more independent.
the journals new york backers were part of a political faction in the colony that opposed royal governor william cosby.
zenger quickly began printing stories about official corruption and government actions he considered to be dictatorial.
within a year he was indicted for printing seditious libel.
british law at the time made it a crime to print attacks on public officials that challenged their authority whether the articles were false or true and zenger had clearly printed attacks on governor cosby.
but zenger and his backers fought back defending themselves in court.
in a well publicized trial that lasted into 1735 zengers attorney argued for rights of speech and the press that far exceeded what then existed in britain.
he asked the jury shall the press be silenced that evil governors may have their way the trial the attorney said was not about zenger but every free man that lives under a british government on the main of america the jury acquitted zenger in spite of the law.
england s glorious revolution and the rights of englishmen 1689 analyze the impact of englands glorious revolution on the thinking and political organization of british colonists in north america.
4 1 the plantation world from a society with slaves to a slave society explain why and how slavery developed as it did in the late 1600s and early 1700s.
4 2 stability and instability in the american and british worlds analyze the changes in the ideas and daily lives of the people in british north america in the 1700s as a result of events within and beyond the colonies.
43 chapter 3 the english colonies in north america what were the similarities and differences among the colonies in north america.
3 1 introduction in the mid 1700s a german schoolteacher named gottlieb mittelberger boarded a ship bound for the colony of pennsylvania in far off north america.
mittelberger had borrowed the cost of his passage by signing on as an indentured servant.
he would have to settle his debt by working for several years for the master who bought his services.
the voyage across the atlantic was horrible.
most passengers suffered from illness and hunger.
the people are packed densely mittelberger wrote like herrings so to say in the large sea vessels.
one person receives a place of scarcely 2 feet width and 6 feet length.
there is on board these ships terrible misery stench fumes horror vomiting many kinds of seasickness fever dysentery headache heat constipation boils scurvy cancer mouth rot and the like all of which come from old and sharply salted food and meat also from very bad and foul water when the nightmarish voyage ended mittelberger had to stay on board until his service was bought.
most indentured servants had to work for their masters for three to six years but commitments varied according to the servants age and strength.
as mittelberger noted young people from 10 to 15 years must serve till they are 21 years old why were people willing to go through such hardships to come to the colonies.
many colonists came to north america for the chance to own land and start a new life.
others were seeking freedom to practice their religion.
there were also some who did not have a choice.
a number of convicts people in jail were forced to go to north america to work off their debts as indentured servants.
millions of africans were kidnapped from their homelands and brought to the colonies as slaves.
in this chapter you will learn about the people who settled the english colonies.
you will read in detail about 8 of the 13 colonies.
as you do pay attention to similarities and differences among the colonies in such areas as geography economy religion and government.
pilgrims from england landed at present day plymouth massachusetts on december 22 1620.
this illustration from 1731 shows the harbor of boston a city in the english colony of massachusetts.
the english colonies in north america 47 mercantilism an economic policy in which nations tried to gain wealth by controlling trade and establishing colonies 3 2 the new england middle and southern colonies english settlers established colonies in north america for many reasons.
some colonies were set up by groups of businesspeople who hoped to profit from resources found in the americas.
several colonies were settled by people looking for a place to practice their religion freely.
one colony was established as a refuge for debtors people who owe money who would otherwise have been tossed into prison.
lhe english government supported all these efforts in part because it was competing for land in the americas with such nations as france and spain.
england had another reason for establishing colonies it was also competing for wealth.
like most western european nations in the late 1600s england followed an economic policy that is called mercantilism.
under this policy nations tried to gain wealth by controlling trade and establishing colonies.
the colonies made money for england by supplying raw materials for its industries.
england turned the raw materials into goods that it could sell to other nations and to its own colonies.
by 1733 there were 13 british colonies strung along the atlantic coastline.
they can be grouped into three distinct regions the new england middle and southern colonies.
these regions had different climates and resources that encouraged settlers to develop different ways of life.
in new england the church was at the center of both religious and political life.
this church s pews could be removed to make room for tables used in town meetings.
the new england colonies the new england region included the colonies of massachusetts rhode island connecticut and new hampshire.
as you will read the first settlers of these colonies came to america seeking religious freedom.
in new england farming was difficult because of the long cold winters and the regions rocky hilly wilderness.
but the forests and the sea provided useful resources and ways to make a living.
new englanders built their economy on small farms lumbering fishing shipbuilding and trade.
the middle colonies the four middle colonies were new york pennsylvania new jersey and delaware.
the landscape of this region ranged from the rich soil of coastal new jersey and delaware to the valleys and wooded mountains of new york and pennsylvania.
farmers in the middle colonies raised a variety of crops and livestock.
lumbering shipbuilding and other occupations added to the many opportunities here.
the people who settled the middle colonies represented many cultures and religions 48 chapter 3 colonial america 1770 lake by 1770 the 13 american colonies had developed a distinctive way of life that would affect the development of america for years to come.
lhe english colonies in north america 49 one important group the quakers started the colony of pennsylvania.
like the early settlers of new england the quakers were looking for freedom to practice their religion.
others seeking religious freedom soon followed.
settlements of french dutch germans swedes danes finns scots irish and english spread throughout the middle colonies.
by the 1700s philadelphia in the middle colony of pennsylvania had become a bustling trading center and one of the most important cities in the english colonies.
it was the first city in america to use a grid to set up its streets.
the southern colonies the five southern colonies were maryland virginia north carolina south carolina and georgia.
this region featured broad rivers and vast wetlands that gradually merged with the sea.
the soil and the hot wet climate were ideal for growing tobacco rice and other cash crops.
wealthy colonists took advantage of these conditions by establishing large farms called plantations.
plantation owners relied on indentured servants and enslaved africans to sow and harvest their fields.
after being harvested the crops could be brought by river to the coast and loaded on ships for transport to other colonies and to europe.
cash crop a crop such as tobacco sugar and cotton raised in large quantities and sold for profit charter a formal document issued by the king that outlined a colonys geographic boundaries and specified how it would be governed democratic ruled by the people.
in a democracy the power to govern belongs to the people.
government in the colonies all the colonies were settled with the permission of the king of england.
for each colony the king issued a charter a formal document that outlined the colonys geographic boundaries and specified how it would be governed.
because the colonies were so far from england however they needed to be able to make their own laws and keep peace and order.
the colonies developed different forms of government depending on the settlements purpose.
most of the colonies were self governing.
colonists elected members of their community to a general assembly which made their laws.
many colonies also had a governor appointed by the king.
as the king s representative the governor could overrule the elected assembly.
some colonies also had councils groups of men who represented the english businessmen involved in starting the colony.
in massachusetts religious colonists established a theocracy a gov ernment whose leaders ruled in the name of god.
in time however a system of town meetings evolved in which colonists voted for representatives to govern them.
in many ways the colonies were more democratic than england.
still not all colonists had a voice in the government.
usually only ree white landowning men were allowed to vote.
in some colonies voters also had to belong to the preferred church.
other colonists including women servants slaves and skilled tradesmen who were not landowners had no voting rights.
50 chapter 3 3 3 massachusetts a new england colony in the early 1600s religion was very important in england.
hie king ruled the official church of england also called the anglican church.
however not everyone agreed with the church practices.
one group who came to be called puritans wanted to purify the anglican church by making services simpler and doing away with ranks of authority.
another group called separatists wanted to separate from the english church and form their own congregations.
when the king began jailing separatists for not attending anglican services some of them moved to holland where they could practice their religion freely.
but holland wasnt home and the separatists wanted their children to grow up in an english culture.
in 1620 about 102 separatists set sail for america aboard the mayflower.
the separatists were called pilgrims because they traveled for religious reasons.
the pilgrims hoped to build their idea of a perfect society in america.
during their voyage they signed an agreement called the mayflower compact that described the way they would govern themselves in the americas.
after a long uncomfortable journey across the atlantic the pilgrims landed at plymouth near cape cod.
luckily for them the local indians welcomed them.
without the help of these american indians the pilgrims might not have survived their first winter.
the indians taught them how to plant crops trap animals and catch fish.
in 1621 the pilgrims invited the indians to share their first harvest in a three day feast of thanksgiving.
americans still celebrate this holiday.
ten years later a large group of puritans decided to follow the pilgrims to america.
the king was relieved to see them go and sent them off with a charter for the colony of massachusetts bay.
the charter said that the massachusetts colonists would govern themselves.
the puritans were pleased with the charter because they wanted to build a community governed by the rules of the bible.
they hoped to set an example for the rest of the world.
their governor john winthrop said we must consider that we shall be as a city upon a hill.
the eyes of all people are upon us mayflower compact an agreement that pilgrims wrote and signed describing how they would govern themselves in the americas massachusetts new england colony founders pilgrims led by william bedford 1620 and puritans led by john winthrop 1630 settlers puritans escaping religious persecution climate harsh winters warm summers geography sandy coast with good ports rich pastures forests economy occupations crop and livestock farming lumbering shops shipping religion puritan government self governing with strong religious influence hn winthrop was a founder and later wernor of massachusetts.
here he is ving a blessing to soldiers in the colony.
the english colonies in north america 51 slave trade the business of capturing transporting and selling people as slaves rhode island new england colony founders roger williams and anne hutchinson settlers people seeking religious freedom climate hot humid summers cold snowy winters geography coastal lowlands flat rocky woodlands economy occupations farming large cattle and dairy farms small independent farms lumbering shipbuilding fishing whaling trade religion various faiths government self governing this woodcut shows roger williams building a crude cabin after he fled massachusetts in the bitter winter.
3 4 rhode island a new england colony the puritans of massachusetts gained the freedom to practice their religion the way they wanted to.
but instead of granting similar freedom to others they set up a government that required everyone in the colony to worship as they did.
when a young minister named roger williams began preaching different ideas the puritans put him on trial.
williams believed that all people should be able to worship in any way they chose.
forced worship he declared stinks in gods nostrils.
the puritans ordered williams sent back to england.
instead on a cold winter day in 1636 he left his wife and children and lied south.
after trudging through snow for days he met a group of indians near narragansett bay.
the indians cared for him until spring.
when his family and a few followers joined him williams bought land from the indians for a settlement.
he called it providence a word meaning the guidance and care of god williams welcomed people with different religious beliefs.
two years after he and his followers settled providence a colonist named anne hutchinson was also forced to leave massachusetts for preaching against the puritans.
she and her family followed williams and established a settlement called portsmouth.
in 1647 these and other settlements joined together to become the colony of rhode island.
in 1663 rhode island elected an assembly to govern the colony the ideal of freedom in rhode island did not extend to enslaved africans.
sea merchants soon discovered the riches that could be made in the slave trade.
as a result rhode island became one of the largest slave trading centers in the world.
slave trading helped make the fortunes of some of the wealthiest families in new england.
at the same time the isolated coves along the rhode island coast provided perfect hiding places for pirates and smugglers.
puritans in other colonies were disgusted by these activities.
reverend cotton mather of boston called rhode island the sewer of new england to these puritans the actions of slave traders in rhode island justified having rejected these people and ideas from their own communities.
using a word that implied criminals they invented their own name for the colony rogues island 52 chapt er 3 3 5 connecticut a new england colony even in massachusetts not all puritans shared exactly the same ideas.
thomas hooker was a puritan clergyman who lived in new towne a fast growing community next to boston.
hooker didnt always agree with the laws and leadership in massachusetts.
when he heard about a fertile valley along a river to the west he convinced his family and about 100 other people to move there with him.
it took hooker and his followers two weeks to travel to the connecticut valley with their animals and belongings.
there they established a settlement on the site of an old dutch fort where an earlier group of english colonists had settled.
they called their new community hartford.
in 1639 hartford joined with two other settlements to form the colony of connecticut.
hooker believed that government should be based on the free consent of the people to whom belongs the choice of public officials by gods own allowance he helped draw up the first written plan of government for any of the colonies.
this document was called the fundamental orders.
the fundamental orders guaranteed the right to vote to all men who were members of the puritan church.
meanwhile other puritans formed a separate colony nearby called new haven.
the puritans of new haven agreed to live by the word of god their laws were stricter than those in hookers connecticut colony.
neither of these colonies however was legally authorized by the king.
then in 1662 king charles ii granted a charter for a new connecticut colony that included new haven.
the charter gave connecticut colonists more rights than those enjoyed by any other colonists except rhode islands.
legend says that when king james ii sent governor andros to hartford 15 years later to take back the colonists charter someone stole it and hid it in the trunk of a huge white oak tree.
the charter oak became a symbol of connecticuts freedom.
thomas hooker and about a hundred others established the community of hartford in the fertile connecticut valley.
it later became a part of the colony of connecticut.
connecticut new england colony founder thomas hooker settlers puritans seeking a new settlement climate cold winters mild summers geography forested hills seacoast economy occupations farming crops and livestock shipbuilding fishing whaling religion puritan government written constitution fundamental orders self governing the english colonies in north america 53 new york middle colony founders dutch west india company 1624 james duke of york 1664 settlers dutch and english seeking new lives climate cold snowy winters hot humid summers geography wetlands along the coast and hudson river forested mountains to the north economy occupations furtrapping lumbering shipping slave trade merchants and tradesmen farming iron mining religion various faiths government british appointed governor and council alternating with elected assembly 3 6 new york a middle colony the english took control of the settlement of new netherland in 1664.
the english renamed the colony new york in honor of its new proprietor owner james the duke of york.
the duke gave huge chunks of his colony to two friends sir george carteret and lord john berkeley.
these men then established the colony of new jersey to the south of new york.
the duke also awarded large estates along the hudson river to wealthy englishmen.
the new landowners charged high rents to farmers working their land.
this practice created a great difference in wealth between the landowners and their poor tenants.
it also discouraged people from settling in new york.
the duke of york expected his colony to be a moneymaking business.
as its owner he appointed people to run the colony.
he also issued his own laws and decided what new yorkers should pay in taxes.
new yorks rich landlords approved of the dukes approach to governing his colony.
but farmers fishers and tradespeople did not.
they demanded the right to elect an assembly to make laws for new york.
the duke refused saying that elected assemblies had a habit of disturbing the peace of the government after years of protest the duke finally allowed new yorkers to elect an assembly in 1683.
this first assembly passed 15 laws.
the most important was a charter listing a number of rights that most colonists thought they should have as english citizens.
among them were the right to elect their own lawmakers the right to trial by jury and the right to worship as they pleased.
when the duke saw what the assembly had done he abolished it.
new yorkers did not get a new assembly until under the leadership of jacob leisler liester they rebelled in 1689.
leisler was elected commander in chief of a democratic council that governed until 1691.
that year new york was finally granted the right to elect an assembly with the power to pass laws and set taxes for the colony.
ships navigate the harbor of new amsterdam in the 1660s.
the city was later renamed new york and became one of the busiest and most important ports in the world.
54 chapter 3 3 7 pennsylvania a middle colony when william penn asked king charles ii to let him establish a colony in america the king had two very good reasons for granting penns request.
first he could repay a large debt that he owed to penns father admiral penn.
second he could get rid of william.
the younger penn had been a thorn in the kings side for a long time.
william penn was a member of the society of friends or quakers.
the quakers believed in a simple lifestyle and in treating all people equally.
they refused to bow before the king fight in wars or pay taxes to the church of england.
in 1668 the king had thrown penn in jail hoping to stop him from preaching the quakers ideas.
to the kings dismay penn continued preaching after his release.
with the quakers unwelcome in england penn wanted to establish a colony in america where they would be safe.
in 1681 the king granted penn a huge area of land between the puritan colonies of new england and the anglican colonies of the south.
in honor of penns father the colony was called pennsylvania.
penn advertised his colony all over europe.
in his great law of 1682 he promised that people of all faiths would be treated equally.
penns appeal attracted settlers from several countries.
an early colonist in pennsylvania marveled at the prosperity and peace in the colony.
he wrote poor people both men and women of all kinds can here get three times the wages for their labour they can in england or wales.
here are no beggars to be seen jealousie among men is here very rare nor are old maids to be met with for all commonly marry before they are twenty years of age penn named his capital city philadelphia which is greek for city of brotherly love from there he wrote great documents of government that made pennsylvania the first democracy in america.
william penn made a treaty with indians in about 1770.
penn insisted thatthe delaware indians be treated fairly and paid fortheir land.
pennsylvania middle colony founder william penn settlers english quakers and other europeans seeking freedom and equality climate cold winters hot humid summers geography rolling hills trees and fertile soil economy occupations farming crops and dairy merchants and tradesman lumbering shipbuilding religion various faiths government self governing the english colonies in north america 55 maryland southern colony founder cecil calvert lord baltimore settlers catholics and protestants seeking religious and political freedom i climate cold rainy winters hot humid summers i geography low fertile land surrounding chesapeake bay i economy occupations farming and ranching crops beef dairy lumbering shipping fishing iron mining i religion various faiths particularly catholic i government self governing 3 8 maryland a southern colony the founding of maryland was a family enterprise.
sir george calvert named lord baltimore by king james i was an english gentleman who became a roman catholic.
in england with its official anglican church catholics were treated harshly.
calvert wanted to start a colony founded on religious freedom where there would not only be a good life but also a prosperous one for those bold enough to take the risk as a businessman he also hoped the colony would make his own family more prosperous or wealthy.
unfortunately calvert died while he was still bargaining with the king.
the new king king charles i granted a charter for the colony to calverts son cecil the new lord baltimore.
the charter gave the calverts complete control of the colony which was called maryland.
armed with these powers cecil named his brother leonard to be governor.
to make money from the colony cecil needed to attract both protestant and catholic settlers.
he told leonard to be very careful to preserve unity and peace.
and treat the protestants with as much mildness and favor as justice will permit leonards expedition arrived in maryland in 1634.
there he and his followers built st marys city on a high dry bluff they purchased from american indians.
the following year leonard agreed to let maryland elect an assembly to govern the colony.
as more and more settlers arrived leonard could see that catholics would always be outnumbered in the colony.
to protect their rights in 1649 he helped pass americas first law guaranteeing religious liberty the act concerning religion.
this law however applied only to christians.
atheists people who do not believe in the existence of god and jews were not included.
despite the calverts efforts protestants and catholics remained suspicious of one another and waged a tug of war in maryland for more than a century.
during this time the colony s founding family lost and regained power several times.
still george calverts dream was fulfilled.
catholics in maryland worshiped freely and took part in the colonys government alongside protestants.
newyork sir cecil calvert or second lord baltimore was the founder of maryland.
calvert established laws to protect catholics from persecution in the colony 3 9 virginia a southern colony jamestown virginia was the first successful english settlement in america.
after a shaky start virginia began to grow and prosper.
by 1700 the descendants of those early settlers were wealthy landowners and the most important people in virginia.
the economy of virginia was based on tobacco.
tobacco planters needed vast areas of land to be successful.
they also needed a large number of workers to grow their crops.
at first planters tried putting indians to work.
but indians in this area were not used to farming.
worse many of them died of diseases they caught from the colonists.
the others faded into the forests and disappeared.
next tobacco planters tried bringing poor people from england to work their land.
in exchange for free passage to virginia the workers agreed to become indentured servants for a period of five to seven years.
many men women and children came to virginia as indentured servants.
after completing their service they were given their freedom along with a small plot of land some clothing tools and seeds.
the first africans brought to virginia were also treated as indentured servants.
at first they had the same rights and freedoms as white servants.
once their service ended they could buy land and servants of their own.
gradually however planters turned to slaves to solve their labor problem.
slaves brought from africa cost twice as much as servants but they did not leave after a few years.
for the planters enslaving africans had other advantages as well.
most africans were hard workers who were used to farming.
and because of their dark skin it was hard for them to escape from their owners and blend into the rest of the population.
virginia elected an assembly called the house of burgesses in 1619.
in 1661 the house of burgesses passed a law that made african workers slaves for life.
by 1700 virginia had more than 16 000 enslaved africans more than one fourth of the colonys population.
for virginia slavery had become a way of life.
virginia southern colony founders sir walter raleigh and the virginia company settlers english landowners skilled laborers shoemakers bricklayers tailors people seeking profit climate mild winters hot humid summers geography coastal lowlands wooded mountains economy occupations farming plantations and small independent farms religion church of england government self governing with elected assembly house of burgesses the first africans were brought to jamestown virginia in 1619 the year before the pilgrims landed at plymouth rock.
56 chapt er 3 the english colonies in north america 57 james oglethorpe founded the colony of georgia.
he is shown here wearing scottish clothing and greeting colonists.
georgia southern colony founders george ii and james edward oglethorpe settlers debtors from english prisons europeans seeking religious freedom and cheap land climate short mild winters long hot humid summers geography wetlands and red clay plains forested mountains economy occupations farming plantations and independent farms trade skilled labor religion various faiths government self governing 3 10 georgia a southern colony georgia the 13th and last colony was founded by a group of englishmen whose business plan was based on a grand and noble idea.
they wanted to help poor people in england stay out of debtors prison.
in england at this time people who couldnt pay their bills went to jail.
james oglethorpe inspired wealthy englishmen to give money to help establish a colony where the poor could build better lives instead of going to jail.
king george ii and his government liked this plan because the georgia colony would help keep the spanish from moving north out of florida.
georgia would stand between spanish florida and the rest of the british colonies to the north.
the englishmens plan depended on getting the cooperation of settlers.
but there werent many poor debtors who wanted to start new lives in the wilderness of north america.
some thought prison would be a safer place.
instead of an army of poor people the colonists who went with oglethorpe to georgia in 1732 were adventurers much like the settlers in the other colonies.
in addition many protestants catholics and jews came to georgia in search of religious freedom.
as many had feared life was not easy in georgia.
the spaniards in florida wanted to control georgia and they continually attacked the new settlements.
the georgians fought them off without any help from the other british colonies.
to make matters worse oglethorpe had specific ideas about how the colonists should live.
he established laws against drinking alcohol and owning slaves.
he thought the settlers should live on small farms and learn to farm their land themselves 8 chapter 3 the settlers werent about to go along.
they wanted to farm large plantations and own slaves like the wealthy planters in neighboring colonies.
they disliked some of oglethorpes other rules as well.
after 12 years of governing the colony oglethorpe returned to england.
in 1752 the people of georgia elected an assembly.
chapter summary in this chapter you read about the settlement of the 13 english colonies in the future united states.
settlers and slaves settlers had many reasons to come to america in the 1600s and 1700s.
two important reasons were freedom of religion and the chance to start a new life.
however even though colonists treasured freedom for themselves they had africans brought to america by force to work as slaves.
regional development the new england middle and southern colonies had distinctive geographies and natural resources.
as a result different ways of life developed in each region.
colonies also varied in their form of government but all were democratic to some degree.
new england colonies religion and geography were key influences in these colonies.
although puritans sometimes disagreed they hoped to establish model communities based on their religious faith.
new englands forests and coastline made lumbering shipbuilding and trade very important to the regions economy.
middle colonies these colonies were geographically culturally and religiously diverse.
catholics quakers anglicans and members of other protestant faiths all found homes in this region.
southern colonies in these colonies climate and geography encouraged the planting of cash crops and the development of large plantations.
in time slave labor would become a major part of this regions economy.
nova dritann ia offering most excellent fruitcs byplantinein v i r 5 qi n i a.
exciting all lucli as be well affected to further the fame.
r sign of the bul head 1 tf 5.
handbills like this one lured colonists from europe to the american colonies.
the english colonies in north america 59 reading further in this painting william bradford and other passengers sign the mayflower compact.
the colonists agreed to unite and form a government based on common interests.
a colonial cast of characters many kinds of people settled the english colonies of north america.
there were pilgrims and planters merchants and craft workers enslaved africans and indentured servants.
some came seeking freedom and opportunity.
others came because they had no choice.
all of them contributed to life in the colonies.
here are four of their stories.
william bradford was worried.
it was november 1620 and he had just arrived in america on the mayflower.
he and his fellow passengers had survived a long and difficult voyage.
but they had not reached their intended destination and trouble was brewing.
bradford was one of the leaders of a group of separatists on the mayflower.
the separatists had broken away from the church of england and were seeking religious freedom in america.
they called themselves pilgrims.
they had been granted a patent a royal permit to settle in virginia.
but violent storms had blown their ship off course.
now they sat off the coast of what would become massachusetts hundreds of miles from virginia.
winter was coming so the pilgrims decided to found their colony there.
they would call it plymouth after a coastal city in england.
but another group of people on board had different ideas.
they had not come to america for religious reasons but to own land.
since they had not reached virginia they argued that they were not bound by the terms of the patent.
they said that no one had the power to command them facing a possible rebellion bradford and the other pilgrim leaders came up with a plan to unite the colony.
they drew up an agreement we call the mayflower compact.
by signing this document the members of the new colony agreed to form a civil body politic or a form of representative government.
they agreed to obey just and equall laws created for the generall good of the colonie this was the first written framework for self government in the english colonies.
bradford would later become governor of plymouth colony.
he had never lived under any form of self government.
he had always been ruled by kings.
but he did have a strong belief in his rights as an englishman.
this idea of the rights of englishmen would be a foundation for self rule in the colonies.
the idea was rooted in magna carta a 13th century document limiting royal power and the english bill of rights.
margaret hardenbroeck dutch trader yir bradford came to america to practice his religion.
he wanted o ui a new society based on religious principles.
margaret harden ec came for a very different reason.
she moved to the colonies to do business and she became very successful.
0 chapter 3 hardenbroeck was born in the netherlands.
in 1659 she moved to new amsterdam the dutch colonial city that later became new york.
unlike most colonists she had a job when she arrived.
she worked as an agent for her cousin a merchant in holland.
hardenbroeck sold goods like cooking oil and vinegar and bought furs to send back to holland.
she quickly established a reputation as a skilled trader.
new amsterdam was a growing trade center at the time.
it reflected the commercial spirit of holland a country that thrived on trade.
the city had an open tolerant feel.
it was a place where people of different religious and national backgrounds could live and do business.
hardenbroeck benefited from this commercial spirit.
she also benefited from the more relaxed dutch attitude toward womens rights.
in holland women could get an education and own property.
they could conduct business on their own.
women did not enjoy such rights in england at the time.
not long after hardenbroeck arrived she married a wealthy merchant.
when he died soon after she inherited his land and business.
in a short time she had become one of the wealthiest citizens in the colony.
a year later hardenbroeck married another trader.
together they continued to expand their business.
they owned a fleet of ships and moved goods from the colonies to europe and the west indies and back.
they also owned a lot of land including a plantation in barbados.
after england took control of new amsterdam in 1664 hardenbroeck maintained good relations with her english rulers.
english law allowed her less freedom to manage her own affairs but her business continued to thrive.
she remained one of the colonys leading citizens until her death in 1691.
margaret hardenbroecktook part in new amsterdam s growing trade in the 1660s.
merchants in this port city bought and sold goods from around the world.
i olaudah equiano olaudah equiano african slave most people came to the colonies of their own free will.
for one group however coming to america was not a choice.
many black africans were captured in their homelands and sold to slave traders.
packed onto ships they were transported to the american colonies.
this journey known as the middle passage was horrific for the enslaved africans.
one man who made this journey was olaudah equiano oh lau duh ek wee ahn oh.
in 1789 he wrote a book about his life the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano or gustavus vassa the african written by himself he described his early life in africa his enslavement and his eventual freedom.
equiano was born in the kingdom of benin in west africa.
his father was a village chief and olaudah was expected to follow in his footsteps.
when he was 11 however he was kidnapped and taken to the coast where he was loaded onto a slave ship.
ihere he was beaten and chained to the deck along with other slaves.
i inquired of these what was to be done with us he wrote.
they gave me to understand we were to be carried to these white peoples country to work for them equiano was relieved since he had believed that the white men meant to kill him.
but his trials were not over.
when the ship was about to set sail the africans were put into cramped quarters below deck.
equiano recalled the closeness of the place and the heat of the climate added to the number in the ship which was so crowded that each had scarcely room to turn himself almost suffocated us.
the shrieks of the women and the groans of the dying rendered the whole a scene of horror almost inconceivable.
olaudah equiano was taken to america on a slave ship like this one.
ship captains tried to pack as many people on board as possible.
many people died from overcrowding and disease.
62 chapt er 3 equiano spent several weeks at sea.
he was first taken to barbados and then to a plantation in virginia.
there after less than a month he was sold to an english naval officer.
equiano traveled the world as this man s servant and after seven years he was able to buy his freedom.
he was relatively fortunate.
hundreds of thousands of africans were brought to america and never knew freedom again.
most of their children were born into slavery too.
matthew lyon indentured servant another large group of people came to the colonies as indentured servants.
in fact around half of all european colonists arrived as indentured workers.
as with enslaved africans some of these people were brought against their will.
some were kidnapped while others were convicts who were transported in chains.
most indentured servants agreed to come voluntarily however and to work for several years to pay off their ship passage.
one of these people was a young irishman named matthew lyon.
lyon was just 14 when he came to the colonies in 1765.
under the terms of indenture young people were supposed to work until age 21.
but lyon bribed the ship captain to say that he was 18.
so when lyon was auctioned to a buyer in new york he was sold for a three year term of service.
lyon was too clever to remain a servant for even that length of time however.
a year into his service he arranged to buy two bulls from a local farmer promising to pay the farmer when he was free.
he then sold the bulls to his master in exchange for his freedom.
at that point lyon went to work for the farmer to pay back his debt.
lyon next got a job at an ironworks in connecticut.
he married the owners niece and they eventually set tled on land to the north that would later become part of vermont.
there lyon joined the green mountain boys a volunteer fighting force set up to protect settlers rights.
in 1775 at the start of the american revolution this force captured fort ticonderoga a british fort in upstate new york.
lyon became an officer and led troops in two more important battles of the revolution.
after the war for independence was won lyon served as a legislator in the new state of vermont.
he would go on to have a long career in politics and government.
from his early days as an indentured servant lyon had worked hard to build a new life in america.
like others who came to the colonies his spirit and determination helped form the new american nation.
the granger collection newyork owners of small businesses such as this colonial plumber boughtthe indentures of workers like matthew lyon.
the growth of the colonies depended on the labor of indentured servants.
the english colonies in north america 63 0 chapter 3 you try it.
the following passage of a primary source can be found in the chapter you are about to read.
as you read this passage ask yourself what you could learn from this source.
the mayflower compact we whose names are underwritten having undertaken for the glory of god and advancement of the christian faith and the honour of our king and country a voyage to plant the first colony in the northern parts of virginia do by these presents solemnly and mutually in the presence of god and one of another covenant and combine ourselves together into a civil body politic for our better ordering and preservation and furtherance of the ends aforesaid and by virtue hereof to enact constitute and frame such just and equal laws ordinances acts constitutions and offices as shall be thought most meet and convenient for the general good of the colony unto which we promise all due obedience.
answer the questions about the sentences you read.
the passage you have just read is from a document outlining the government of the colony at plymouth.
if a historian wanted to study the reasons the colony made the laws that it did would this be a good source to use.
why or why not.
where else might a historian look to verify the information found in this source.
would this be a good source to study to learn how the u s government functions today.
why or why not.
as you read chapter 3 look at the primary sources included in the chapter.
why do you think these sources were included.
chapter 3 section 1 jamestown p 72 john smith p 73 pocahontas p 73 indentured servants p 74 bacon s rebellion p 74 toleration act of 1649 p 75 olaudah equiano p 77 slave codes p 77 section 2 puritans p 78 pilgrims p 78 immigrants p 78 mayflower compact p 79 squanto p 79 john winthrop p 80 anne hutchinson p 82 section 3 peter stuyvesant p 85 quakers p 86 william penn p 86 staple crops p 87 section 4 town meeting p 91 english bill of rights p 91 triangular trade p 93 great awakening p 94 jonathan edwards p 94 enlightenment p 95 john locke p 95 pontiac p 97 section 5 samuel adams p 99 committees of correspondence p 99 stamp act of 1765 p 100 boston massacre p 101 tea act p 102 boston tea party p 102 intolerable acts p 102 quartering act p 102 academic vocabulary in this chapter you will learn the following academic words authority p 73 factors p 74 the english colonies 71 teks 1c 2a 2b 10a 11a 11c 12b 23a 25a the southern colonies what you will learn 1.
jamestown was the first permanent english settlement in america.
daily life in virginia was challenging to the colonists.
religious freedom and economic opportunities were motives for founding other southern colonies including maryland the carolinas and georgia.
farming and slavery were important to the economies of the southern colonies.
if you were there a year ago in 1609 you moved to the colony of virginia.
life here has been hard.
during the winter many people died of cold or sickness.
food is always scarce.
now it is spring and a ship has come from england bringing supplies.
in a week it will sail home.
some of your neighbors are giving up and returning to england.
they ask you to come too.
would you take the ship back to england.
despite a difficult beginning the southern colonies soon flourished.
j key terms and people jamestown p 12 john smith p 73 pocahontas p 73 indentured servants p 74 bacon s rebellion p 74 toleration act of 1649 p 75 olaudah equiano p 77 slave codes p 77 bf taking notes 1 use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the founding of the southern colonies.
bding background several european nations took part in ce to claim lands in the americas.
their next step was to establish iesinthe lands thatthey claimed.
the first english colonies were started in the late 1500s but failed.
even in successful colonies colonists s faced hardships and challenges.
settlement in jamestown in 1605 a company of english merchants asked king james i for the right to found or establish a settlement.
in 1606 the king granted the request of the company to settle in a region called virginia.
founding a new colony the investors in the new settlement formed a joint stock company called the london company.
this allowed the group to share the cost and risk of establishing the colony.
on april 26 1607 the first 105 colonists sent by the london company arrived in america.
on may 14 about 40 miles up the james river in virginia the colonists founded jamestown the first permanent english settlement in north america.
a lack of preparation cost a lot of the colonists their lives.
most of the men who came to jamestown were adventurers with no farming experience or useful skills such as carpentry.
jamestown was surrounded by marshes full of disease carrying mosquitoes.
by the time winter arrived two thirds of the original colonists had died.
2 chapter 3 jamestown on a river.
human environment interaction what do you think would have been a commonly used method of transportation for people in this region.
powhatan confederacy jamestown fared better under john smith who took control of the colony and built a fort in 1608.
he forced the settlers to work harder and to build better housing by creating rules that rewarded harder workers with food.
the colonists received help from the powerful powhatan confederacy of native americans after smith made an agreement with them.
the powhatan brought food to help the colonists and taught them how to grow com.
in 1609 some 400 more settlers arrived in jamestown.
that winter disease and famine once again hit the colony.
the colonists called this period the starving time.
by the spring of 1610 only 60 colonists were still alive.
jamestown failed to make a profit until colonist john rolfe introduced a new type of tobacco that sold well in england.
war in virginia john rolfe married pocahontas daughter of the powhatan leader in 1614.
their marriage helped the colonists form more peaceful relations with the powhatan.
however pocahontas died three years later in england where she was visiting with rolfe.
in 1622 colonists killed a powhatan leader.
the powhatan responded by attacking the virginia settlers later that year.
fighting between the colonists and the powhatan continued for the next 20 years.
because the london company could not protect its colonists the english crown canceled the company s charter in 1624.
virginia became a royal colony and existed under the authority of a governor chosen by the king.
finding main ideas what problems did the jamestown colonists face.
d history video save our history secrets of jamestown sbbbbbs reading check academic vocabulary authority power right to rule the english colonies 73 academic vocabulary factors causes daily life in virginia in early virginia people lived on scattered farms rather than in towns.
tobacco farmers established large farms called plantations.
tobacco was so valuable that it was sometimes used as money.
headright system these plantations were made possible in part by the headright system which was started by the london company.
under this system colonists who paid their own way to virginia received 50 acres of land.
a colonist could earn another 50 acres for every additional person brought from england.
rich colonists who brought servants or relatives to virginia gained large amounts of land.
primary source letter a note from virginia in this 1619 letter the secretary of the virginia colony john pory encouraged people to move to virginia.
as touching the quality of this country three things there be which in ferny ears may bring this co bony to perfection the english glow vineyards cattle all our riches for the present do consist in tobacco wherein one man by his own labor has in one year raised to himself to the vadue of zoo pounds sterlings and another by the means of sir.
servants has cleared at one crop n thousand pound english.
these be true yet indeed rare examples yet possible to be done by others from the power of words edited by t h breen analysis skill j analyzing primary sources how does this letter indicate the importance of tobacco in virginia.
labor in virginia colonists in virginia suffered very high death rates which led to labor shortages.
the majority of workers were indentured servants.
these servants signed a contract to work for four to seven years for those who paid for their journey to america.
expansion of slavery not all laborers in virginia came from europe.
a dutch ship brought the first africans to virginia in 1619.
some africans were servants others had been enslaved.
some african servants became successful farmers when their contracts ended.
the demand for workers was soon greater than the supply of people willing to work as indentured servants.
over time the cost of slaves fell.
these factors led some colonists to turn to slave labor.
by the mid 1600s most africans in virginia were being kept in lifelong slavery.
bacon s rebellion as plantations grew the economy of jamestown began to expand.
soon colonial officials began to ask for more taxes.
during the mid 1600s poor colonists protested the higher taxes.
they were also upset about the governor s policies toward native americans.
they thought the colony was not well protected against attack.
in 1676 a group of former indentured servants led by nathaniel bacon attacked some friendly american indians.
bacon opposed the governor s policies promoting trade with american indians.
he also thought the colonists should be able to take the indians land.
when the governor tried to stop him bacon and his followers attacked and burned jamestown in an uprising known as bacon s rebellion.
at one point bacon controlled much of the colony.
he died of fever however and the rebellion soon ended.
analyzing what factors led to the increased use of slave labor in virginia.
reading check 4 chapter 3 colonial williamsburg foundation other southern colonies as jamestown was developing in virginia new groups of colonists began planning their move to america.
many english catholics came to america to escape religious persecution.
english catholics had long been against england s separation from the roman catholic church.
for this reason they were not allowed by the church of england to worship freely.
english leaders also feared that english catholics would ally with catholic countries such as france and spain in conflicts.
maryland in the 1620s george calvert the first lord baltimore asked king charles i for a charter establishing a new colony in america for catholics.
in 1632 charles issued the charter to calvert s son cecilius who took over the planning of the colony.
cecilius known as the second lord baltimore named the colony maryland in honor of england s queen henrietta maria.
it was located just north of virginia in the chesapeake bay area.
calvert intended for the colony to be a refuge for english catholics.
it would also be a proprietary colony.
this meant that the colony s proprietors or owners controlled the government.
in 1634 a group of 200 english catholics came to maryland.
included in the group were wealthy landowners servants craftspeople and farmers.
settlers in maryland benefited from the lessons learned by the jamestown colonists.
they spent their time raising corn cattle and hogs so that they would have enough to eat.
before long many colonists also began growing tobacco for profit.
although catholics founded maryland a growing number of protestants began moving there in the 1640s.
soon religious conflicts arose between catholics and protestants in the colony.
to reduce tensions lord baltimore presented a bill to the colonial assembly that became known as the toleration act of 1649.
this bill made it a crime to restrict the religious rights of christians.
this was the first law supporting religious tolerance passed in the english colonies.
the toleration act did not stop all religious conflict.
however it did show that the government wanted to offer some religious freedom and to protect the rights of minority groups.
the english colonies 75 the southern colonies analysis skill interpreting charts about how many slaves lived in the english colonies in 1700 and in 1750.
the carolinas and georgia colonies were also established south of virginia.
in 1663 the english king charles ii gave much of the land between virginia and spanish florida to eight of his supporters.
at first carolina was a single colony.
however the settlements were far apart and it was hard to govern them.
in 1712 the colony separated into north and south carolina.
most of the colonists in north carolina were farmers who had moved south from virginia.
colonists primarily from europe settled south carolina.
those who paid their own way received large grants of land and some brought enslaved africans with them.
by 1730 about 20 000 enslaved africans were living in the colony compared to some 10 000 white settlers.
south carolina s proprietors managed the colony poorly and in 1719 the proprietary government was overthrown.
the james oglethorpe tried to prevent slavery in georgia.
but slaves soon provided the labor for the colony s many rice plantations.
crown then purchased north and south carolina in 1729 making them royal colonies.
in 1732 king george ii granted a charter to james oglethorpe and other trustees to found georgia.
the king hoped that georgia would shield britain s other colonies from spanish florida.
oglethorpe wanted the new colony to be a place where debtors who had been jailed for their debts in england could make a new start.
in 1733 oglethorpe and 120 colonists mostly from england founded the city of savannah.
oglethorpe did not want georgia to have large plantations owned by a few wealthy individuals.
he wanted many small farmers.
to reach this goal oglethorpe outlawed slavery and limited the size of land grants.
soon however the settlers grew unhappy with oglethorpe s strict rules.
in 1752 the british government made georgia a royal colony with new laws.
coastal georgia was soon filled with large rice plantations worked by thousands of slaves.
reading check finding main ideas what were some of the reasons colonists came to the southern colonies.
chapter 3 economies of the southern colonies the economies of the southern colonies depended on agriculture.
they also exported materials for building ships such as wood and tar.
some colonies traded with local indians for deerskins to sell.
the colonies had many small farms and some large plantations.
farms did well because the south enjoyed a warm climate and a long growing season.
many farms grew cash crops that were sold for profit.
tobacco rice and indigo a plant used to make blue dye were the most important cash crops.
the southern colonies cash crops required a great deal of difficult work to grow and harvest.
this meant a large workforce was needed.
by the 1700s enslaved africans rather than indentured servants had become the main source of labor.
african slaves brought with them knowledge that helped turn the wild environment into profitable farms.
many had previous experience raising cattle and knew the method for clearing brush using fire.
slavery was a viciously brutal condition for many inhabitants of the southern colonies.
one former slave named olaudah equiano recorded his experiences.
tortures murder and every other imaginable barbarity are practiced upon the poor slaves with impunity no punishment.
i hope the slave trade will be abolished olaudah equiano from the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano or gustavus vassa the african most of the southern colonies passed slave codes or laws to control slaves.
colonies with large numbers of slaves had the strictest slave codes.
for example south carolina s slaveholders feared that slaves would revolt.
as a result south carolina s code said slaves could not hold meetings or own weapons.
some colonies did not allow slaveholders to free their slaves.
reading check focus on reading what is the source of this quote.
is it a primary or secondary source.
do you think it is a valid source.
summarizing what role did slavery play in the southern plantation economy.
how was it regulated.
summary and i you read about preview in this section life in the southern colonies.
in the next section you will learn about the new england colonies.
section 1 assessment jji reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
describe what happened in 1607 and why is it important.
how did john smith improve conditions in jamestown.
explain what events led to a conflict between the jamestown settlers and the powhatan confederacy.
recall why were indentured servants necessary in virginia.
why did the number of slaves increase.
evaluate what do you think was the most serious problem faced by settlers in virginia.
describe why were the colonies of maryland carolina and georgia founded.
describe their locations.
b analyze why did more enslaved africans live in south carolina than did white settlers.
c predict how might the colony of georgia have been different if oglethorpe s plan had succeeded.
recall what was the purpose of slave codes.
b analyze why were slaves in high demand in the southern colonies.
critical thinking 5.
summarizing review your notes on the southern colonies.
then add a new column to your chart that summarizes the successes and or failures of each colony and the effect the environment had on colonists there.
gathering some ideas take notes on the early colonies of virginia maryland the carolinas and georgia.
be sure to note what advantages they offered to settlers and what difficulties settlers faced.
start to think about the people who would be most likely to settle in the southern colonies.
the english colonies 77 1iis i.
2 1 hi section teks 1c 2b 3b 4b 11a 15a 20a 23ez25a what you will learn 1 the pilgrims and puritans came to america to avoid religious persecution.
z religion and government were closely linked in the new england colonies.
x the new england economy was based on trade and farming.
education was important in the new england colonies.
english colonists traveled to new england to gain religious freedom.
the new england colonies if you were there you live in a town near london in the early 1700s.
some of your neighbors are starting new lives in the american colonies.
you would like to go with them but you cannot afford the cost of the trip.
there is one way you can go though.
you can sign a paper promising to work as a servant for five years.
then you would be free and in a new country.
would you sign the paper and go to america.
key terms and people puritans p 78 pilgrims p 78 immigrants p 78 mayflower compact p 79 squanto p 79 john winthrop p 80 anne hutchinson p 82 i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the reasons english colonists came to new england.
b ing background england s first successful colonial rients were in virginia.
they were started mainly as business es.
other colonists in north america had different reasons for leavingtheirhomes.
many like the pilgrims and puritans came to have freedom to practice their religious beliefs.
others like the person.
above simply wanted a new way of life.
pilgrims and puritans religious tensions in england remained high after the protestant reformation.
a protestant group called the puritans wanted to purify or reform the anglican church.
the puritans thought that bishops and priests had too much power over church members.
pilgrims on the move the most extreme english protestants wanted to separate from the church of england.
these separatists formed their own churches and cut all ties with the church of england.
in response anglican leaders began to punish separatists.
the pilgrims were one separatist group that left england in the early 1600s to escape persecution.
the pilgrims moved to the netherlands in 1608.
the pilgrims were immigrants people who have left the country of their birth to live in another country.
the pilgrims were glad to be able to practice their religion freely.
they were not happy however that their children were chapter 3 learning the dutch language and culture.
the pilgrims feared that their children would forget their english traditions.
the pilgrims decided to leave europe altogether.
they formed a joint stock company with some merchants and then received permission from england to settle in virginia.
on september 16 1620 a ship called the mayflower left england with more than 100 men women and children aboard.
not all of these colonists were pilgrims.
however pilgrim leaders such as william bradford sailed with the group.
the mayflower compact after two months of rough ocean travel the pilgrims sighted land far north of virginia.
the pilgrims knew that they would thus be outside the authority of virginia s colonial government when they landed.
their charter would not apply.
so they decided to establish their own basic laws and social rules to govern the colony they would found.
on november 21 1620 41 of the male passengers on the ship signed the mayflower compact a legal contract in which they agreed to have fair laws to protect the general good.
the compact represents one of the first attempts at self government in the english colonies.
in late 1620 the pilgrims landed at plymouth rock in present day massachusetts.
the colonists struggled through the winter.
nearly half died during this first winter from sickness and the freezing weather but the colony became the first permanent european colony in new england.
pilgrims and native americans in march 1621 a native american named samoset walked boldly into the colonists settlement.
he spoke in broken english.
samoset had learned some english from the crews of english fishing boats.
he gave the pilgrims useful information about the peoples and places of the area.
he also introduced them to a patuxet indian named squanto.
squanto had at one time lived in europe and spoke english as well.
primary source historical document the mayflower compact in november 1620 pilgrim leaders aboard the mayflower drafted the mayflower compact.
this excerpt from the mayflower compact describes the principles of the pilgrim colony s government.
the pilgrims describe the reasons they want to form a colony in north america.
we whose names are underwritten having undertaken for the glory of god and advancement of the christian faith and the honour of our king and country a voyage to plant the first colony in the northern parts of virginia do by these presents solemnly and mutually in the presence of god and one of another covenant and combine ourselves together into a civil body politic for our better ordering and preservation and furtherance of the z ends aforesaid and by virtue hereof to enact the pilgrims constitute and frame such just and equal laws promise to ordinances acts constitutions and offices lb e lws tuha t help the whole as shall be thought most meet and convenient colony for the general good of the colony unto which we promise all due obedience.
by these presents by this document covenant promise civil body politic group organized to govern aforesaid mentioned above virtue authority ordinances regulations meet fitting analysis skill.
analyzing primary sources 1.
why do you think the colonists felt the need to establish a government for themselves.
how do you think the mayflower compact influenced later governments in america.
from squanto the pilgrims learned to fertilize the soil with fish remains.
squanto also helped the pilgrims establish relations with the local wampanoag indians.
conditions in the plymouth colony began to improve.
the pilgrims invited wampanoag chief massasoit and 90 other guests to celebrate their harvest.
this feast became known as the first thanksgiving.
for the event the pilgrims killed wild turkeys.
this event marked the survival of the pilgrims in the new colony.
the english colonies 79 pilgrim community although the pilgrims overcame many problems their small settlement still struggled.
most pilgrims became farmers but the farmland around their settlement was poor.
they had hoped to make money by trading furs and by fishing.
unfortunately fishing and hunting conditions were not good in the area.
some colonists traded corn with american indians for beaver furs.
the pilgrims made little money but were able to form a strong community.
the colony began to grow stronger in the mid 1620s after new settlers arrived and as in jamestown colonists began to have more rights to farm their own land.
the pilgrims settlement was different from virginia s in that it had many families.
the pilgrims taught their children to read and offered some education to their indentured servants.
families served as centers of religious life health care and community well being.
all family members worked together to survive during the early years of the colony.
women generally cooked spun and wove wool and sewed clothing.
they also made soap and butter carried water dried fruit and cared for livestock.
men spent most of their time repairing tools and working in the fields.
they also chopped wood and built shelters.
women in the colony in plymouth women had more legal rights than they did in england.
in england women were not allowed to make contracts to sue or to own property.
in america pilgrim women had the right to sign contracts and to bring some cases before local courts.
widows could also own property.
from time to time local courts recognized the ways women helped the business community.
widow naomi silvester received a large share of her husband s estate.
the court called her a frugal thrifty and laborious hardworking woman.
puritans leave england during the 1620s england s economy suffered.
many people lost their jobs.
the english king charles i made the situation worse by raising taxes.
this unpopular act led to a political crisis.
at the same time the church of england began to punish puritans because they were dissenters or people who disagree with official opinions.
king charles refused to allow puritans to criticize church actions.
great migration these economic political and religious problems in england led to the great migration.
between 1629 and 1640 many thousands of english men women and children left england.
more than 40 000 of these people moved to english colonies in new england and the caribbean.
in 1629 charles granted a group of puritans and merchants a charter to settle in new england.
they formed the massachusetts bay company.
in 1630 a fleet of ships carrying puritan colonists left england for massachusetts to seek religious freedom.
they were led by john winthrop.
the puritans believed that they had made a covenant or promise with god to build an ideal christian community.
a new colony the puritans arrived in new england well prepared to start their colony.
they brought large amounts of tools and livestock with them.
like the pilgrims the puritans faced little resistance from local american indians.
trade with the plymouth colony helped them too.
in addition the region around boston had a fairly healthful climate.
thus few puritans died from sickness.
all of these things helped the massachusetts bay colony do well.
by 1691 the massachusetts bay colony had expanded to include the pilgrims plymouth colony.
reading check summarizing what role did religion play in the establishment of the massachusetts bay colony.
chapter 3 history close up plymouth colony the pilgrims landed in a region of forests streams and rocky soil.
plymouth colony was surrounded by stakes that formed a wall of protection.
outside the wall were colonists crop fields.
analysis a skill.
analyzing visuals i what ways were plymouth colony and the indian village similar and different.
religion and government in new england massachusetts bay colony had to obey english laws.
however its charter provided more independence than did the royal charter of i virginia.
for example it created a general i court to help run the massachusetts colony t the puritan colonists turned this court into a type of self government to represent the needs of the people.
each town sent two or three delegates to the court.
after john winthrop served as the colony s first governor the general court elected the governor and his assistants.
in 1644 the general court became a two house or bicameral legislature.
politics and religion were closely linked in puritan new england.
government leaders were also church members and ministers often had a great deal of power in puritan communities.
male church members were the only colonists who could vote.
colonists became full members in the church by becoming what the puritans called god s elect or chosen.
reaching this status was a difficult process.
individuals had to pass a public test to prove that their faith was strong.
in 1636 minister thomas hooker and his followers left massachusetts to help found connecticut another new england colony.
the english colonies 81 ri biography anne hutchinson 1591 1643 in 1634 anne hutchinson emigrated with her family from england to the massachusetts bay colony.
after settling in boston she worked as a nurse and midwife.
she also hosted a bible study class that met in her home.
over time hutchinson began to question the teachings of the local ministers.
meanwhile her popularity grew.
after being banished from the colony hutchinson settled in rhode island and later long island.
she died in an american indian attack.
today we remember her as a symbol of the struggle for religious freedom.
drawing conclusions why do you think church leaders disliked hutchinson s ideas.
church and state crs religion affected government government leaders were church members.
ministers had great authority.
government affected religion government leaders outlawed certain religious views.
government leaders punished dissenters.
in 1639 hooker wrote the fundamental orders of connecticut.
this set of principles made connecticut s government more democratic.
for example the orders allowed men who were not church members to vote.
as a result some historians call hooker the father of american democracy.
the fundamental orders of connecticut also outlined the powers of the general courts.
not all puritans shared the same religious views.
minister roger williams did not agree with massachusetts leaders.
he called for his church to separate completely from the other new england congregations.
he also criticized the general court for taking land from american indians without paying them.
puritan leaders worried that williams s ideas might hurt the unity of the colony and they made him leave.
williams took his supporters to southern new england.
they formed a new settlement called providence.
this settlement later developed into the colony of rhode island.
in providence williams supported the separation of the church from the state.
he also believed in religious tolerance for all members of the community.
in boston an outspoken woman also angered puritan church leaders.
anne hutchinson publicly discussed religious ideas that some leaders thought were radical.
for example hutchinson believed that people s relationship with god did not need guidance from ministers.
hutchinson s views alarmed puritans such as john winthrop.
puritan leaders did not believe that women should be religious leaders.
puritan leaders put hutchinson on trial for her ideas.
the court decided to force her out of the colony.
with a group of followers hutchinson helped found the new colony of portsmouth later a part of the colony of rhode island.
although these differences among religious views caused some community conflicts they were also an important step in the development of religious freedom in the colonies.
chapter 3 reading check perhaps the worst community conflicts in new england involved the witchcraft trials of the early 1690s.
the largest number of trials were held in salem massachusetts.
in salem a group of girls had accused people of casting spells on them.
the community formed a special court to judge the witchcraft cases.
the court often pressured the suspected witches to confess.
before the trials had ended the salem witch trials led to 19 people being put to death.
identifying cause and effect what led to religious disagreements among the puritans and what was the result.
new england economy connecticut massachusetts new hampshire and rhode island were very different from the southern colonies.
the often harsh climate and rocky soil meant that few new england farms could grow cash crops.
most farming families grew crops and raised animals for their own use.
there was thus little demand for farm laborers.
although some people held slaves slavery did not become as important to this region.
merchants trade was vital to new england s economy.
new england merchants traded goods locally with other colonies and overseas.
many of them traded local products such as furs pickled beef and pork.
many merchants grew in power and wealth becoming leading members of the new england colonies.
fishing fishing became one of the region s leading industries.
the rich waters off new england s coast served as home to many fish including cod mackerel and halibut.
merchants exported dried fish.
colonists also began hunting for whales that swam close to shore.
whales were captured with harpoons or spears and dragged to shore.
whaling provided valuable oil for lighting.
shipbuilding shipbuilding became an important industry in new england for several reasons.
the area had plenty of forests that provided materials for shipbuilding.
as trade particularly in slaves in the new england seaports grew more merchant ships were built.
the fishing industry also needed ships.
new england shipyards made high quality valuable vessels.
ship owners sometimes even told their captains to sell the ship along with the cargo when they reached their destination.
skilled craftspeople the northern economy needed skilled craftspeople.
families often sent younger sons to learn skilled trades such as blacksmithing weaving shipbuilding and printing.
the young boys who learned skilled trades were known as apprentices.
apprentices lived with a master craftsman and learned from him.
in exchange the boys performed simple tasks.
apprentices promised to work for a master craftsman for a set number of years.
they learned trades that were essential to the survival of the colonies.
apprentices received food and often clothing from the craftsmen.
gabriel ginings for example was an apprentice in portsmouth rhode island.
he received sufficient food and raiment clothing suitable for such an apprentice as his 1663 contract stated.
after a certain amount of time had passed apprentices became journeymen.
they usually traveled and learned new skills in their trade.
eventually they would become a master of the trade themselves.
reading check categorizing what types of jobs were common in the new england colonies.
the impact today education in the colonies education was important in colonial new england.
mothers and fathers wanted their children to be able to read the bible.
the fishing remains an important industry in new england earning hundreds of millions of dollars each year.
the english colonies 83 massachusetts bay colony passed some of the first laws requiring parents to provide instruction for their children.
public education the impact today public schools are the main source of education for most children in the united states.
about 50 million students are enrolled in the nation s public elementary and secondary schools.
to be sure that future generations would have educated ministers communities established town schools.
in 1647 the general court of massachusetts issued an order that a school be founded in every township of 50 families.
schoolchildren often used the new england primer which had characters and stories from the bible.
they learned to read at the same time that they learned about the community s religious values.
the availability of schooling varied in the colonies.
there were more schools in new england than in the other colonies where most children lived far from towns.
these children had to be taught by their parents or by private tutors.
most colonial children stopped their education after the elementary grades.
many went to work either on their family farm or away from home.
higher education higher education was also important to the colonists.
in 1636 john harvard and the general court founded harvard college.
harvard taught ministers and met the colony s need for higher education.
the second college founded in the colonies william and mary was established in virginia in 1693.
by 1700 about 70 percent of men and 45 percent of women in new england could read and write.
these figures were much lower in virginia where jamestown was the only major settlement.
reading check analyzing why was education important to the new england colonies.
summary and preview in this section k you learned about the role that religion played in the new england colonies.
in the next section you ll learn about new york new jersey and pennsylvania.
section 2 assessment jp reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
recall why did the pilgrims and puritans leave f europe for the americas.
explain what was significant about the year 1620.
c elaborate do you think the pilgrims could have survived without the assistance of squanto and massasoit.
explain your answer.
describe what role did the church play in mas.
sachusetts.
why did some colonists disagree with the leaders of massachusetts.
explain why were the colonies of connecticut and rhode island founded.
c analyze how did the mayflower compact and the fundamental orders of connecticut encourage self government.
identify describe the economy in the new eng i land colonies.
b analyze why do you think new england merchants became leading members of society.
describe what steps did the massachusetts bay colony take to promote education.
predict what are some possible benefits that new england s emphasis on education might bring.
critical thinking 5.
identifying cause and effect review your notes on the reasons english colonists came to new england.
then copy the diagram below and use it to show how the colonists experiences caused them to build certain types of colonies.
comparing colonies take notes on the early new england colonies.
be sure to note what advantages they offered to settlers and what difficulties settlers faced.
put a star beside the colony or colonies you might use in your infomercial.
i chapter 3 the aftiddle colonies what you will learn.
if you were there you are a farmer in southern germany in 1730.
religious wars have torn your country apart for many years.
now you hear stories about a place in america where people of all religions are welcome.
but the leaders of the colony and many of its people are english.
you would not know their language or customs.
still you would be free to live and worship as you like.
how would you feel about moving to a country full of strangers.
building background the middle section of the atlantic coast offered good land and a moderate climate.
several prominent english people established colonies that promised religious freedom.
to people like the settler above these colonies promised a new life.
new york and new jersey the dutch founded new netherland in 1613 as a trading post for exchanging furs with the iroquois.
the center of the fur trade in new netherland was the town of new amsterdam on manhattan island.
generous land grants to patroons or lords and religious tolerance soon brought jews french huguenots puritans and others to the colony.
director general peter stuyvesant sty vuh suhnt led the colony beginning in 1647.
peter stuyvesant was forced to surrender new amsterdam to 1.
the english created new york and new jersey from former dutch territory.
william penn established the colony of pennsylvania.
the economy of the middle colonies was supported by trade and staple crops.
r the big idea j people from many nations settled in the middle colonies.
key terms and people peter stuyvesant p 85 quakers p 86 william penn p 86 staple crops p 87 j l taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the founding of the middle colonies.
the english colonies 85 characteristics of the middle colonies social new york dutch influence new jersey diverse population pennsylvania founded by quakers economic successful farming of staple crops work force of slaves and indentured servants active trade with britain and west indies the impact today today new york city is the largest city in the united states with more than 8 million people.
in 1664 an english fleet captured the undefended colony of new amsterdam with out firing a single shot.
new netherland was renamed new york and new amsterdam became new york city.
soon after the english conquest in 1664 the duke of york made sir george carteret and lord john berkeley proprietors of new jersey.
this colony occupied lands between the hudson and delaware rivers.
it had a diverse population including dutch swedes finns and scots.
the fur trade was important to the economies of new york and new jersey through the end of the 1600s.
comparing how were new york and new jersey similar.
reading check.
ii lniiin 8 n penn was bom in london as the if a wealthy admiral.
penn joined the akers in 1666 and became an active eacher and writer of religious works.
he supported toleration of dissenters.
in 1681 he received a charter to establish a new colony called pennsylvania.
there penn put his beliefs into practice.
he insisted on fair dealings with local american indians welcomed immigrants and promised religious toleration.
making generalizations how did penn s ideas influence the rules of the colony.
penn s colony the society of friends or the quakers made up one of the largest religious groups in new jersey.
quakers did not follow formal religious practices and dressed plainly.
they believed in the equality of men and women before god.
they also supported nonviolence and religious tolerance for all people.
at the time many quaker beliefs and practices shocked most christians.
as a result quakers were persecuted in both england and america.
one proprietor of the new jersey colony was a quaker named william penn.
penn wished to found a larger colony under his own control that would provide a safe home for quakers.
in 1681 king charles ii agreed to grant penn a charter to begin a colony west of new jersey.
penn s colony known as pennsylvania grew rapidly.
penn limited his own power and established an elected assembly.
he also promised religious freedom to all christians.
his work made pennsylvania an important example of representative self government a government that reflects its citizens will in the colonies.
penn named the capital of his colony philadelphia which means the city of brotherly love.
in 1682 the duke of york sold penn a region to the south of pennsylvania.
this area called delaware remained part of pennsylvania until 1776.
finding main ideas why did william penn establish pennsylvania and how did he influence its government.
reading check.
economy of the middle colonies the middle colonies combined characteristics of the new england and southern colonies.
with a good climate and rich land farmers there could grow large amounts of staple crops crops that are always needed.
these crops included wheat barley and oats.
farmers also raised livestock.
however their use of only one plant in each field made the fields vulnerable to erosion and insects.
slaves were somewhat more important to the middle colonies than they were to new england.
they worked in cities as skilled laborers such as blacksmiths and carpenters.
other slaves worked on farms onboard ships and in the growing shipbuilding industry.
however indentured servants largely filled the middle colonies growing labor needs.
between 1700 and 1775 about 135 000 indentured servants came to the middle colonies.
about half of them moved to pennsylvania.
by 1760 philadelphia had become the largest british colonial city.
other cities in the middle colonies such as new york city also grew quickly.
trade was important to the economy of the middle colonies.
merchants in philadelphia and new york city exported colonial goods to markets in britain and the west indies.
these products included wheat from new york pennsylvania and new jersey.
throughout the colonies women made important contributions to the economy.
they ran farms and businesses such as clothing and grocery stores bakeries and drugstores.
some women also practiced medicine and worked as nurses and midwives.
however colonial laws and customs limited women s economic opportunities.
most colonial women worked primarily in the home.
married women managed households and raised children.
sometimes they earned money for their families by selling products like butter or washing clothes.
finding the main idea on what were the economies of the middle colonies based.
reading check summary i you learn and preview in this section d about the middle colonies.
in the next section you will read about colonial government the slave trade and conflicts that arose in the english colonies.
section 3 assessment j jj ij i j f immibmii reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
describe name the middle colonies.
where were they located.
how did the region s physical geography compare to that of the northern and southern colonies.
draw inferences what led to the diverse populations of new york and new jersey.
identify who are the quakers.
b analyze how did william penn attempt to create a colonial government that would be fair to all.
describe what different types of jobs did slaves in the middle colonies hold.
evaluate in what ways were women essential to the middle colonies.
critical thinking 4.
sequencing review your notes about which nation founded each middle colony.
then complete the time line below by listing the event that occurred on each of the dates on the time line.
1613 1647 1664 1681 5.
comparing colonies you ve just read about early colonies in new york new jersey and pennsylvania.
think about the advantages they offered to settlers and what difficulties settlers faced.
in your notes put a star beside one of the colonies you might use in your infomercial.
the english colonies 87 america s s r the english colonies in 1760 were located between the atlantic ocean and the appalachian mountains.
the total population of the colonies was around 1 8 million.
soon however the colonies began to grow both in size and in population.
in 1763 great britain and france signed the treaty of paris giving britain control over all lands east of the mississippi river.
with the stroke of a pen the colonies increased enormously in size.
the westward expansion of the english colonies soon to be the united states had begun.
rw america s population 1760 1 8 million 1 ethnic groups 1760 white european african american native american other tseu.
a wall of mountains the 1 500 mile long appalachian mountain range formed a natural barrier to westward expansion.
the appalachians dense forests and steep terrain made passage on foot or 4.
ki by horse difficult.
1 k5 wito wismb religions 1760 protestant catholic jewish other x natural harbors the largest cities in the colonies such as philadelphia new york and boston grew where the best natural ports were.
ships were vital to the colonies for the growing fishing industry for overseas trade and to bring more settlers to the new land.
issiitiar boston population 16 000 new york population 25 000 philadelphia population 25 000 811 boston harbor provided natural protection for ships.
av jr v a v x v a 17 f ib jg new england colonies sis middle colonies 1 southern colonies a flood of people the colonial population doubled between 1750 and 1770.
roughly half of the immigrants to the colonies were english.
second largest group of immigrants had no choice in the matter they were enslaved people from africa.
150 300 kilometers ihblw geography skills.
interpreting maps 1.
location where were the colonies largest cities located at this time.
human environment interaction how did mountains and seas influence the location of the colonies.
4 section teks 1 a 3a 3b 3c 4a 10a 10b 11 a 12a 12b 12d 20a 20c 21b what you will learn n 1.
colonial governments were influenced by political changes in england.
english trade laws limited free trade in the colonies.
the great awakening and the enlightenment led to ideas of political equality among many colonists.
the french and indian war gave england control of more land in north america.
ohhmbihmo the english colonies continued to grow despite many challenges.
key terms and people town meeting p 9 1 english bill of rights p 91 triangular trade p 93 i great awakening p 94 jonathan edwards p 94 j enlightenment p 95 i john locke p 95.
pontiac p 97 f taking notes j use the graphic organizer online to take notes on developments that affected the growing colonies.
life m the english colonies if you were there.
your family migrated to america in the 1700s and started a small farm in western pennsylvania.
now more and more people are moving in.
you would like to move farther west into the ohio river valley.
but a new law says you cannot move west of the mountains because it is too dangerous.
still you are restless and want more land and more freedom.
why might you decide to break the law and move west.
f building background when they moved to america the eng i lish colonists brought their ideas about government.
they expected to j i have the same rights as citizens in england.
however many officials f in england wanted tight control over the colonies.
as a result some j colonists like this family were unhappy with the policies of colonial i governments.
i colonial governments the english colonies in north america all had their own governments.
each government was given power by a charter.
the english monarch had ultimate authority over all of the colonies.
a group of royal advisers called the privy council set english colonial policies.
colonial governors and legislatures each colony had a governor who served as head of the government.
most governors were assisted by an advisory council.
in royal colonies the english king or queen selected the governor and the council members.
in proprietary colonies the proprietors chose all of these officials.
in a few colonies such as connecticut the people elected the governor.
in some colonies the people also elected representatives to help make laws and set policy.
these officials served on assemblies.
each colonial assembly passed laws that had to be approved first by the advisory council and then by the governor.
established in 1619 virginia s assembly was the first colonial legislature in north america.
at first it met as a single body but it was later split into two houses.
the first house was known as the council of state.
the governor s advisory council and the london company selected its members.
the house of burgesses was the assembly s second house.
the members were elected by colonists.
it was the first democratically elected body in the english colonies.
in new england the center of politics was the town meeting.
in town meetings people talked about and decided on issues of local interest such as paying for schools.
in the southern colonies people typically lived farther away from one another.
therefore many decisions were made at the county level.
the middle colonies used both county meetings and town meetings to make laws.
political change in england in 1685 james ii became king of england.
he was determined to take more control over the english government both in england and in the colonies.
because the colonies were so distant from the seats of government they had developed many of their own systems of governing and felt a sense of separation from the british government.
james believed that the colonies were too independent.
in 1686 he united the northern colonies under one government called the dominion of new england.
james named sir edmund andros royal governor of the dominion.
the colonists disliked andros because he used his authority to limit the powers of town meetings.
english bill of rights parliament replaced the unpopular king james and passed the english bill of rights in 1689.
this act reduced the powers of the english monarch.
at the same time parliament gained power.
as time went on the colonists valued their own right to elect geography skills interpreting maps 1.
location where were the new england colonies located in relation to the other colonies.
human environment interaction what natural feature marked the western boundary of the southern colonies.
khe englismzolonfes representatives to decide local issues.
following these changes the colonies in the dominion quickly formed new assemblies and charters.
colonial courts colonial courts made up another important part of colonial governments.
whenever possible colonists used the courts to control local affairs.
in general the courts reflected the beliefs of their local communities.
for example many laws in massachusetts enforced the puritans religious beliefs.
laws based on the bible set the standard for the community s conduct.
sometimes colonial courts also protected individual freedoms.
for example in 1733 officials arrested john peter zenger for printing a statement that damaged the reputation of the governor of new york.
andrew hamilton zenger s attorney argued that zenger could publish whatever he wished as long as it was true.
jury members believed that colonists had a right to voice their ideas openly and found him not guilty.
reading check.
analyzing information why were colonial assemblies and colonial courts created and what did they do.
english trade laws one of england s main reasons for founding and controlling its american colonies was to earn money from trade.
in the late 1600s england like most western european nations practiced mercantilism a system of creating and maintaining wealth through carefully controlled trade.
a country gained wealth if it had fewer imports goods bought from other countries than exports goods sold to other countries.
to support this system of mercantilism between 1650 and 1696 parliament passed a series of navigation acts limiting colonial trade.
for example the navigation act of 1660 forbade colonists from trading specific items such as sugar and cotton with any country other than england.
the act also required colonists to use english ships to transport goods.
parliament later passed triangular trade other acts that required all trade goods to pass through english ports where duties or import taxes were added to the items.
england claimed that the navigation acts were good for the colonies.
after all the colonies had a steady market in england for their goods.
but not all colonists agreed.
many colonists wanted more freedom to buy or sell goods wherever they could get the best price.
local demand for colonial goods was small compared to foreign demand.
despite colonial complaints the trade restrictions continued into the 1700s.
some traders turned to smuggling or illegal trading.
they often smuggled sugar molasses and rum into the colonies from non english islands in the caribbean.
parliament responded with the molasses act of 1733 which placed duties on these items.
british officials however rarely carried out this law.
by the early 1700s english merchants were trading around the world.
most american merchants traded directly with great britain or the west indies.
by importing and exporting goods such as sugar and tobacco some american merchants became wealthy.
triangular trade trade between the american colonies and great britain was not direct.
rather it generally took the form of triangular trade a system in which goods and slaves were traded among the americas britain and africa.
there were several routes of the triangular trade.
in one route colonists exchanged goods like beef and flour with plantation owners in the west indies for sugar some of which they shipped to britain.
the sugar was then exchanged for manufactured products to be sold in the colonies.
colonial merchants traveled great distances to find the best markets.
olaudah equiano 1745 1797 olaudah equiano claimed to have been born in africa in present day nigeria.
his autobiography told the story of his enslavement.
according to his autobiography equiano survived the middle passage traveling in a slave ship across the atlantic.
after arriving in the colonies a virginia planter purchased him and again sold him to a british naval officer.
while working as a sailor equiano eventually earned enough money to purchase his own freedom in 1766.
equiano later settled in england and devoted himself to ending slavery.
analyzing information how did equiano gain his freedom.
i received such a salutation smell in my nostrils as i had never experienced in my life j became so sick and low that i was not able to eat.
the groans of the dying rendered made the whole a scene of horror almost inconceivable unbelievable.
olaudah equiano from the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano or gustavus vassa the african iii 1 the english colonies 93 the great awakening george whitefield gives a powerful sermon during the great awakening.
ministers like whitefield emphasized personal religious experiences over official church rules.
they also allowed ordinary church members whatever their race class or gender to play a role in services.
the value placed on individuals of all types during the great awakening helped shape american political ideas about who should have a say in government.
how do you think religious freedom led to middle passage one version of the triangular trade began with traders exchanging rum for slaves on the west african coast.
the traders then sold the enslaved africans in the west indies for molasses or brought them to sell in the mainland american colonies.
the slave trade brought millions of africans across the atlantic ocean in a voyage called the middle passage.
this was a terrifying and deadly journey that could last as long as three months.
enslaved africans lived in a space not even three feet high.
slave traders fit as many slaves as possible on board so they could earn greater profits.
thousands of captives died on slave ships during the middle passage.
in many cases they died from diseases such as smallpox.
as farmers began to use fewer indentured servants slaves became even more valuable.
reading check identifying cause and effect what factors caused the slave trade to grow.
how did this affect conditions on the middle passage.
great awakening and enlightenment in the early 1700s revolutions in both religious and nonreligious thought transformed the western world.
these european movements affected life in the american colonies.
great awakening religious leaders wanted to spread religious feeling throughout the growing colonial population.
in the late 1730s ministers began holding revivals emotional gatherings where people came together to hear sermons.
many american colonists experienced a great awakening in their religious lives.
this great awakening a religious movement that swept through the colonies in the 1730s and 1740s changed colonial religion.
it also affected social and political life.
jonathan edwards of massachusetts was one of the most important leaders of the great awakening.
his dramatic sermons told sinners to seek forgiveness for their sins or face punishment in hell forever.
the great awakening drew people of different regions classes and races.
women members of minority groups and poor people often took part in services.
ministers from different colonies met and shared ideas with one another.
this represented one of the few exchanges between colonies.
the great awakening promoted ideas that may also have affected colonial politics.
sermons about the spiritual equality of all people led some colonists to begin m chapter 3 demanding more political equality.
revivals became popular places to talk about political and social issues.
people from those colonies with less political freedom were thus introduced to more democratic systems used in other colonies.
enlightenment during the 1600s european scientists began to better understand the basic laws that govern nature.
their new ideas about the universe began the scientific revolution.
the revolution changed how people thought of the world.
in 1675 for example anton van leeuwenhoek became the first to observe microorganisms through a microscope.
many colonists were also influenced by the enlightenment.
this movement which took place during the 1700s spread the idea that reason and logic could improve society.
enlightenment thinkers also formed ideas about how government should work.
they based many of their ideas on the concept of using reason to best achieve virtue and social order.
some enlightenment thinkers believed that there was a social contract between government and citizens.
philosophers such as john locke thought that people had natural rights such as equality and liberty.
one judge william blackstone published a book describing the system of english law.
his ideas about natural laws and rights became influential in colonial legal education.
ideas of the scientific revolution and the enlightenment eventually influenced colonial leaders desire for self government.
summarizing how did new ideas influence colonial society.
french and indian war by the 1670s tensions had arisen between new england colonists and the wampa noag.
metacomet a wampanoag leader also known as king philip opposed the colo reading check nists efforts to take his people s lands.
in 1675 these tensions finally erupted in a conflict known as king philip s war.
the colonial militia civilians serving as soldiers fought american indian warriors.
both sides attacked each other s settlements killing men women and children.
the fighting finally ended in 1676 but only after about 600 colonists and some 3 000 indians had been killed including metacomet.
native american allies some native americans allied with the colonists to fight against metacomet and his forces.
these indians had developed trade relations with colonists.
they wanted tools weapons and other goods that europeans could provide.
in exchange the colonists wanted furs which they sold for large profits in europe.
as a result each side came to depend upon the other.
french colonists traded and allied with the algonquian and huron.
english colonists traded and allied with the iroquois league.
this powerful group united american indians from six different groups.
many american indians trusted the french more than they did the english.
the smaller french settlements were less threatening than the rapidly growing english colonies.
no matter who their allies were many indian leaders took care to protect their people s independence.
as one leader said we are born free.
we neither depend upon the governor of new france nor the governor of new york.
we may go where we please and buy and sell what we please garangula quoted in the world turned upside down edited by colin g calloway war erupts until the mid 1700s france and great britain struggled for control of territory in north america.
british colonists wanted to settle in the ohio river valley where they could the english colonies 95 north american empires before and after the treaty of paris take advantage of the fur trade.
the french believed this settlement would hurt their profits.
a standoff developed in the ohio valley where the french had built three forts.
fighting erupted in 1753 as the british military moved to take over the valley.
when a young virginian named george washington arrived with more soldiers he found the area under french control.
washington and his troops built a small simple fort that he named fort necessity.
after his troops suffered many casualties captured injured or killed soldiers washington finally surrendered.
his defeat in 1754 was the start of the french and indian war.
leaders from the colonies met to discuss defense.
the convention produced a plan for uniting the colonies called the albany plan.
meanwhile in 1756 fighting began in europe starting what became known as the seven years war.
treaty of paris the turning point of the war came in 1759.
that year british general james wolfe captured quebec gaining the advantage in the war.
however the war dragged on for four more years.
finally in 1763 britain and france signed the treaty of paris officially ending the war.
the terms of the treaty gave canada to britain.
britain also gained all french lands east of the mississippi river except the city of new orleans and two small islands in the gulf of st lawrence.
from spain which had allied with france in 1762 britain received florida.
in an earlier treaty spain had received louisiana the land that france had claimed west of the mississippi river.
the treaty of paris changed the balance of power in north america.
soon british settlers began moving west to settle new lands.
western frontier most colonial settlements were located along the atlantic coast.
colonial settlers or pioneers slowly moved into the virgin ia and carolina backcountry and the ohio river valley.
indian leaders like chief pontiac opposed british settlement of this new land.
pontiac s rebellion began in may 1763 when his forces attacked british forts on the frontier.
within one month they had destroyed or captured seven forts.
pontiac then led an attack on fort detroit.
the british held out for months.
british leaders feared that more fighting would take place on the frontier if colonists kept moving onto american indian lands.
to avoid more conflict king george iii issued the proclamation of 1763.
this law banned british settlement west of the appalachian mountains.
the law also ordered settlers to leave the upper ohio river valley.
these limitations angered many colonists and some began to question british policies.
summarizing why did george iii issue the proclamation of 1763.
reading check section 4 assessment pontiac 1720 1769 pontiac an ottawa chief who had fought for france tried to resist british settlement west of the appalachians.
calling them dogs dressed in red who have come to rob us he attacked the british in the ohio country in 1763.
pontiac s rebellion was put down and he surrendered in 1766.
analyzing information how did pontiac try to stop the british.
summary and preview in this section i you read about colonial governments the slave trade and the conflicts with foreign countries and with native americans that the colonies faced as they grew.
in the next section you ll learn about the increasing tension between the colonies and great britain that led to independence.
reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
describe how were colonial governments organized.
b analyze how did political change in england affect colonial governments.
c explain why did self government increase in the colonies.
explain what is mercantilism.
b analyze how did the navigation acts support the system of mercantilism.
c evaluate did the colonies benefit from mercantilism.
why or why not.
identify what was the great awakening and how did it reflect religious freedom.
how did the ideas of virtue and the social contract affect colonial government.
compare how was the enlightenment similar to the great awakening.
c identify how did john locke and william black i stone contribute to the idea of self government in the i colonies.
explain what caused the french and indian war.
evaluate where was the colonial western frontier.
defend the british decision to ban colonists from set tling on the western frontier.
critical thinking 5.
summarizing review your notes on the developments in the colonies during the late 1600s to mid 1700s.
then add a box to the bottom of your chart in which you briefly summarize how the colonies grew and changed during the period as well as the challenges they faced.
development effects establishment of local government political change in england trade laws great awakening enlightenment french and indian war t j how the colonies grew and changed and challenges faced 6.
reviewing the information this section focused on what life was like in all the english colonies discussed so far.
does this information give you any new ideas about the colony you ll use in your infomercial.
the english colonies 97 history and geography as you have read life differed from colony to colony.
the colonies were created with very different goals in mind.
many of the northern colonies were established with the goal of providing religious freedom to the people who lived there.
many of the middle and southern colonies were founded by companies and individual colonists who hoped to make a profit on the resources found there.
eventually however the northern colonies also became centers of business activity.
new england colonies middle colonies southern colonies 100 200 miles 100 200 kilometers 7a chapter 3 v comparing governments economic differences would have long lasting effects on the politics of the regions.
northern merchants and tradespeople began to favor policies that made imported goods more expensive because this increased demand for the goods they produced themselves.
agricultural colonies on the other hand preferred policies that kept the prices of imported goods down because this kept prices for all goods down.
because agricultural colonies did not produce many goods themselves they had to buy most of their household goods.
all colonies formed both local and county governments in order to provide services such as constables and fence inspectors.
both levels of government however had little power because of their limited ability to tax residents.
v k loiisswas ssil comparing economies economic activities were centered on trade in new england agriculture based on slavery in the south and a mix of farming and trade in the middle colonies.
these differences were a result of the contrast among the natural resources in each area.
the south had rich soil and warm temperatures while new england had more rocky soil and a colder climate.
northern colonies also had access to rich fishing grounds and to timber for shipbuilding.
because the merchants and tradespeople in the north needed to work near each other in order for their businesses to thrive the largest cities were in the north.
in every colony the majority of people focused on some type of business venture to earn a profit.
however some colonists especially in the rural areas developed barter economies.
r 7 similarities although there were many differences among the colonies there were also many similarities.
almost none of the colonists who arrived from england were members of the english aristocracy.
the colonies were seen as a place where anyone could become prosperous.
in addition each colony had small communities of non english colonists.
german irish scots irish welsh and dutch communities existed throughout the colonies.
each colony at one time or another bordered native american land.
as settlers moved west they experienced conflict with the people living there.
this was one of the situations that drew colonies together.
mb i 1 oft reting maps 3be 1.
what were some similarities and some differences between the geography of the colonies.
compare and contrast the economies and governments of the different colonies.
tes ill ll compar iii sllsl cssbiessb 1.
british efforts to raise taxes on colonists sparked protest 2.
the boston massacre caused colonial resentment toward great britain.
colonists protested the british tax on tea with the boston tea party.
great britain responded to colonial actions by passing the intolerable acts.
conflict in the colonies tensions developed as the british government placed tax aftertax on the colonies.
if you were there you live in the new england colonies in the 1700s.
recently british officials have placed new taxes on tea your favorite beverage.
you ve never been very interested in politics but you re beginning to think that people far across the ocean in britain shouldn t be able to tell you what to do.
some of your friends have joined a group that refuses to buy british tea.
would you give up your favorite drink to join the boycott.
key terms and people samuel adams p 99 committees of correspondence p 99 stamp act of 1765 p wo boston massacre p 101 tea act p w2 boston tea party p w2 intolerable acts p w2 quartering act p w2 i building background as the british colonies grew and became prosperous the colonists got used to running their own i lives.
britain began to seem very far away.
at the same time officials in britain still expected the colonies to obey them and to earn money for britain.
parliament passed new laws and imposed new taxes.
but the colonists found various ways to challenge them.
w taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the new laws passed by the british government.
1 3 j 1 j j j j j great britain raises taxes great britain had won the french and indian war but parliament still had to pay for it.
the british continued to keep a standing or permanent army in north america to protect the colonists against indian attacks.
to help pay for this army prime minister george grenville asked parliament to tax the colonists.
in 1764 parliament passed the sugar act which set duties on molasses and sugar imported by colonists.
this was the first act passed specifically to raise money in the colonies.
british officials also tried harder to arrest smugglers.
colonial merchants were required to list all the trade goods they carried aboard their ships.
these lists had to be approved before ships could leave colonial ports.
this made it difficult for traders to avoid paying duties.
the british navy also began to stop and search ships for smuggled goods.
8 chapter 3 parliament also changed the colonies legal system by giving greater powers to the vice admiralty courts.
these courts had no juries and the judges treated suspected smugglers as guilty until proven innocent.
in regular british courts accused persons were treated as innocent until proven guilty.
taxation without representation parliament s actions upset many colonists who had grown used to being independent.
the rising merchant class thought the taxes were unfair and hurt business.
many believed that great britain had no right to tax the colonies at all without popular consent.
james otis argued that the power of the crown and parliament was limited.
otis said they could not take from any man any part of his property without his consent in person or by representation.
colonial assemblies had little influence on parliament s decisions.
in addition the colonists had no direct representatives in parliament.
the colonists were subjects of the crown instead of citizens of england.
at a boston town meeting in may 1764 local leader samuel adams agreed with otis.
he believed that parliament could not tax the colonists without their permission.
the ideas of otis and adams were summed up in the slogan no taxation without representation which spread throughout the colonies.
adams helped found the committees of correspondence each committee got in touch with other towns and colonies.
its members shared ideas and information about the new british laws and ways to challenge them.
a popular method of protest was the boycott in which people refused to buy british goods.
the first colonial boycott started in new york in 1765.
it soon spread to other colonies.
colonists hoped that their efforts would hurt the british economy and might convince parliament to end the new taxes.
the english colonies 99 stamp act the british government continued to search for new ways to tax the american colonies further angering many colonists.
for example prime minister grenville proposed the stamp act of 1765.
this act required colonists to pay for an official stamp or seal when they bought paper items.
the tax had to be paid on legal documents licenses newspapers pamphlets and even playing cards.
colonists who refused to buy stamps could be fined or sent to jail.
grenville did not expect this tax to spark protest.
after all in britain people already paid similar taxes.
but colonists saw it differently.
the stamp act was parliament s first attempt to raise money by taxing the colonists directly rather than by taxing imported goods.
protests against the stamp act began almost immediately.
colonists formed a secret society called the sons of liberty.
samuel adams helped organize the group in boston.
this group sometimes used violence to frighten tax collectors.
many colonial courts shut down because people refused to buy the stamps required for legal documents.
businesses openly ignored the law by refusing to buy stamps.
in may 1765 a virginia lawyer named patrick henry presented a series of resolutions to the virginia house of burgesses.
these resolutions stated that the stamp act violated colonists rights.
in addition to taxation without representation the stamp act denied the accused a trial by jury.
henry s speech in support of the resolutions convinced the assembly to support some of his ideas.
repealing the stamp act in boston the members of the massachusetts legislature called for a stamp act congress.
in october 1765 delegates from nine colonies met in new york.
they issued a declaration that the stamp act was a violation of their rights and liberties.
pressure on parliament to repeal or do away with the stamp act grew quickly.
a group of london merchants complained that their trade suffered from the colonial boycott.
parliament repealed the stamp act in 1766.
members of parliament were upset that colonists had challenged their authority.
thus parliament issued the declaratory act which stated that parliament had the power to make laws for the colonies in all cases whatsoever.
the declaratory act further worried the colonists.
the act stripped away much of their independence.
townshend acts in june 1767 parliament passed the townshend acts.
these acts placed duties on glass lead paints paper and tea.
to enforce the townshend acts british officials used writs of assistance.
these allowed tax collectors to search for smuggled goods.
colonists hated the new laws because they took power away from colonial governments.
the colonists responded to the townshend acts by once again boycotting many british goods.
women calling themselves the daughters of liberty supported the boycott.
in february 1768 samuel adams wrote a letter arguing that the laws violated the legal rights of the colonists.
the massachusetts legislature sent the letter to other colonies legislatures who voted to join the protest.
at the same time tax collectors in massachusetts seized the ship liberty on suspicion of smuggling.
this action angered the ship s owner and the sons of liberty.
they attacked the houses of customs officials in protest.
in response the governor broke up the massachusetts legislature.
he also asked troops to restore order.
british soldiers arrived in boston in october 1768.
sequencing what series of events led to the arrival of british troops in boston in 1768.
reading check a 00 chapter 3 primary source lj uju.
newspaper article the boston massacre an account of the boston massacre appeared in the boston gazette and country journal soon after the event the people were immediately alarmed with the report of this horrid massacre the bells were set a ringing and great numbers soon assembled at the place where this tragical scene had been acted their feelings may be better conceived than expressed and while some were taking care of the dead and wounded the rest were in consultation what to do in these dreadful circumstances.
but so little intimidated were they bostonians notwithstanding their being within a few yards of the main guard and seeing the 29th regiment under arms and drawn up in king street that they kept their station and appeared as an officer of rank expressed it ready to run upon the very muzzles of their muskets.
boston gazette and country journal march 12 1770.
analysis skill analyzing primary sources why do you think the people described were not intimidated by the soldiers.
boston massacre many bostonians saw the presence of british troops as a threat by the british government against its critics in massachusetts.
some colonists agreed with samuel adams who said i look upon british soldiers as foreign enemies.
the soldiers knew that they were not welcome.
both sides resented each other and name calling arguments and fights between bostonians and the soldiers were common.
the tension exploded on march 5 1770.
a lone british soldier standing guard had an argument with a colonist and struck him.
a crowd gathered around the soldier throwing snowballs and shouting insults.
soon a small number of troops arrived.
the crowd grew louder and angrier by the moment.
some yelled come on you rascals fire if you dare.
suddenly the soldiers fired into the crowd instantly killing three men including sailor crispus attucks.
half indian half negro and altogether rowdy as he was called attucks is the best remembered casualty of the incident.
two others died within a few days.
samuel adams and other protesters quickly spread the story of the shootings.
they used it as propaganda a story giving only one side in an argument against the british.
colonists called the shootings the boston massacre.
paul revere created an elaborate color print titled the bloody massacre perpetrated in king street above.
the soldiers and their officer thomas preston were charged with murder.
two boston lawyers josiah quincy and john adams samuel adams s cousin agreed to defend the soldiers.
they argued that the troops had acted in self defense.
the boston jury agreed finding preston and six soldiers not guilty.
two soldiers were convicted of killing people in the crowd by accident.
these men were branded on the hand and released.
the trial helped calm people down but many were still angry at the british.
analyzing what was the significance of the boston massacre.
reading check the english colonies 101 the sugar act is passed to raise money from the colonies for britain.
samuel adams founds the committees of correspondence to improve communication among the colonies.
the stamp act taxes newspapers licenses and colonial paper products.
a series of resolutions is published stating that the stamp act violates the rights of colonists.
the boston tea party to reduce tensions in the colonies parliament repealed almost all of the townshend acts.
however it kept the tax on tea.
british officials knew that the colonial demand for tea was high despite the boycott.
but colonial merchants were smuggling most of this imported tea and paying no duty on it.
the british east india company offered parliament a solution.
the company had huge amounts of tea but was not allowed to sell it directly to the colonists.
if the company could sell directly to the colonists it could charge low prices and still make money.
cheaper tea might encourage colonists to stop smuggling.
less smuggling would result in more tax money.
parliament agreed and passed the tea act in 1773 which allowed the british east india company to sell tea directly to the colonists.
many colonial merchants and smugglers feared that the british east india company s cheap tea would put them out of business.
three ships loaded with tea from the british east india company arrived in boston harbor in 1773.
members of the sons of liberty demanded that the ships leave.
but the governor of massachusetts would not let the ships leave without paying the duty.
unsure of what to do the captains waited in the harbor.
on the night of december 16 1773 colonists disguised as indians sneaked onto the three tea filled ships and dumped over 340 tea chests into boston harbor.
this event became known as the boston tea party.
soon the streets echoed with shouts of boston harbour is a teapot tonight.
it was an early example of what later became known as an act of civil disobedience.
the protest quickly increased the tensions between britain and the colonies.
reading check summarizing what factors led to the boston tea party.
the intolerable acts lord north the new british prime minister was furious when he heard the news.
parliament decided to punish boston.
in the spring of 1774 it passed the coercive acts.
colonists called these laws the intolerable acts.
the acts had several effects.
boston harbor was closed until boston paid for the ruined tea.
massachusetts s charter was canceled.
the governor decided if and when the legislature could meet.
royal officials accused of crimes were sent to britain for trial.
this let them face a more friendly judge and jury.
a new quartering act required colonists to house british soldiers.
102 chapter 3 british soldiers fire into a crowd of colonists killing five men.
colonists protest and bring the soldiers to trial.
colonists protest by dumping shipments of british tea into boston harbor.
colonists resentment toward britain builds.
analysis skilli analyzing visuals in what year did the conflict between britain and the colonists turn violent.
the quebec act gave a large amount of land to the colony of quebec.
general thomas gage became the new governor of massachusetts.
the british hoped that these steps would bring back order in the colonies.
instead they simply increased people s anger at britain.
analyzing what was the purpose of the intolerable acts.
reading check.
summary and preview in this section i you learned about the increasing dissatis faction between the colonists and great britain.
in the next chapter you ll learn about the result of these conflicts the american revolution.
section 5 assessment a reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
explain why did great britain raise taxes in its american colonies.
evaluate which method of protesting taxes do you think was most successful for colonists.
describe what events led to the boston massacre.
elaborate why do you think john adams and josiah quincy agreed to defend the british soldiers that were involved in the boston massacre.
recall what was the purpose of the tea act.
draw conclusions what message did the boston tea party send to the british government.
explain why did parliament pass the intolerable acts.
draw conclusions why do you think the colo nists believed that these laws were intolerable.
i s critical thinking i i 5.
identifying cause and effect review your notes.
on the laws passed by the british government.
then add a new column to your chart and identify the laws results.
law result 1.
5 mvwritesmart 6 gathering information now you have some information about the political situation in boston in the late 1700s.
why might someone from britain want to immigrate to boston at this time.
would you consider the city of boston rather than a whole colony for the subject of your infomercial.
the english colonies 103 social studies skills analysis critical thinking s v c.
3 participation study interpreting time lines define the skill knowing the sequence or order in which historical events took place is important to understanding these events.
time lines visually display the sequence of events during a particular period of time.
they also let you easily see time spans between events such as how long after one event a related event took place and what events occurred in between.
sequencing the life spans and major accomplishments of people helps you see when people s lifespans overlapped who might have been influenced by whom and what ideas and events happened around the same time.
in addition comparing time lines for different places makes relationships between distant events easier to identify and understand.
learn the skill follow these guidelines to read interpret and compare time lines.
determine each time line s framework.
note the years it covers and the periods of time into which it is divided.
study the order of events on each time line.
note the length of time between events.
compare what was taking place on different time lines around the same time period.
look for relationships between events.
pay particular attention to how an event on one time line might relate to an event on another.
practice the skill interpret the time lines below to answer the following questions.
what is each time line s framework.
how long was england without a king.
what event in england allowed the colonists to get rid of the dominion of new england in 1689.
how old was governor andros when the dominion of new england was formed.
leaders and events in the colonies 1641 massachusetts shews independence by passing 1590 1657 william own code of laws.
bradford signer of the mayflower compact 1637 1714 edmund andros governor of the dominion of new england 1659 virginia pledges loyalty to charles ii as king of england.
1666 massachusetts is united with other colonies in dominion of new england by king james ii.
1669 colonies disband dominion of new england and re establish separate governments.
1599 1656 1642 civil war breaks out oliver cromwell between king charles i lord protector of and parliament the commonwealth 1660 monarchy is restored charles ii becomes king.
1649 charles i is executed parliament takes power.
leaders and events in england 1666 parliament overthrows king james ii and puts new king on throne.
04 chapter 3 chapter review visual summary use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter increasing tensions between the colonies and britain led many colonists to consider cutting ties to britain.
taxation without representation acts of parliament violence between colonists and british troops reviewing vocabulary terms and people match the words in the left column with the correct definition in the right column.
committees of correspondence 2.
jonathan edwards 3 mercantilism 4 immigrants 5 indentured servants 6.
william penn 7.
pocahontas 8.
quakers 9 staple crops 10 town meeting a colonists who received free passage to north america in exchange for working without pay for a certain number of years b created in massachusetts these groups helped towns and colonies share information about resisting the new british laws c crops that are continuously in demand d daughter of powhatan chief whose marriage to colonist john rolfe eased tensions between the powhatan and the colonists e one of the leaders of the great awakening he urged sinners to seek forgiveness f protestant sect founded in england that believed salvation was available to all people g people who move to another country after leaving their homeland h political gathering at which people make decisions on local issues i quaker leader who established a colony with the goal of fair government for all j system of creating and maintaining wealth through controlled trade the english colonies 105 comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 72 77 11 a.
explain what problems did the settlers of virginia face.
draw conclusions why was maryland s toleration act of 1649 important.
c predict how might the southern colonies reliance on slave labor eventually cause problems.
section 2 pages 78 84 12 a.
describe on what was the economy of the new england colonies based.
how did the physical environment affect colonists.
compare and contrast how were the pilgrim and puritan colonies similar and different.
c evaluate what was the significance of the mayflower compact.
explain why you think the close ties between church and state in massachusetts helped or hurt its government.
section 3 pages 85 87 13 a.
identify what types of crops were grown in the middle colonies.
draw conclusions why did the middle colonies have a more diverse population than others.
c explain why were the colonies of new york new jersey and pennsylvania founded.
section 4 pages 90 97 14 a.
identify what challenges did the english colonies face.
b analyze what effect did the great awakening and the enlightenment have on the colonies.
c evaluate explain the effects of the english bill of rights the virginia house of burgesses and the great awakening on the growth of self government.
describe which one you think is most important and give reasons for your choice.
section 5 pages 98 103 15 a.
recall why did the british believe it was necessary to raise taxes on the american colonists.
why did colonists protest.
draw conclusions how did events in boston affect relations with great britain.
c evaluate did the british over react to protests by issuing the intolerable acts.
why or why not.
reviewing themes 16.
politics what political influences shaped the governments of the british colonies.
identify the different racial ethnic and religious groups that settled in the colonies.
economics how did mercantilism affect the economies of britain and the colonies.
how did it lead to the transatlantic slave trade.
politics analyze each of the following as a cause for american revolution mercantilism the french and indian war the proclamation of 1763 lack of representation in parliament the stamp act and the intolerable acts.
politics describe the roles of crispus attucks and samuel adams in the events at boston.
reading skills evaluating sources use the reading skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
choose a topic from the chapter to research.
find five sources on the internet that discuss the topic.
identify each source as primary or secondary.
list the author and describe why he or she is an authority or not.
then identify language in each source that indicates whether or not the source is valid.
compare and contrast the information in the sources then write a brief explanation of the topic.
verify the information you use between sources.
cite each source you are using in your explanation.
social studies skills interpreting time lines use the social studies skills taught in this chapter to answer the questions below.
look at the time line on page 104.
write a brief description of the events described that includes their relationship to one another.
choose two major events from each section of the chapter and sequence them.
then create a time line with the events you have chosen.
j writesmart 23.
writing your infomercial choose a colony and time period.
compare and contrast that colony with those in other regions.
then write an infomercial with at least four scenes.
each scene should have video and a voice over telling one of the reasons for immigrating.
06 chapter 3 chapter texas test practice directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 use the map below to answer the following question.
4 what was the central issue in the dispute between britain and its american colonies.
f the restrictions parliament placed on trade g the presence of british troops in the colonies h the colonists right to religious freedom j the power to tax the colonists 5 which side did native americans take in the french and indian war.
a the british b the french c different groups sided with each country d native americans did not fight in the french and indian war 6 examine the following passage from an early colonists journal and then use it to answer the question below.
the red box on this map indicates which early colonial settlement.
a plymouth b massachusetts bay c new amsterdam d jamestown 2 ideas about spiritual social and political equality arose in the colonies in the 1700s in a religious movement called f separatism.
g the enlightenment.
h the great awakening.
j puritanism.
3 how did parliaments passage of the english bill of rights in 1689 affect englands north american colonies.
a colonists became more interested in being governed by representatives they elected.
b several colonies decided to unite and formed the dominion of new england.
c the great awakening took place.
d a movement to end slavery developed.
z an indian came to us from the chief the great powhatan with the word of peace.
he said that powhatan greatly desired our friendship and that chiefs pasyaheigh and tapahanagh wanted to be our friends.
powhatan said that we would be able to sow and reap our crops in peace or else he would make war upon our enemies.
this message turned out to be true for these chiefs have ever since remained in peace and continued to trade with us.
we rewarded the messenger with many small gifts which were great wonders to him edward maria wingfield from a discourse on virginia document based question why do you think native american chiefs wanted to make peace with early english colonists.
the english colonies 107 where the british were finally defeated us on writing writesmart united states giving an oral report the revolutionary war was a very exciting time in our history a time filled with deeds of courage and daring and ending with an amazing victory for the underdog.
as you read this chapter and listen to your teacher s lectures you will learn about the great events and heroic people of that time.
then you will prepare and give an oral report that demonstrates your understanding of the history of the american revolution by summarizing a lecture responding to questions by your classmates and taking notes and asking questions during your classmates presentations.
world 56 chapter 2 englands colonies a rchbishop and bishops in the other.
in s eventeenth century england those who criticized or abandoned the anglican church were called dissenters.
the puritans were dissenters who believed that the church of england needed further purifying they demanded that all papist roman catholic rituals be eliminated.
no use of holy water.
no organ music.
no elegant robes then called vestments.
no jeweled gold crosses.
no worship of saints.
no kneeling for communion.
no tyrannical bishops and archbishops.
the puritans wanted to simplify religion to its basics people worshipping god in plain self governing congregations without all the formal trappings of catholic and anglican ceremonies and wealth.
they had hoped the new king would support their efforts but james i instead sought to banish them from england.
some puritans eventually decided that the church of england was so corrupt and corrupting that it should simply be abandoned so they created their own congregations separate from the anglican churches thus earning the name separatists.
such rebelliousness infuriated the leaders of the church of england who required people by law to attend anglican church services.
during the late sixteenth century the separatists also called nonconformists were hunted and persecuted on every side english authorities imprisoned separatist leaders three of whom were hanged.
in 1604 james i vowed to make the separatists conform or i will hurry them out of the land or do worse many separatists left england to escape persecution and some who would eventually be known as pilgrims decided to sail for america.
jamess son charles i succeeded his father in 1625 and proved to be an even more stubborn defender of absolute royal power he raised taxes without consulting the house of commons and house of lords harassed the puritans and took the shocking step of disbanding parliament from 1629 to 1640.
the monarchy went too far however when it forced anglican forms of worship on presbyterian scots.
in 1638 scotland rose in revolt and in 1640 king charles desperate for money to fund his army and save his skin revived parliament ordering its members to raise taxes for the defense of his kingdom against the rampaging scots.
parliament led by militant puritans refused.
in 1642 when the king tried to arrest five members of parliament a bloody civil war erupted in england between royalists and parliamentarians leading many new england puritans to return home to fight against the royalist army.
in 1646 parliamentary forces led by oliver cromwell captured king charles and in an unprecedented public trial convicted him of high treason and contempt of parliament labeling him a tyrant traitor murderer and public enemy he was beheaded in 1649.
as it turned out however the puritans had killed a king but they had not slain the monarchy.
religious conflict and war 57 oliver cromwell the puritan leader of the parliamentary coup ruled over england like a military dictator calling himself lord protector.
he o utlawed roman catholics and anglicans but his dictatorship fed growing resentment.
many royalists called cavaliers escaped by sailing to virginia.
after cromwells death in 1658 the army allowed new elections for parliament and in 1660 supported the restoration of the monarchy under young charles ii eldest son of the executed king.
unlike his father king charles ii agreed to rule jointly with parliament.
his younger brother the duke of york who became james ii upon succeed the execution of charles i flemish ing to the throne in 1685 was more artist john weesop witnessed the kings rigid.
he openly embraced catholicism execution and painted this gruesome scene from memory.
he was so in protestant england had political disgusted by a country where they cut opponents murdered or imprisoned off their kings head that he refused to defied parliament and appointed visit england again.
roman catholics to key positions.
the english people tolerated james iis rule so long as they expected one of his protestant daughters mary or anne to succeed him.
in 1688 however the birth of a royal son who would be raised in the roman catholic tradition stirred a revolt.
determined to prevent a catholic monarchy political religious and military leaders urged the kings protestant daughter mary stuart and her protestant husband the ruling dutch prince william iii of orange to displace james ii and assume the english throne as joint husband and wife monarchs.
when william landed in england with a dutch army king james ii not wanting to lose his head fled to france.
amid this dramatic transfer of power which soon became known as the glorious revolution parliament reasserted its right to counterbalance the authority of the monarchy.
kings and queens could no longer suspend parliament create armies or impose taxes without parliaments consent.
the monarchy would henceforth derive its power not from god but from the people.
58 chapter 2 englands colonies american colonies people and profits during these eventful years all but one of englands north american colonies georgia were founded.
from the outset english colonization differed significantly from the spanish pattern in which all aspects of colonial life were regulated by the government.
the english government treated its original american colonies much like it dealt with neighboring ireland.
the irish had been conquered by the english during the reign of queen elizabeth.
england thereafter extended its control over the catholic irish through the planting of new protestant settlements in ireland called plantations.
by confiscating irish lands and repopulating them with english and scottish protestants the government sought to reduce the influence of roman catholicism and smother any rebellious nationalism in conquered ireland.
in time the english would impose their rule and religion upon the native americans as they had been imposed upon the irish.
england envied the riches taken from the new world by spain especially the enormous amounts of gold and silver.
however the english colonies in america were quite different from the spanish colonies.
spanish settlements were royal expeditions much of the wealth and lands the spanish accumulated in the americas became the property of the monarchs who funded the conquistadores.
in contrast english colonization in the americas was led by two different groups that sometimes overlapped those seeking freedom from religious persecution both protestants and catholics and those seeking land and wealth.
in addition english colonies in america were private business ventures or collective religious experiments rather than government enterprises.
and they were expensive.
few individuals were wealthy enough to finance a colony over a long period.
those englishmen interested in colonization thus banded together to share the financial risks of starting colonies in the american wilderness investors purchased shares of stock to form joint stock companies.
that way large amounts of money could be raised and if a colony failed no single investor would suffer the whole loss.
if a colony succeeded the profits would be shared among the investors.
yet while english monarchs did not fund the colonial expeditions they did grant the royal charters legal authorization needed to launch them.
the joint stock companies represented the most important organizational innovation of the age of exploration and they provided the first instruments of english colonization in america.
american colonies 59 s elf sustaining colonies the english settlements in america were much more compact than those in new spain and the native peoples along the atlantic coast were less numerous more scattered and less wealthy than the mexica and the incas.
unlike the m ale dominated french and spanish colonies where fur traders and conquistadores often lived among the indians and intermarried most english settlers viewed the indians as devilish threats to be removed as they created family based agricultural and trading communities.
englands colonies were also much more populous than the spanish and french colonies in north america.
in 1660 there were 58 000 colonists in new england and along the chesapeake bay compared with 3 000 in new france and 5 000 in dutch new netherland.
by 1750 english colonists male and female still outnumbered the french mostly male nearly 20 to 1 1 3 million to 70 000 whereas in the northern areas of new spain the lands that became texas new mexico arizona florida and california there were only 20 000 spaniards.
the english government and individual investors had two primary goals for their american colonies 1 to provide valuable raw materials such as timber for shipbuilding tobacco for smoking and fur pelts for hats and coats and 2 to develop a thriving consumer market for english manufactured goods.
to populate the colonies the english encouraged social rebels including convicts religious dissenters and the homeless and landless to migrate to america thereby reducing social and economic tensions at home.
by far the most powerful enticement to colonists was to offer them land and the promise of a better way of life what came to be called the american dream.
land plentiful and cheap was english americas miraculous treasure once it was taken from the native americans.
what virtually all of the diverse immigrants shared was the courage to risk everything for a new life of adventure in america.
in the process of discovering a new world of opportunities and dangers they also discovered and recreated themselves as americans.
the landless english during the late sixteenth century england experienced a population explosion that outstripped its economys ability to support the surplus of landless workers.
many of those poor laborers would find their way to america.
an additional social strain for the english poor was the enclosure of farmlands on which peasants had lived and worked for generations.
as trade in woolen products grew landlords decided to enclose farmlands and evict the farmworkers in favor of grazing sheep.
the enclosure movement of the sixteenth century coupled with the rising population generated the great number of beggars and vagrants who wandered across england during the late sixteenth century and gained immortality in 60 chapter 2 englands colonies the line from the mother goose tale hark hark the dogs do bark.
the beggars have come to town the problems created by this uprooted peasant population provided a compelling reason to send many of them abroad to colonies in america and the caribbean.
as the reverend richard hakluyt an english geographer explained valiant youths rusting from lack of employment would flourish in the new world and produce crops and materials that would enrich england.
virginia in 1606 king james i chartered a joint stock enterprise called the virginia company.
it was owned by merchant investors including the wealthiest merchant in london seeking to profit from the gold and silver they hoped to find in america.
king james also gave the virginia company a spiritual mission by ordering the settlers to take the christian religion to the indians who live in darkness and miserable ignorance of the true knowledge and worship of god in 1607 the virginia company sent to america three tiny ships carrying about 100 men and boys.
in may after five storm tossed months at sea they reached chesapeake bay which extends 200 miles from north to south along the present day states of virginia and maryland.
to avoid spanish raiders the english colonists chose to settle about forty miles inland along a large river with a northwest bend.
they called the river the james in honor of the catholic king and named their first settlement james fort later renamed jamestown.
on a l ow lying island surrounded by boggy salt marshes swarming with malaria infested mosquitoes the s ea weary colonists built a fort with thatched huts and a church.
they had come to america overflowing with misperceptions.
they expected to find gold friendly indians and easy living.
instead they found disease drought starvation violence and death.
virtually every colonist fell ill within a year after arriving in virginia as they moved into a new disease environment against which they had no natural immunities.
summers in virginia were much hotter and more humid than in england.
the early settlers also struggled to find enough to eat for most of them were either poor townsmen unfamiliar with farming or gentleman adventurers who despised manual labor.
a more damned crew hell never vomited said the president of the virginia company.
the leaders of the company expected the native americans to submit to the authority of the colonists.
they were wrong.
the 14 000 indians living along the virginia coast were dominated by the powhatan confederacy.
powhatan as the english called him was the supreme chief of several hundred villages of about 100 people each organized into thirty chiefdoms in eastern virginia.
american colonies 61 at the time the powhatan confederacy may have been the most powerful group of native peoples along the entire atlantic coast.
focused on raising corn they lived in oval shaped houses framed with bent saplings and covered with bark or mats.
their walled villages included forts buildings for storing corn and temples.
chief powhatan his proper name was wahunsenacawh lived in an imposing lodge on the york river not far from jamestown where he was protected by forty bodyguards and supported by a hundred wives.
colonist john smith reported that the chieftain sat covered with a great robe made of raccoon skins and all the tails hanging by flanked by two rows of men and behind them as many women with all their heads and shoulders painted red the powhatans smith reported were generally tall and straight very ingenious and handsome the black hair on their heads half shaven and half grown long.
some adorned their heads with feathers and chains hanging from their pierced ears.
many painted their bodies.
unlike the english only a few grew beards.
during the winter they wore fur skins and in the summer were mostly naked covered only by grasses or leaves.
in simple huts made of saplings and bark the powhatans lived together in family clusters.
some villages had 20 such huts others had 200.
the powhatan men smith stressed went to great pains never to engage in womans work when they were not hunting fishing or fighting they sat around watching the women and children do the rest of the work gardening making baskets and pottery cooking and all the rest powhatan was as much an imperialist as the english or spanish.
he forced the chieftains of rival peoples he had conquered to give him corn.
upon learning of the english settlement at jamestown he planned to impose his will on the strangers as well.
when powhatans happened upon a group of englishmen stealing their corn they killed all seventeen of them stuffing their mouths with ears of corn.
the inexperienced colonists found a match for chief powhatan in john smith a canny iron willed twenty seven year old mercenary soldier for hire who arrived the next year with more colonists.
the virginia company impressed by smiths exploits in foreign wars had appointed him a member of the council to manage the new colony in america.
it was a wise decision.
of the original 105 settlers only 38 survived the first nine months.
at one point said smith all their food was gone all help abandoned each hour expecting the fury of the savages after recognizing their desperate extremity the powhatans brought corn to rescue the starving strangers.
62 chapter 2 englands colonies nc e ri ve r land grants to the virginia company st la wr e ec neb ken riv la ke ar second colony of plymouth io n e o n r iv huds ro hu l ont ake er council for new england plymouth l r de l a w a r e e ak e e ri r.
potom ac r r ive jamestown s e se e riv ca pe r first colony of london r ar fe.
te nn e j ames riv er chesapeake bay 100 miles 50 100 kilometers atlantic ocean what did stockholders of the virginia company hope to gain from the first two english colonies in north america.
how were the first english settlements different from the spanish wwn64 america 10e settlements in north america.
26593 02map 01 what first proofwere the major differences between jamestown and plymouth.
american colonies 63 thereafter smith imposed strict military discipline and forced all to work long days in the fields.
he also bargained effectively with the indians.
through his dictatorial efforts jamestown survived.
but it was not easy.
as he explained the quarreling colonists were a sorry lot ten times more fit to spoil a commonwealth than.
to begin one when no gold or silver was discovered near jamestown the virginia company shifted its money making efforts to the sale of land which would rise in value as the colony grew in population.
the company recruited hundreds of new investors and settlers with promises that virginia would make them rich the influx of settlers nearly overwhelmed the struggling colony.
during the winter of 1609 1610 the colonys food supply again ran out and most of the english colonists died of disease or starvation.
desperate settlers consumed their horses cats and dogs then rats and mice.
a few even ate their leather shoes and boots and the starch in their shirt collars.
one hungry man killed salted and ate his pregnant wife.
horrified by such cannibalism his fellow colonists tortured and executed him.
but the cannibalism continued colonial necessities a list of supplies recommended to new settlers by the virginia company in 1622.
64 chapter 2 englands colonies as the starvation worsened.
so great was our famine smith wrote that a savage we slew and buried the poorer sort of colonists took him up again and ate him in june 1610 as the surviving colonists prepared to abandon jamestown and return to england a new governor lord de la warr arrived with three ships and 150 men.
they established new settlements upstream at henrico richmond and two more downstream near the mouth of the james river.
it was a critical turning point for the colony.
after lord de la warr returned to england in 1611 sir thomas gates took charge of the virginia settlements and imposed a strict system of laws.
the penalties for running away included shooting hanging and burning.
when a man was caught stealing oatmeal the authorities thrust a long needle through his tongue chained him to a tree and let him starve to death as a grisly example to the community.
gates also ordered the colonists to attend church services on thursdays and sundays.
religious uniformity became an essential instrument of public policy and civil duty in colonial virginia.
over the next several years the jamestown colony limped along until at last the settlers found a profitable crop tobacco.
the plant had been grown on caribbean islands for years and smoking had become a popular habit in europe.
in 1612 settlers began growing virginia tobacco for export to england.
by 1620 the colony was shipping 50 000 pounds of tobacco each year by 1670 virginia and maryland were exporting 15 million pounds annually.
as large scale tobacco growing emerged farmers needed additional cleared lands for planting and more workers to grow tobacco.
if all our riches for the present do consist in tobacco explained a jamestown planter then it followed that our principal wealth.
consisteth in servants another planter said they wanted lusty laboring men.
capable of hard labor and that can bear and undergo heat and cold indentured servants to support their deepening investment in tobacco lands planters purchased indentured servants colonists who exchanged several years of labor for the cost of passage to america and the eventual grant of land thus increasing the flow of immigrant workers to the colony.
indentured servitude became the primary source of laborers in english america during the colonial period.
of the 500 000 english immigrants to america from 1610 to 1775 some 350 000 came as indentured servants most of them penniless young men and boys that the english government was eager to be rid of.
in the 1630s the gender ratio in virginia was 6 men to every woman by the 1650s it had dropped to 3 to 1.
american colonies 65 not all indentured servants came to the colonies voluntarily.
many homeless children in london were kid napped and sold into servitude in america.
in addition parliament in 1717 declared that convicts could avoid prison or the hangman by relocating to the colonies and some 30 000 made their way to the new world.
newspapers in american ports announced the arrival of indentured servants for sale.
one advertisement noted a shipload of healthy indented men and women servants.
a variety of tradesmen good farmers stout laborers.
whose indentures will be disposed of on reasonable terms for cash buyers of workers preferred the strongest young men and the most attractive women.
those who were sick or older proved harder to sell and often they were added to a sale as a bonus some middlemen would buy the whole shipload of servants and then load them on wagons to sell in outlying communities.
while most men labored on farms or plantations young indentured women tended to work as household servants learning the skills of spinning sewing cooking and cleaning.
once in america servants were provided food and a bed but life was harsh and their rights were limited.
masters could sell or loan or rent servants to others without their permission.
marriage required the masters permission.
masters could whip servants or chain them in iron collars and extend their length of service as penalty for bad behavior or for running away.
being indentured was almost like being a slave but servants unlike slaves could file a complaint about abuse with the local court.
elizabeth sprigs for example a servant in maryland reported of her toiling day and night and then being tied up and whipped to that degree you would not beat an animal scarce fed anything but indian corn and salt the most important difference between servanthood and slavery was that it did not last a lifetime.
when the indenture ended usually after four to seven years the servant could claim the freedom dues set by custom and law tools clothing food and on occasion small tracts of land.
some former servants did very well.
in 1629 seven members of the virginia legislature were former indentured servants and fifteen served in the maryland assembly in 1637.
such opportunities were much less common in england or europe giving people even more reasons to travel to america.
pocahontas one of the most remarkable powhatans was pocahontas the favorite daughter of chief powhatan.
in 1607 then only eleven years old she figured in perhaps the best known story of the settlement her plea for the life of john smith who had gotten into trouble by trespassing on p owhatans 66 chapter 2 englands colonies territory.
smith was wounded and readied for execution.
at that point according to smith pocahontas made a dramatic appeal for his life convincing her father to release him in exchange for muskets hatchets beads and trinkets.
schoolchildren still learn the story of pocahontas and john smith but through the years the storys facts have become distorted or even falsified.
pocahontas and john smith were friends not disney lovers.
moreover the indian princess saved smith on more than one occasion before she pocahontas shown here in european dress by 1616 pocahontas was known herself was kidnapped by english setas lady rebecca tlers in an effort to blackmail powhatan her powerful father.
pocahontas however surprised her english captors by choosing to join them.
she embraced christianity was baptized and renamed rebecca and fell in love with john rolfe a t wenty eight year old widower who introduced tobacco to jamestown.
after their marriage they moved in 1616 with their infant son thomas to london.
there the young princess drew excited attention from the royal family and curious londoners.
but just a few months after arriving rebecca only twenty years old contracted a lung disease and died.
the virginia company prospers in 1618 sir edwin sandys a prominent member of parliament became head of the virginia company and created a new policy to attract more colonists to virginia when he announced the headright land grant program any male english colonist who bought a share in the company and could pay for passage to virginia could have fifty acres upon arrival and fifty more for each servant he brought along.
the virginia company also promised that the settlers would have all the rights of englishmen including an elected legislature to advise the colonial governor arguing that every man will more willingly obey laws to which he has yielded his consent this was a crucial development for the english had long enjoyed the broadest civil liberties and the least intrusive government in europe.
now the colonists in virginia were to have the same rights.
by 1619 the settlement had outgrown james fort and was formally renamed jamestown.
the same year a ship with ninety young women aboard arrived.
men american colonies 67 rushed to claim them as wives by providing 125 pounds of tobacco to cover the cost of each transatlantic passage.
also in 1619 a dutch ship called the white lion stopped at jamestown and unloaded 20 negars the first enslaved africans known to have reached english america.
thus began an inhumane system that would grow rapidly while spurring dramatic economic growth sowing moral corruption and generating horrific suffering for african americans.
by 1624 some 14 000 english men women and children had migrated to jamestown although only 1 132 had survived or stayed and many of them were in a sickly and desperate state in that year an english court dissolved news of the rebellion a pamphlet the struggling virginia company and printed in london provided details about bacons rebellion.
weak and miserable virginia became a royal colony.
the settlers were now free to own property and start businesses.
their governors however would thereafter be appointed by the king.
sir william berkeley who arrived as the royal governor in 1642 presided over the colonys rapid growth for most of the next t hirty five years.
tobacco prices surged and wealthy planters began to dominate social and political life.
bacons rebellion the relentless stream of new settlers into virginia exerted constant pressure on indian lands and created growing social tensions among whites.
the largest planters in the colony sought to live like the wealthy english gentlemen who owned huge estates in the english countryside.
in virginia these men acquired the most fertile land along the coast and rivers compelling freed servants to become farmworkers or forcing them inland in order to gain their own farms.
in either case the poorest virginians found themselves at a disadvantage.
by 1676 one fourth of the free white men were landless.
they roamed the countryside squatting on private property working at odd jobs poaching game and struggling to survive.
the simmering tensions among the landless colonists contributed to the tangled events that came to be called bacons rebellion.
the royal governor 68 chapter 2 englands colonies william berkeley noted that poor indebted discontented and armed virginia colonists were ripe for rebellion.
the discontent erupted when a squabble over hogs between a white planter and native americans on the potomac river led to the murder of the planters herdsman and in turn to retaliation by frontier vigilantes who killed some two dozen indians.
when five native chieftains were later murdered enraged indians took revenge on frontier settlements.
scattered attacks continued southward to the james river where nathaniel bacons overseer was killed.
in 1676 when governor berkeley refused to take action against the indian raiders bacon defied the governors authority by assuming command of a rebel group of more than 1 000 men determined to terrorize the protected and darling indians bacon said he would kill all the indians in virginia and promised to free any servants and slaves who joined him.
bacons rebellion quickly became a battle of landless servants small farmers and even some slaves against virginias wealthiest planters and political leaders.
bacons ruthless assaults against peaceful indians and his greed for power and land rather than any commitment to democratic principles sparked his conflict with the governing authorities and the planter elite.
for his part governor berkeley opposed bacons plan to destroy the indians not because he liked indians but because he didnt want warfare to disrupt the profitable deerskin trade the colonists enjoyed with the native americans.
bacon whose ragtag army had now dwindled to a few hundred issued a declaration of the people of virginia accusing berkeley of corruption and attempted to take the governor into custody.
berkeleys forces r esisted feebly and bacons men burned jamestown in frustration.
bacon however could not celebrate the victory long he fell ill and died a month later.
with bacon dead the rebellion gradually disintegrated.
governor berkeley had twenty three of the rebels hanged.
for such severity the king denounced berkeley as a fool and recalled him to england where he died within a year.
maryland in 1634 ten years after virginia became a royal colony a neighboring settlement appeared on the northern shore of chesapeake bay.
named maryland in honor of english queen henrietta maria its 12 million acres were granted to sir george calvert lord baltimore by king charles i.
it became the first proprietary c olony that is it was owned by an individual not by a joint stock company.
calvert had long been one of the kings favorites.
in 1619 he was appointed one of two royal secretaries of state for the nation.
forced to resign after a american colonies 69 early maryland and virginia de l r e ar aw ver i to po maryland m ac ri ve r virginia james delaware bay st marys y 1634 rive r or k atlantic ocean riv er henrico 1610 jamestown 1607 chesapeake bay roanoke island 1580s original grant to lord baltimore present day boundary of maryland 100 miles 100 kilometers why did lord baltimore create maryland.
how was maryland different from virginia.
wwn64 whatamerica were the10e main characteristics of marylands 1632 charter.
26593 02map 02 first proof squabble with the kings powerful advisers calvert used the occasion of his resignation to announce that he had converted from anglicanism to catholicism.
thereafter calvert persistently asked the new king james ii to grant him a charter for an american colony to the north of virginia.
however calvert died before the king could act on his request so the charter was awarded to his son cecilius calvert the second lord baltimore who actually founded the colony.
70 chapter 2 englands colonies calvert wanted maryland to be a refuge for english catholics a persecuted minority in anglican england.
yet he also wanted the colony to be profitable and to avoid antagonizing protestants so he instructed his brother leonard the colonys first proprietary governor to ensure that catholic colonists worship in private and remain silent upon all occasions of discourse concerning matters of religion in 1634 the calverts planted the first settlement in coastal maryland at st marys near the mouth of the potomac river about eighty miles up the chesapeake bay from jamestown.
they sought to learn from the mistakes made at jamestown.
first they recruited a more committed group of colonists families intending to stay in the colony rather than single men seeking quick profits.
second the calverts did not want maryland to be a colony of scattered farms and settlements like virginia or to become dependent solely on tobacco.
they wanted to create a more diversified agriculture and build fortified towns designed to promote social interaction.
third they wanted to avoid extremes of wealth and poverty by ensuring that the government would do justice to every man without partiality.
and fourth to avoid the chronic indian wars suffered in virginia the calverts resolved to purchase land from the native americans rather than take it by force.
the charter from the king gave the calverts power to make laws with the consent of the freemen that is all property holders.
yet they could not attract enough roman catholics to develop a s elf sustaining economy.
the majority of the servants who came to the colony were protestants both anglicans and puritans.
to recruit servants and settlers the calverts offered them small farms most of which grew tobacco.
unlike virginia which struggled for its first twenty years maryland succeeded more quickly because of its focus on growing tobacco from the start.
its long coastline along the chesapeake bay gave planters easy access to shipping.
despite the calverts caution concerning matters of religion sectarian squabbles impeded the maryland colonys early development.
when oliver cromwell and the puritans took control in england after the civil war cecilius calvert a catholic like his father feared he might lose the colony.
to avoid such a catastrophe he wrote the toleration act 1649 which welcomed all christians regardless of their denomination or beliefs.
it also promised to execute anyone who denied the divinity of jesus.
lord baltimore convinced the maryland legislature to pass the toleration act in the hope that it would protect the catholic minority in maryland.
but it did not work.
protestants in maryland seized control of the government deprived lord baltimore of his governing rights and rescinded the toleration american colonies 71 act in 1654 only to see it reinstituted three years later by oliver cromwell.
the act deservedly stands as a landmark to human liberty even though it was enacted more out of expediency than conviction.
the once persecuted puritans had become persecutors themselves at one point driving lord baltimore out of his own colony.
were it not for its success in growing tobacco maryland may well have disintegrated.
in 1692 following the glorious revolution in england catholicism was banned in maryland.
only after the american revolution would marylanders again be guaranteed religious freedom.
settling new england unlike maryland and virginia the new england colonies were initially intended to be s elf governing religious utopias based on the teachings of john calvin.
dedham massachusetts for example was founded in the 1630s by english puritans who signed a written agreement promising to live together in peace and harmony while giving complete obedience to god.
the new england settlers were not indentured servants as in the chesapeake but were mostly m iddle class families that could pay their own way across the atlantic.
most male settlers were small farmers merchants seamen or fishermen.
new england also attracted more women than did the southern colonies.
although its soil was not as fertile as that of the chesapeake region and its growing season was much shorter new england was a healthier place to live.
because of its colder climate settlers avoided the infectious diseases like malaria that ravaged the southern colonies.
during the seventeenth century only 21 000 colonists arrived in new england compared with the 120 000 who went to the chesapeake bay colonies.
but by 1700 new englands thriving white population exceeded that of maryland and virginia.
the pilgrims and puritans who arrived in massachusetts in the 1620s were on a divine mission to create a model christian society.
in the new land these s elf described saints intended to purify their churches of all catholic and anglican rituals and enact a code of laws and a government structure based upon biblical principles.
unlike the anglican church which allowed anyone including sinners to join the puritans would limit membership in their churches only to s aints those who had been chosen by god for salvation.
they also sought to stamp out gambling swearing and sabbath breaking.
such holy settlements they hoped would provide a beacon of righteousness for a wicked england to emulate.
72 chapter 2 englands colonies plymouth the first permanent english settlement in new england was established by separatists who were forced to leave england because of their refusal to worship in anglican churches.
the separatist saints demanded that each congregation govern itself rather than be ruled by a bureaucracy of bishops and archbishops.
separatists had first gathered in scrooby an english village only to be forced out resettling in the english town of boston before many of them left england for holland where over time they worried that their children were becoming dutch.
in september 1620 about 100 women men and children some of whom were called strangers rather than separatists because they were not part of the religious group crammed aboard the tiny mayflower a leaky vessel only 100 feet long and headed across the atlantic bound for the virginia colony where they had obtained permission to settle.
storms however blew the ship off course to cape cod just south of what became boston massachusetts.
being thus arrived at safe harbor and brought safe to land william bradford wrote they fell upon their knees and blessed the god of heaven who had brought them over the vast and furious ocean crossing the atlantic sailors on a sixteenth century oceangoing vessel navigating by the stars.
american colonies 73 since they were outside the jurisdiction of any organized government the forty one separatists on board the mayflower signed the mayflower compact a covenant group contract to form a church.
the civil government grew out of the church government and the members of each were identical.
the signers of the mayflower compact at first met as the general court of plymouth plantation like a town meeting which chose the governor and his early new england settlements kennebec river lake champlain wk r iver piscataqua river r connecticut r iver e m e rri m a c k r iv moha maine new hampshire salem massachusetts bay ri v er boston provincetown hudson er ar law de windsor hartford connecticut r ive new haven new haven new amsterdam long long und d so islan newport plymouth narragansett bay portsmouth rhode island d islan cape cod providence atlantic ocean 100 miles 100 kilometers why did pilgrims found the plymouth colony.
how were the settlers of the massachusetts bay colony different from those of plymouth.
wwn64 america 10e 26593 02map 03 what was the origin of the rhode island colony.
first proof 74 chapter 2 englands colonies assistants or council.
other property owners were later admitted as members or freemen but only church members were eligible to join the general court.
eventually as the colony grew the general court became a legislative body of elected representatives from the various towns.
the plymouth colonists settled in a deserted wampanoag indian village that had been devastated by smallpox.
the pilgrims named their hillside colony plymouth after the english port from which they had embarked.
they too experienced a difficult starving time as had the early jamestown colonists.
during the first winter half of the pilgrims died including thirteen of the eighteen married women.
only the discovery of stored indian corn buried underground enabled the colony to survive.
massachusetts bay the plymouth colony was soon overshadowed by its much larger neighbor the massachusetts bay colony which was also intended to be a holy protestant commonwealth.
the massachusetts bay puritans however differed from the pilgrims and anglicans in important ways.
they wanted to purify the church of england from within not separate from it.
they were called congregationalists because their churches were self governing rather than ruled by an anglican bishop in distant england.
their congregations limited membership to visible saints those who could demonstrate receipt of the gift of gods grace.
in 1629 king charles i gave a royal charter to the massachusetts bay company which was planted in new england the following year.
it consisted of a group of calvinist puritans led by john winthrop a prosperous lawyer with intense religious convictions.
winthrop wanted the new american colony to be a haven for puritans and a model christian c ommunity a city john winthrop the first governor of the upon a hill as he declared.
to that massachusetts bay colony in whose end he shrewdly took advantage of vision the colony would be as a city an oversight in the company charter upon a hill it did not require that the joint stock american colonies 75 company maintain its home office in england.
winthrops group took the royal charter with them thereby transferring government authority from london to massachusetts where they hoped to govern themselves.
winthrop was a strong leader virtually a dictator who believed that the government should enforce religious beliefs and ensure social stability.
he and the puritans had no toleration for other religious views in new england.
catholics anglicans quakers and baptists were punished imprisoned banished and sometimes executed.
even puritans who spoke out against religious or political policies were quickly condemned.
for example anne hutchinson the strong willed intelligent wife of a prominent merchant raised thirteen children and hosted meetings in her boston home to discuss sermons.
soon however the discussions turned into large gatherings at which hutchinson shared her strong feelings about religious matters.
according to one participant she preaches better gospel than any of your black coats male ministers blessed with vast biblical knowledge and a quick wit hutchinson claimed to know which of her neighbors had truly been saved and which were damned including ministers.
she quickly was viewed as a dangerous woman.
a pregnant hutchinson was hauled before the all male general court in 1637 for trying to undermine the kingdom of christ and for two days she sparred on equal terms with the puritan leaders.
her ability to cite c hapter and verse biblical defenses of her actions led an exasperated governor winthrop to explode we are your judges and not you ours.
we do not mean to discourse debate with those of your sex he told hutchinson that she had stepped out of your place as a woman in a mans world.
as the trial the trial of anne hutchinson in this continued an overwrought hutchinson nineteenth century wood engraving was eventually lured into convicting her anne hutchinson stands her ground against charges of heresy from the a ll self by claiming direct revelations from male leaders of puritan boston.
god blasphemy in the eyes of puritans.
76 chapter 2 englands colonies in 1638 winthrop and the general court banished the pregnant hutchinson as a leper not fit for our society she initially resettled with her family and about sixty followers on an island south of providence rhode island.
the hard journey took its toll however.
hutchinson grew sick and her baby was stillborn leading her critics in massachusetts bay to claim that the monstrous birth was gods way of punishing her.
hutchinsons spirits never recovered.
after her husbands death in 1642 she moved near new amsterdam new york city which was then under dutch control.
the following year she and six of her children were massacred by indians.
her murder wrote a spiteful john winthrop was a special manifestation of divine justice representative government the transfer of the massachusetts bay colonys royal charter whereby an english trading company evolved into a provincial government was a unique venture in colonization.
unlike old england new england had no powerful lords or bishops kings or queens.
the massachusetts general court wherein power rested under the royal charter consisted of all the shareholders property owners who were also called freemen.
at first the freemen had no power except to choose assistants who in turn elected the governor and deputy governor.
in 1634 however the freemen turned themselves into the general court with two or three deputies to represent each town.
a final stage in the democratization of the massachusetts bay government came in 1644 when the general court organized itself like the english parliament with a house of assistants corresponding roughly to the house of lords and a house of deputies corresponding to the house of commons.
all decisions had to be ratified by a majority in each house.
the puritans who had fled religious persecution ensured that their liberties in america were spelled out and protected.
over time membership in a puritan church replaced the purchase of stock as the means of becoming a freeman or voter in massachusetts bay.
rhode island more by accident than design the massachusetts bay colony became the staging area for other new england colonies created by people dissatisfied with puritan control.
young roger williams 1603 1683 who had arrived from england in 1631 was among the first to cause problems precisely because he was the purest of puritans a separatist.
he criticized puritans for not completely cutting ties to the whorish church of england.
where john winthrop cherished strict governmental and clerical authority williams stubbornly championed individual liberty and criticized the way the indians were being shoved aside.
the combative williams posed a radical american colonies 77 question if ones salvation depends solely upon gods grace as john calvin had argued why bother to have churches at all.
why not give individuals the right to worship god in their own way.
in williamss view true puritanism required complete separation of church and state and freedom from all coercion in matters of faith.
forced worship he declared stinks in gods nostrils such dangerous opinions led governor winthrop and the general court to banish williams to england.
before authorities could ship him back the diversity of english protestantism religious quarrels among the puritans led to the founding of new colonies.
in this seventeenth century cartoon four englishmen each representing a faction in opposition to the established church of england are shown fighting over the bible.
78 chapter 2 englands colonies owever he slipped away during a blizzard and found shelter among the narh ragansett indians.
in 1636 he bought land from the indians and established a town he named providence at the head of narragansett bay the first permanent settlement in rhode island and the first in america to allow complete freedom of religion.
from the beginning rhode island was the most democratic of the colonies governed by the heads of households rather than by church members.
newcomers could be admitted to full citizenship by a majority vote and the colony welcomed all who fled religious persecution in massachusetts bay.
for their part puritans in boston came to view rhode island as a refuge for rogues.
a dutch visitor reported that the new colony was the sewer of new england.
all the cranks of new england retire there connecticut new hampshire and maine in 1636 the reverend thomas hooker led three church congregations from massachusetts bay to connecticut where they organized a self governing colony.
in 1639 the connecticut general court adopted the fundamental orders a series of laws that provided for a christian commonwealth like that of massachusetts except that voting was not limited to church members.
the connecticut constitution specified that the congregational churches would be the colonys official religion.
the governor was commanded to rule according to the word of god to the north most of what are now the states of new hampshire and maine was granted in 1622 to sir ferdinando gorges and captain john mason.
in 1629 mason and gorges divided their territory with mason taking the southern part which he named the province of new hampshire and gorges taking the northern part which became the province of maine.
during the early 1640s massachusetts took over new hampshire and in the 1650s it extended its authority to the scattered settlements in maine.
this led to lawsuits and in 1678 english judges decided against massachusetts in both cases.
in 1679 new hampshire became a royal colony but massachusetts continued to control maine.
a new massachusetts charter in 1691 finally incorporated maine into massachusetts.
the english civil war in america by 1640 english settlers in new england and around chesapeake bay had established two great beachheads on the atlantic coast with the dutch colony of new netherland in between.
after 1640 however the struggle between the restoration in the colonies 79 king and parliament in england diverted attention from colonization and migration to america dwindled for more than twenty years.
during the english civil war 1642 1651 and oliver cromwells puritan dictatorship 1653 1658 the struggling colonies were left pretty much alone by the mother country.
in 1643 massachusetts bay plymouth connecticut and new haven formed the new england confederation to provide joint defense against the dutch french and indians.
in some ways the confederation behaved like a nation unto itself.
it made treaties and in 1653 it declared war against the dutch who were accused of inciting indian attacks.
massachusetts far from the scene of trouble failed to cooperate greatly weakening the confederation.
virginia and maryland also defied cromwells dictatorship.
virginia burgesses legislators in 1649 denounced the puritans execution of king charles and claimed that his son charles ii was the lawful king.
the colony grew rapidly during its years of independent government before reverting to royal control when william berkeley returned as governor in 1660 after the monarchy was restored in england.
cromwell allowed the colonies great flexibility but was not indifferent to britains north american empire.
he fought trade wars with the dutch and his navy harassed englands traditional enemy catholic spain in the caribbean.
in 1655 a british force wrested jamaica from spanish control.
the restoration of king charles ii in 1660 led to an equally painless reinstatement of previous governments in the colonies.
agents hastily dispatched by the colonies won reconfirmation of the massachusetts charter in 1662 and the very first royal charters for connecticut and rhode island in 1662 and 1663.
all three remained self governing corporations.
plymouth still had no charter but it went unmolested.
new haven however was absorbed into connecticut.
the restoration in the colonies the restoration of charles ii to the british throne in 1660 revived interest among the english in colonial expansion.
within twelve years the english would conquer new netherland and settle carolina.
in the middle region formerly claimed by the dutch four new colonies emerged new york new jersey pennsylvania and delaware.
the new colonies were awarded by the king to men proprietors who had remained loyal to the monarchy during the civil war.
in 1663 for example charles ii granted carolina to eight prominent supporters who became lords proprietor owners of the region.
80 chapter 2 englands colonies the carolinas from the start the southernmost mainland colony in the seventeenth century consisted of two widely separated areas that eventually became two different carolina colonies north and south.
the northernmost part called albemarle had been settled in the 1650s by colonists from virginia.
for half a century albemarle remained an isolated cluster of farms along the shores of albemarle sound.
the eight lords proprietor focused on more promising sites in southern carolina.
to speed their efforts to generate profits they recruited experienced s early settlements in the south p e a av ah nn ri er ocone r ve.
florida spanish gulf of mexico t n e n er o ke fe ashley river albemarle sound roanoke island bath occaneechi trading path ar north carolina ri v cooper river charles town atlantic savannah ocean a added to georgia virginia south carolina georgia alta m riv ah er m o river er s i d n cape pa h m u i njam s a ro riv ap c la i an o ta st marys river st augustine spanish 200 miles 200 kilometers how were the carolina colonies created.
what were the impediments to settling north carolina.
how did the lords proprietor settle south carolina.
wwn64 america 10e 26593 02map 04 what were the major items traded by settlers in south carolina.
first proof the restoration in the colonies 81 english planters from the tiny caribbean island of barbados the oldest richest and most heavily populated colony in english america.
the english in barbados had developed a hugely profitable sugar plantation system based on the hard labor of enslaved africans.
the king sugar colony the easternmost island in the west indies was dominated by a few extraordinarily wealthy planters who exercised powerful political influence in the mother country.
the renowned philosopher john locke reported that the english planters on barbados endeavored to rule all they also worked their slaves to death the mortality rate for both slaves and whites in barbados was twice that in virginia forcing english planters on the island to buy huge numbers of additional slaves each year as replacements.
by 1670 however all available land on barbados had been claimed and the sons and grandsons of the planter elite were forced to look elsewhere to find estates of their own.
they seized the chance to settle south carolina and bring the barbadian plantation system to the new colony.
the first english colonists arrived in south carolina in 1669 at charles town later named charleston.
over the next twenty years half the south carolina colonists came from barbados and other island colonies in the caribbean such as nevis st kitts and jamaica.
in a reference to barbados and the other caribbean colonies john yeamans an englishman in carolina explained in 1666 that these settlements have been made and upheld by negroes and without constant supplies of them cannot subsist from the start south carolina was a slave based colony.
in their efforts to recruit slaveholding planters the lords proprietor placed advertisements like the following in the barbados newspaper to the owner of every negro man or slave brought thither to carolina within the first year 20 acres and for every woman negro or slave 10 acres and all men negroes or slaves after that time and within the first five years 10 acres and for every woman negro or slave 5 acres planters from the caribbean colonies brought enormous numbers of enslaved africans to carolina to clear land plant crops and herd cattle.
carolina a swiss immigrant said looks more like a negro country than like a country settled by white people the government of carolina grew out of a unique documents the fundamental constitutions of carolina drafted by one of the eight proprietors lord anthony ashley cooper with the help of his secretary john locke.
its provisions for a formal titled nobility encouraged awarding large land grants to prominent englishmen.
from the beginning however headrights were given to every immigrant who could pay for passage across the atlantic.
the fundamental constitutions granted religious toleration which gave carolina a greater 82 chapter 2 englands colonies degree of religious freedom extending to jews and heathens than england or any other colony except rhode island.
in 1712 the carolina colony was formally divided in two north and south.
after rebelling against the lords proprietor south carolina became a royal colony in 1719.
north carolina remained under the proprietors rule until 1729 when it too became a royal colony.
rice became the dominant commercial crop in coastal south carolina because it was perfectly suited to the hot humid growing conditions.
rice like sugarcane and tobacco was a labor intensive crop and planters preferred enslaved africans to work their plantations in part because west africans had been growing rice for generations.
both carolinas also had huge forests of yellow pine trees that provided lumber and other key materials for shipbuilding.
the sticky resin from pine trees could be boiled to make tar which was needed to waterproof the seams of wooden ships which is why north carolinians came to be called tar heels.
enslaving indians one of the quickest ways to make money in the early years of carolinas development was through trade with local indians.
in the late seventeenth century english merchants began traveling southward the broiling of their fish over the flame in this drawing by john white algonquian men in north carolina broil fish a dietary staple of coastal societies.
the restoration in the colonies 83 from virginia into the piedmont region of carolina where they developed a prosperous commerce in deerskins with the catawbas.
between 1699 and 1715 carolina exported to england an average of 54 000 deerskins per year where they were transformed into leather gloves belts hats work aprons and book bindings.
the growing trade in deerskins entwined indians in a dependent relationship with europeans that would prove disastrous to their traditional ways of life.
english traders quickly became interested in buying enslaved indians as well as deerskins.
they gave indians goods firearms and rum as payment for their capturing rivals to be sold as slaves.
the profitability of captive indian workers prompted a frenzy of slaving activity among english settlers.
as many as 50 000 indians mostly women and children were sold as slaves in charles town between 1670 and 1715.
more enslaved indians were exported during that period than africans were imported and thousands of others were sold to slavers who took them to islands in the west indies through new england ports.
the growing trade in enslaved native americans triggered bitter struggles between rival indian nations and helped ignite unprecedented colonial violence.
in 1712 the tuscaroras of north carolina attacked german and english colonists who had encroached upon their land.
north carolina authorities appealed to south carolina for aid and the colony eager for more slaves dispatched two expeditions made up mostly of indian allies yamasees cherokee chiefs a print depicting seven cherokee chieftains taken from carolina to england in 1730.
84 chapter 2 englands colonies herokees creeks and catawbas.
they destroyed a tuscarora town exec cuted 162 male warriors and took 392 women and children captive for sale in charles town.
the surviving tuscaroras fled north where they joined the iroquois.
the tuscarora war in north carolina sparked more conflict in south carolina.
the yamasees felt betrayed when white traders paid them less for their tuscarora captives than they wanted.
what made this shortfall so acute was that the yamasees owed debts to traders totaling 100 000 deerskins.
to recover their debts white traders cheated yamasees confiscated their lands and began enslaving their women and children.
in april 1715 the enraged yamasees attacked coastal plantations and killed more than 100 whites.
the governor mobilized all white and black men to defend the colony other colonies supplied weapons.
but it wasnt until the governor bribed the cherokees to join them that the yamasee war e nded in 1717.
the defeated yamasees fled to s panish controlled florida.
by then hundreds of whites had been killed and dozens of plantations destroyed and abandoned.
to prevent another conflict the colonial government outlawed all private trading with indians.
the end of the yamasee war did not stop infighting among the indians however.
for the next ten years or so the creeks and cherokees engaged in a costly blood feud much to the delight of the english.
one carolinian explained that their challenge was to figure out how to hold both tribes as our friends for some time and assist them in cutting one anothers throats without offending either.
this is the game we intend to play if possible between 1700 and 1730 the indigenous population in the carolinas dwindled from 15 000 to just 4 000.
the middle colonies and georgia the area between new england and the chesapeake maryland and virginia included the middle colonies of new york new jersey delaware and pennsylvania that were intially controlled by the netherlands.
by 1670 the mostly protestant dutch had the largest merchant fleet in the world and the highest standard of living.
they controlled northern european commerce and had become one of the most diverse and tolerant societies in europe and englands most ferocious competitor in international commerce.
new netherland becomes new york in london king charles ii decided to pluck out that old dutch thorn in the side of the english colonies in america new netherland.
the dutch colony was older than new the middle colonies and georgia 85 england.
the dutch east india company organized in 1602 had hired an english sea captain henry hudson to explore america in hopes of finding a northwest passage to the s pice rich indies.
sailing along the coast of north america in 1609 hudson crossed delaware bay and then sailed up the river eventually named for him in what is now new york state.
the hudson river would become one of the most strategically important waterways in all of america wide and deep enough for oceangoing vessels to travel far north into the interior of the colony where valuable furs were acquired from indians.
like virginia and massachusetts new netherland was created as a profit making enterprise.
and like the french the dutch were interested mainly in the fur trade as the european demand for beaver hats created huge profits.
in 1610 the dutch established fur trading posts on manhattan island and upriver at fort orange later called albany.
in 1626 the dutch governor purchased manhattan an indian word meaning island of many hills from the indians for 60 gilders or about 1 000 in current values.
the dutch then built a fort and a f ur trading post at the lower end of the island.
the village of new amsterdam eventually new york city which grew up around the fort and expanded north to wall street where the dutch built a defensive wall became the capital of new netherland.
new netherland was a corporate colony governed by the newly organized dutch west india company.
it controlled political life appointing the colonys governor and advisory council and not allowing any form of legislature.
all commerce with the netherlands had to be carried in the companys ships and the company controlled the beaver trade with the indians.
in 1629 the dutch west india company decided that it needed more settlers outside manhattan to help protect new amsterdam the colonys front door at the mouth of the hudson river from possible indian attack.
to encourage settlers to move into the surrounding countryside it awarded wealthy individuals a large estate called a patroonship in exchange for peopling it with fifty adults within four years.
like a feudal lord the patroon provided cattle tools and buildings.
his tenants in turn paid him rent used his gristmill for grinding flour gave him first option to purchase surplus crops and submitted to a court he established.
these arrangements amounted to transplanting the feudal manor to the new world and it met with as little success as similar efforts in maryland and south carolina.
most settlers wanting their own farms took advantage of the companys provision that they could have as farms bouweries all the lands they could improve.
dutch settlements gradually emerged wherever fur pelts might be found.
in 1638 a swedish trading company established fort christina at the site of 86 chapter 2 englands colonies castello plan of new amsterdam a map of new amsterdam in 1660 shortly before the english took the colony from the dutch and christened it new york city.
resent day wilmington delaware and scattered settlements up and down p the delaware river.
the dutch in 1655 took control of new sweden.
unlike most of the other european colonies in the americas the dutch embraced ethnic and religious diversity.
in 1579 the treaty creating the dutch republic declared that everyone shall remain free in religion and.
no one may be persecuted or investigated because of religion both the dutch republic and new netherland welcomed exiles from the constant religious strife in europe spanish and german jews french protestants huguenots english puritans and catholics.
there were even muslims in new amsterdam where eighteen different languages were spoken.
in september 1654 a french ship arrived in new amsterdam harbor carrying twenty three sephardim jews of spanish portuguese descent.
they had come seeking refuge from p ortuguese controlled brazil and were the first jewish settlers to arrive in north america.
the anti semitic colonial governor peter stuyvesant refused to accept them however.
dutch officials overruled him pointing out that it would the middle colonies and georgia 87 jewish heritage in colonial america a seventeenth century jewish cemetery in new york city.
be unreasonable and unfair to refuse to provide jews a safe haven.
they reminded stuyvesant that some of the west india company shareholders in the netherlands were jews.
they told him that they wanted to allow everyone to have his own belief as long as he behaves quietly and legally gives no offense to his neighbor and does not oppose the government it would not be until the late seventeenth century that jews could worship in public however.
such restrictions help explain why the american jewish community grew so slowly.
in 1773 more than 100 years after the first jewish refugees arrived jews represented only one tenth of 1 percent of the entire colonial population.
not until the nineteenth century would the american jewish community experience dramatic growth.
the dutch west india company tolerated jews but its priority was making profits.
in 1626 the company began importing enslaved africans to meet its labor shortage.
by the 1650s new amsterdam had one of the largest slave markets in america although most of the african slaves sold there were sent to virginia and maryland.
the extraordinary success of the dutch economy also proved to be its downfall however.
like imperial spain the dutch empire expanded too rapidly.
the dutch dominated european trade with china india africa brazil 88 chapter 2 englands colonies and the caribbean but they could not control their f ar flung possessions.
it did not take long for european rivals to exploit the sprawling empires weak points.
by the m id seventeenth century england and the netherlands were locked in ferocious commercial warfare.
the new netherland governors were mostly stubborn autocrats either corrupt or inept and especially clumsy at indian relations.
they depended upon a small army for defense and the residents of manhattan many of whom were not dutch were often contemptuous of the government.
in 1664 the diverse colonists showed almost total indifference when governor peter stuyvesant called them to defend the colony against a threatening english fleet.
stuyvesant finally surrendered the colony without firing a shot.
the english conquest of new netherland had been led by james stuart duke of york who would become king james ii.
upon the capture of new amsterdam his brother king charles ii granted the entire dutch region to him.
the dutch however negotiated an unusual surrender agreement that allowed new netherlanders to retain their property churches language and local officials.
the english renamed both new netherland and the city of new amsterdam as new york in honor of james the duke of york.
new jersey shortly after the conquest of new netherland the duke of york granted the lands between the hudson and delaware rivers to sir george carteret and lord john berkeley brother of virginias governor and named the territory for carterets native jersey an island in the english channel.
in 1676 by mutual agreement the new colony was divided into east and west jersey with carteret taking the east and berkeley the west.
finally in 1682 carteret sold out to a group of investors.
new settlements gradually arose in east jersey.
disaffected puritans from new haven founded newark carterets brother brought a group to found elizabethtown named for queen elizabeth and a group of scots founded perth amboy.
in the west facing the delaware river a scattering of swedes finns and dutch remained but they were soon overwhelmed by swarms of english and welsh quakers as well as german and s cots irish settlers.
in 1702 east and west jersey were united as the single royal colony of new jersey.
pennsylvania the quakers as the society of friends was called because they believed that no one could know christ without quaking and trembling became the most controversial of the radical religious groups that emerged from the turbulence of the english civil war.
founded in england in 1647 by george fox a saintly roving preacher who often traveled the middle colonies and georgia 89 the middle colonies moha wk riv er albany fort orange massachusetts 42 parallel connecticut river new york new netherland 1613 1664 connecticut ri ve r delaw ar e ar iver susq u eh an n p e n n s y lva n i a new sweden 1638 1655 sch newark elizabethtown perth amboy uy l kill ri ve r east jersey philadelphia fort christina wilmington west jersey maryland long nd isla new york new amsterdam new jersey delaware bay delaware virginia chesapeake bay atlantic ocean 100 miles 100 kilometers why was new jersey divided in half.
why did the quakers settle in pennsylvania.
america 10e wwn64 how did the relations with indians in pennsylvania compare with other 26593 02map 05 colonies.
first proof barefoot the friends rebelled against all forms of political and religious authority including salaried ministers military service and paying taxes.
they insisted that everyone not just a select few could experience gods free gospel a personal revelation from god what they called the inner light of the holy spirit.
90 chapter 2 englands colonies quaker meeting the presence of women at this friends meeting is evidence of progressive quaker views on gender equality.
quakers held radical beliefs for the time they believed that people were essentially good and could achieve salvation through a personal emotional communion with god that would enable them to be a candle of the lord they demanded complete religious freedom for everyone and promoted equality of the sexes including the full participation of women in religious affairs.
they discarded all formal religious rituals and embraced a fierce pacifism.
like fox some early quakers went barefoot others wore rags and a few went naked and smeared themselves with excrement to demonstrate their primitive commitment to christ.
the quakers suffered often violent abuse for their odd behavior because their beliefs were so threatening to the social and religious order.
quakers would gather outside anglican or congregational churches where one of the middle colonies and georgia 91 them would try to outpreach the minister inside.
authorities accused them of disrupting peace and order and undermining religion church order and the state new england puritans banned tortured and executed them.
quakers were especially hated because they refused to acknowledge the supremacy of puritanism.
so that quakers could be more readily recognized and jailed they were defaced by the authorities in new england.
their nostrils were slit their ears lopped off their tongues pierced by a r ed hot rod or their foreheads branded with the letter h for heretic but the quakers kept coming.
in fact the friends often sought out such abuse and martyrdom as a sign of their intense christian commitment.
mary dyer a follower of anne hutchinson who was banned from massachusetts later became a quaker and returned to the colony to visit jailed quakers.
she was eventually arrested and sentenced to death.
at the last minute however her son convinced the court to release h er against her w ishes on the condition that she relocate to rhode island.
in april 1660 however dyer went back to massachusetts in a suicidal effort to protest the wicked anti quaker law against gods people and offer up her life there the mother of six was again sentenced to death.
the will of the lord be done she said.
yea joyfully shall i go she was hanged.
the settling of english quakers in west jersey encouraged other friends to migrate especially to the delaware river side of the colony where william penns quaker commonwealth the colony of pennsylvania soon arose.
penn the son of wealthy admiral sir william penn had attended oxford university from which he was expelled for criticizing the universitys requirement that students attend daily chapel services.
his furious father banished his rebellious son from their home.
the younger penn lived in france for two years then studied law before moving to ireland to manage the familys estates.
there the twenty two year old penn was arrested in 1666 for attending a quaker meeting.
much to the chagrin of his parents he became a quaker and was arrested several times for his religious convictions.
upon his fathers death penn inherited a fortune including a huge tract of land in america which the king urged him to settle as a means of ridding england of quakers.
the land was named at the kings insistence for penns father pennsylvania literally penns woods and it was larger than england itself.
penn aggressively encouraged people of different religions from different countries to settle in his new colony which he called a holy experiment for he hoped that people of all faiths and nations would live together in harmony.
92 chapter 2 englands colonies by the end of 1681 thousands of immigrants had responded to penns offer and a bustling town was emerging at the junction of the schuylkill and delaware rivers.
penn called it philadelphia meaning city of brotherly love.
the relations between the native americans and the pennsylvania quakers were unusually good because of the quakers friendliness and penns policy of purchasing land titles from the native americans.
for some fifty years the settlers and the native americans lived in peace.
the colonys government which rested on three frames of government drafted by penn resembled that of other proprietary colonies except that the freemen property owners elected the council members as well as the assembly.
the governor had no veto although penn as proprietor did.
penn hoped to show that a colonial government could operate in accordance with quaker principles that it could maintain peace and order and that religion could flourish without government support and with absolute freedom of conscience.
over time however the quakers struggled to forge a harmonious colony.
in pennsylvanias first ten years it went through six governors.
a disappointed penn wrote from london pray stop those scurvy quarrels that break out to the disgrace of the province delaware in 1682 the duke of york granted penn the area of delaware another part of the former dutch territory which had been new sweden before being acquired by the dutch in 1655.
at first d elaware taking its name from the delaware river which had been named to honor thomas west baron de la warr virginias first colonial governor became part of pennsylvania but after 1704 it was granted the right to choose its own assembly.
from then until the american revolution delaware had a separate assembly but shared pennsylvanias governor.
georgia georgia was the last of the english colonies to be established.
in 1732 king george ii gave the land between the savannah and altamaha rivers to twenty one english trustees appointed to govern the province of georgia named in honor of the king.
in two respects georgia was unique among the colonies it was to provide a military buffer protecting the carolinas against spanish controlled florida and to serve as a social experiment bringing together settlers from different countries and religions many of them refugees debtors or miserable wretches making up the worthy poor general james e oglethorpe a prominent member of parliament was appointed to head the colony designed to provide a haven for the poor children and other poor that pester the streets of london the middle colonies and georgia 93 savannah georgia the earliest known view of savannah georgia 1734.
the towns layout was carefully planned.
in 1733 colonists founded savannah on the atlantic coast near the mouth of the savannah river.
the town designed by oglethorpe featured a grid of crisscrossing roads graced by numerous parks.
protestant refugees from austria began to arrive in 1734 followed by germans and g erman speaking moravians and swiss.
the addition of welsh highland scots sephardic jews and others gave the early colony a diverse character like that of charleston south carolina.
as a buffer against spanish florida the georgia colony succeeded but as a social experiment creating a common mans utopia it failed.
initially landholdings were limited to 500 acres to promote economic equality.
liquor was banned as were lawyers and the importation of slaves was forbidden.
but the idealistic rules soon collapsed as the colony struggled to become s elf sufficient.
the regulations against rum and slavery were widely disregarded and finally abandoned.
in 1754 georgia became a royal colony.
it developed slowly over the next decade but grew rapidly after 1763.
georgians exported rice lumber beef and pork and they carried on a profitable trade with the islands in the west indies.
almost unintentionally the colony became an economic success and a slave c entered society.
european settlements and indian u lake s perior la ke potaw ot atom i lake michig an o ebag winn fox ron hu sauk hu ki ckapoo wy fox la o ri la d ie er ke erie miami hi o an r ve shawnee a l chickasaw f n va sa mis sis sip l pi r i ver cherokee na h r so car georgia creek ya m a see altamaha river choctaw ti m apalachee florida spanish gulf of mexico why did european settlement lead to the expansion of hostilities among the indians.
wwn64 america 10e what were the consequences of the trade and commerce 26593 02map 06 between the english settlers and the southern indigenous first proof peoples.
how were the relationships between the settlers and the members of the iroquois league different from those between settlers and tribes in other regions.
societies in early north america quebec new france maine ki ab en a montreal mahican on ds hu huron ot mohawk ri o one ida onondaga cayuga s oi senec a qu iro nd m as s ac hu s e tt r on t a lake albany ma boston w a m pa no ag na us et providence hartford ri p e q n arragan s e tt u o connecticut t awa del ie er ke re r erie pa.
philadelphia po md to r ma c powh ata virginia jam occaneechi trading path n es r nj new york de laware de nanticok e st marys jamestown atlantic e tuscarora o cean l l l i n north carolina f a c atawba na h r south carolina charleston orgia see savannah ltamaha river t imucua e florida spanish 200 miles 200 kilometers 96 chapter 2 englands colonies native peoples and english settlers most english colonists adopted a strategy for dealing with the indians quite different from that of the french and the dutch.
merchants from france and the netherlands focused on exploiting the profitable fur trade.
the thriving commerce in animal s kins especially beaver otter and d eer helped spur exploration of the vast american continent.
it also both enriched and devastated the lives of indians.
to get fur pelts the french and dutch built trading outposts in upper new york and along the great lakes where they established friendly relations with the hurons algonquians and other indians.
the hurons and algonquians also sought french support in their ongoing wars with the mighty iroquois nations.
in contrast to the french experience in canada the english colonists were more interested in pursuing their god given right to hunt and farm on indian lands and to fish in indian waters.
algonquian ceremony celebrating harvest as with most native americans the algonquians dependence on nature for survival shaped their religious beliefs.
native peoples and english settlers 97 native americans and christianity the new england puritans aggressively tried to convert native americans to christianity and civilized living.
they insisted that indian converts abandon their religion language clothes names and villages and forced them to move to what were called praying towns to separate them from their heathen brethren.
one reason that roger williams of rhode island was considered so dangerous by the puritan leaders was his insistence that all f aiths including those of the indians should be treated equally.
he labeled efforts by governments to impose puritanism on everyone soul rape the pequot war indians in the english colonies who fought to keep their lands were forced out or killed.
new england puritans like the english colonists in virginia viewed indians as demonic savages barbarous creatures and merciless and cruel heathens as one colonist asserted indians had no place in a new england in 1636 settlers in massachusetts accused a pequot of murdering a colonist the english took revenge by burning a pequot village.
as the indians fled the puritans killed t hem men women and children.
the militia commander declared that god had guided his actions to smite our enemies.
and give us their land for an inheritance sassacus the pequot chief organized the survivors and counterattacked.
during the ensuing pequot war of 1637 the colonists and their narragansett allies set fire to an indian village near west mystic in the connecticut valley and killed those who tried to escape.
william bradford the governor of plymouth admitted that it was a fearful sight to see the indians frying in the fire and the streams of blood quenching the flames but the victory seemed a sweet sacrifice delivered by god.
under the terms of the treaty of hartford 1638 the pequot nation was dissolved.
refugees fled in all directions.
sassacus escaped to the mohawks in new york with whom he pleaded to spare his life.
they did not.
in fact they sent his scalp to the english as a peace offering.
king philips war after the pequot war relations between colonists and indians improved somewhat but the continuing influx of english settlers and the decline of the beaver population eventually reduced the native americans to poverty.
by 1675 the indians and english settlers had come to fear each other deeply.
the era of peaceful coexistence came to a bloody end during the last quarter of the seventeenth century.
native american leaders especially the chief of the wampanoags metacomet known to the colonists as king philip 98 chapter 2 englands colonies resented english efforts to convert indians to christianity.
in the fall of 1674 john sassamon a christian indian who had graduated from harvard college warned the english that the wampanoags were preparing for war.
a few months later sassamon was found dead in a frozen pond.
colonial authorities convicted three wampanoags of murder and hanged them.
enraged wampanoag warriors then burned puritan farms on june 20 1675.
three days later an englishman shot a wampanoag the wampanoags retaliated by ambushing and beheading a group of puritans.
the shocking violence on both sides soon spun out of control in what came to be called king philips war or metacomets war.
the brutal fighting resulted in more deaths and destruction in new england in proportion to the population than any american conflict since including the civil war.
vengeful bands of warriors destroyed twelve towns and attacked forty others.
within a year colonists conducted a surprise attack that killed 300 narragansett warriors and 400 women and children.
the narragansetts retaliated by destroying providence rhode island and threatening boston itself prompting a prominent minister to call it the saddest time with new england that was ever known the situation grew so desperate that the colonies passed americas first conscription laws drafting into the militia all males between the ages of sixteen and sixty.
in the summer of 1676 metacomets wife and only son were captured leading the chieftain to cry my heart breaks now i am ready to die in the end staggering casualties and shortages of food and ammunition wore down the naragansetts.
some surrendered many succumbed to disease and others fled to the west.
those who remained were forced into villages supervised by english officials.
metacomet initially escaped only to be hunted down and killed.
the victorious colonists marched his severed king philips war a 1772 engraving by head to plymouth where it stayed atop paul revere depicts metacomet king a pole for twenty years.
metacomets philip leader of the wampanoags.
wife and son were sold into slavery in native peoples and english settlers 99 the caribbean.
by the end of king philips war three quarters of the indians in new england had been killed.
the iroquois league the same combination of forces that wiped out the indian populations of new england and the carolinas affected the native peoples around new york city and the lower hudson valley.
the inability of indian groups to unite effectively against the europeans as well as their vulnerability to infectious diseases doomed them to conquest and exploitation.
in the interior of new york however a different situation arose.
there sometime before 1600 the iroquois nations seneca cayuga onondaga oneida and mohawk had been convinced by hiawatha a mohawk to forge an alliance.
the iroquois league known to its members as the haudenosaunee or great peace became so strong that the outnumbered dutch and later english traders were forced to work with them to acquire beaver pelts.
by the early seventeenth century a council of some fifty sachems chieftains oversaw the 12 000 members of the iroquois league.
its capital was onondaga a bustling town a few miles south of what later became syracuse new york.
the league was governed by a remarkable constitution called the great law of peace which had three main principles peace equity and justice.
each person was to be a shareholder in the wealth of the nation.
the constitution wampum belt these valued belts were woven and exchanged to certify treaties or record transactions.
100 chapter 2 englands colonies established a great council of fifty male royaneh religious political leaders each representing one of the female led clans of the iroquois nations.
the great law of peace gave essential power to the people.
it insisted that every time the royaneh dealt with an especially important matter or a great emergency they had to submit the matter to the decision of their people both men and women for their consent.
the search for furs and captives led iroquois war parties to range widely across what is today eastern north america.
they gained control over a huge area from the st lawrence river to tennessee and from maine to michigan.
for more than twenty years warfare raged across the great lakes region between the iroquois supported by dutch and english fur traders and the algonquians and hurons and their french allies.
in the 1690s the french and their indian allies destroyed iroquois crops and villages infected them with smallpox and reduced the male population by more than a third.
facing extermination the iroquois made peace with the french in 1701.
during the first half of the eighteenth century they stayed out of the almost constant wars between the two european powers which enabled them to play the english off against the french while creating a thriving fur trade for themselves.
slavery in the colonies slavery in north america by 1700 enslaved africans made up 11 percent of the total american population slaves would comprise more than 20 percent by 1770.
but slavery differed greatly from region to region.
africans were a tiny minority in new england about 2 percent.
because there were no large plantations in new england and fewer slaves were owned family slavery prevailed with masters and slaves usually living under the same roof.
slavery was much more prevalent in the chesapeake colonies and the carolinas.
by 1730 the black slave population in virginia and maryland had become the first in the western hemisphere to achieve a s elf sustaining rate of population growth.
by 1750 about 80 percent of the african american slaves in the chesapeake bay region for example had been born there.
slaverys african roots the transport of african captives across the atlantic to the americas was the largest forced migration in world history.
more than 10 million people eventually made the terrifying journey to the western hemisphere the vast majority of them going to portuguese brazil or caribbean sugar islands such as barbados and jamaica.
slavery in the colonies 101 indentured servants an advertisement for indentured servants from the virginia gazette october 4 1779.
enslaved africans spoke as many as fifty different languages and worshipped many different gods.
some had lived in large kingdoms and others in dispersed villages.
in their homelands africans had preyed upon other africans for centuries.
warfare was almost constant as rival tribes conquered kidnapped enslaved and sold one another.
slavery in africa however was less brutal than in the americas.
in africa slaves lived with their captors and their children were not automatically enslaved.
the involvement of europeans in transatlantic slavery whereby captives were sold and shipped to other nations was much worse.
during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries african slave traders brought captives to dozens of slave forts along the west african coast owned by virtually every european nation sweden denmark france great britain the netherlands and portugal.
after languishing for weeks or months the captured africans were one day led down tunnels to waiting ships owned by 102 chapter 2 englands colonies european slave traders.
as one of them remembered it was a most horrible scene there was nothing to be heard but rattling of chains smacking of whips and groans and cries of our fellow men once purchased the captives were branded on the back or buttocks with a company mark chained and loaded onto mostly british owned slave ships.
they were packed below deck and subjected to a four week to six month transatlantic voyage known as the middle passage because it served as the middle leg of the s o called triangular trade in which british ships traveled on the first leg to west africa where they exchanged rum clothing and guns for slaves.
the slaves then were taken on the second leg of the triangle to american ports where the ships were loaded with commodities and timber before returning to the african slave trade 1500 1800 north america europe english colonies africa principa l ar ea l ga of ne se bia s m ea eone a g in l y st t e gu erra a m co as si ho ia n ry co da iger oo ivoold ogo n er m t g ca west indies ve la ly supp gu ian a new granada spain gabon congo c ifi pac south america e a ocean angola f ri c a n atlantic t fr o m e as oc brazil portugal a how were africans captured and enslaved.
describe how captive africans were treated during the middle passage.
how did enslaved african americans create a new culture in the colonies.
wwn64 america 10e 26593 02map 07 first proof slavery in the colonies 103 britain and europe on the final of the three legs of the triangular trade.
by the mid eighteenth century britain was the largest slaving nation in the world.
one in six african captives died during the middle passage to america and slave revolts aboard the floating prisons were not uncommon.
yet many of the english engaged in slave trafficking considered their work highly respectable.
what a glorious and advantageous trade this is wrote slave trader james houston.
it is the hinge on which all the trade of this globe moves the rapid growth of slavery in the western hemisphere was driven by high profits and justified by a widespread racism that viewed africans as beasts of burden rather than human beings.
once in america africans were treated as property chattel herded in chains to public slave auctions and sold to the highest bidder.
on large southern plantations that grew tobacco sugarcane or rice groups of slaves were organized into work gangs supervised by black drivers and white overseers.
the slaves were often quartered in barracks fed like livestock and issued ill fitting work clothes and shoes so uncomfortable that many preferred to go barefoot.
colonial laws allowed whites to use brutal means to discipline slaves.
they were whipped branded shackled castrated or sold slave ship one in six africans died while crossing the atlantic in ships like this one from an american diagram ca.
104 chapter 2 englands colonies away often to the caribbean islands where few survived the harsh working conditions of harvesting sugarcane.
enslaved africans however found ingenious ways to cope.
some rebelled against their captors by resisting work orders sabotaging crops and stealing tools faking illness or injury or running away.
if caught runaways faced terrible punishment.
they also faced uncertain freedom.
where would they run to in a society ruled by whites and governed by racism.
slave culture in the process of being forced into lives of bondage in a new world africans from diverse homelands forged a new identity as african americans.
at the same time they wove into american culture many strands of their heritage including new words such as tabby tote goober yam and banana as well as the names of the coosaw pee dee and wando rivers.
african cultural heritage in the south the survival of african culture among enslaved americans is evident in this late e ighteenth century painting of a south carolina plantation.
the musical instruments and pottery are of african origin probably yoruban.
thriving colonies 105 more significant were african influences upon american music folklore and religious practices.
slaves often used songs stories and religious preachings to circulate coded messages expressing their distaste for masters or overseers.
the fundamental theme of slave religion adapted from the christianity that was forced upon them was deliverance god would eventually free them and open the gates to heavens promised land.
thriving colonies by the early eighteenth century the english colonies in the new world had outstripped those of both the french and the spanish.
english america both the mainland colonies and those in the caribbean had become the most populous prosperous and powerful of the european empires in the americas.
on average american colonists were better fed clothed and housed than their counterparts in europe.
yet the english colonization of north america included failures as well as successes.
many settlers found hard labor desperation and an early death in the new world.
others flourished only because they were able to exploit indians indentured servants or africans.
the english colonists enjoyed crucial advantages over their european rivals.
while the tightly controlled colonial empires of spain and france stifled innovation the english colonies were organized as p rofit making enterprises with a minimum of royal control.
where new spain was dominated by wealthy men who controlled vast estates and often intended to return to spain many english colonists ventured to america because for them life in england had grown intolerable.
the leaders of the dutch and non puritan english colonies unlike the spanish and french welcomed people from a variety of nationalities and religions who came in search of a new life.
perhaps most important the english colonies enjoyed a greater degree of s elf government which made them more dynamic and creative than their french and spanish counterparts.
throughout the seventeenth century geography reinforced englands emphasis on the concentrated settlements of its american colonies.
the farthest western expansion of english settlement stopped at the eastern slopes of the appalachian mountains.
to the east lay the wide expanse of ocean which served as a highway for the transport of people ideas commerce and ways of life from europe to america.
but the ocean also served as a barrier that separated old ideas from new allowing the english colonies to evolve in a new world while developing new ideas about economic freedom and political liberties that would flower later in the eighteenth century.
chapter review summary english background englands colonization of north america differed from that of its european rivals.
while chartered by the crown english colonization was funded by joint stock companies groups of investors eager for profits.
their colonial governments reflected the english model of a two house parliament and long cherished civil liberties.
the colonization of the eastern seaboard of north america occurred at a time of religious and political turmoil in england strongly affecting colonial culture and development.
english settlers and colonization the early years of jamestown and plymouth were grim.
in time tobacco flourished and its success also paved the way for a slave based economy in the south.
sugar and rice plantations developed in the proprietary carolina colonies which operated with minimal royal intrusion.
family farms and a mixed economy characterized the middle and new england colonies.
religion was the primary motivation for the founding of several colonies.
puritans drafted the mayflower compact and founded massachusetts bay colony as a christian commonwealth.
rhode island was established by roger williams a religious dissenter from massachusetts.
maryland was founded as a refuge for english catholics.
william penn a quaker founded pennsylvania and invited europes persecuted religious sects to his colony.
the dutch allowed members of all faiths to settle in new netherland.
indian relations trade with the powhatan confederacy in virginia enabled jamestown to survive its early years but brutal armed conflicts such as bacons rebellion occurred as settlers invaded indian lands.
puritans retaliated against indian resistance in the pequot war of 1637 and in king philips war from 1675 to 1676.
among the principal colonial leaders only roger williams and william penn treated indians as equals.
the powerful iroquois league played the european powers against one another to control territories.
indentured servants and slaves the colonies increasingly relied on indentured servants immigrants who signed contracts indentures that required them to work for several years upon arriving in america.
by the end of the seventeenth century enslaved africans had become the primary form of labor in the chesapeake.
the demand for slaves in the sugar plantations of the west indies drove european slave traders to organize the transport of africans via the dreaded middle passage across the atlantic.
african cultures fused with others in the americas to create a native born african american culture.
thriving english colonies by 1700 england had become a great trading empire.
english america was the most populous and prosperous region of north america.
minimal royal interference in the proprietary for profit colonies and widespread landownership encouraged settlers to put down roots.
religious diversity attracted a variety of investors and settlers.
chronology 1642 1651 1675 1676 james i takes the throne of england the virginia company establishes jamestown john rolfe begins growing tobacco for export in virginia first africans arrive in english america the plymouth colony founded by pilgrims mayflower compact the dutch purchase manhattan from indians massachusetts bay colony is founded by puritans settlement of maryland begins the pequot war in new england the english civil war puritans versus royalists the toleration act in maryland restoration of english monarchy english take control of new amsterdam new york city charles town is founded in the carolina colony king philips war in new england bacons rebellion in virginia pennsylvania is established georgia is founded key terms puritans p 55 bacons rebellion p 67 joint stock companies p 58 mayflower compact p 73 powhatan confederacy p 60 king philips war p 98 tobacco p 64 iroquois league p 99 indentured servants p 64 middle passage p 102 headright p 66 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
colonial ways of life the artisans of boston 1766 while fishing shipbuilding and maritime trade dominated new england economies many young men entered apprenticeships learning a trade from a master craftsman in the hopes of becoming blacksmiths carpenters gunsmiths printers candlemakers leather tanners and more.
t he process of carving a new civilization out of an abundant new world involved o ften violent encounters among european african and indian cultures.
war duplicity displacement and enslavement were the tragic results.
yet on another level the process of transforming the american continent was a story of blending and accommodation of diverse peoples and resilient cultures engaged in the everyday tasks of building homes planting crops trading goods raising families enforcing laws and worshipping their gods.
those who colonized america during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were part of a massive social migration occurring throughout europe and africa.
everywhere it seemed people were in motion moving from farms to villages from villages to cities and from homelands to colonies.
most english and european settlers were responding to powerful social and economic forces.
rapid population growth and the rise of commercial agriculture squeezed poor farmworkers off the land and into cities like london edinburgh dublin and paris where they struggled to survive.
that most europeans in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were desperately poor helps explain why so many were willing to risk their lives by migrating to the american colonies.
others sought political security or religious freedom.
a tragic exception was the africans who were captured and transported to new lands against their will.
those who initially settled in colonial america were mostly young more than half were under t wenty five male single and poor and almost half were focus questions 1.
what were the major factors that contributed to the demographic changes in the english colonies during the eighteenth century.
what roles did women play in the english colonies.
what were the differences and similarities between the societies and economies of the southern middle and new england colonies.
how did race based slavery develop during the seventeenth century and in what ways did this impact the social and economic development of colonial america.
in what ways did the enlightenment and great awakening impact american thought.
chapter 6 life in colonial america 63 new england triangular trade mid atlantic colonies southern colonies magna carta pill of rights of 16s9 house of purgesses mayflower compact fundamental orders of connecticut john peter zenger pilgrims puritans creat awakening mercantilism atlantic slave trade cotton mather phillis wheatley questions what differences existed between the main regions of the thirteen colonies.
what was life like in colonial america.
what factors contributed to religious freedom in the thirteen colonies.
how did the economic system of mercantilism affect the thirteen colonies.
different patterns of life developed in three regions of the colonies based on differences in geography climate settler origins and economic activities.
in new england a short growing season cooler climates rocky soil and an influx of puritan settlers encouraged the development of small farms and the growth of fishing shipping and handicraft trades.
c in the southern colonies a long growing season and warmer climate as well as the arrival of mainly anglican settlers seeking to make their fortune encouraged the development of larger farms that often grew cash crops for sale to england.
along main water routes large plantations developed.
d part of the southern colonies economy was based on slave labor.
slaves grew cotton tobacco rice and indigo.
they were taken by force from africa and faced a horrific middle passage journey across the atlantic.
most southerners however did not own slaves.
e the middle atlantic colonies had greater ethnic and religious diversity than either new england or the southern colonies.
some of these colonies had once been under dutch rule and were conquered by the english in 1664.
the middle atlantic colonies had fertile soil and grew food crops.
name chapter 6 life in colonial america 65 new england the colonies of new england massachusetts new hampshire connecticut and rhode island had rocky soil and less fertile land.
since the new england colonies were the farthest north they had longer winters and a colder climate than the other colonies.
many new englanders had small farms where they grew crops for their own use.
others used the forests in the region for lumber and building ships.
these colonies were located near the ocean where there was an abundance of whales and fish.
large numbers of new englanders became sailors fishermen and merchants.
the practice of religion especially puritanism also remained important in new england.
new englanders frequently owned and manned ships.
they carried sugar from the west indies to new england where it was turned into rum.
the rum was carried to africa where it was traded for slaves.
new england merchants also carried sugar from the west indies to england.
their ships were then loaded with manufactured goods and sailed back to new england.
you will learn more about these triangular trades later in this chapter.
the 13 english colonies 1750 atiamic q new england middle colonies i i southern colonies 500 c a p if milps j uic vj i ivi 11j the middle atlantic colonies the middle atlantic colonies new york new jersey delaware and pennsylvania were located between new england and the southern colonies.
winters were not as harsh as in new england and summers were longer.
uncleared forests and fertile soils attracted many colonists to this area.
most of the settlers came from the netherlands holland germany swe den france and scotland.
settlers first the first job of the colonial farmer was to clear the land.
focused on cutting down the trees and removing stones and stumps from the soil so that it could be prepared for planting.
the forests of the middle atlantic colonies gave birth to an active lumbering and shipbuilding industry.
name chapter 6 life in colonial america 67 the main crops planted on a plantation were very labor intensive.
a successful harvest depended on slaves working from sunrise to sunset.
women usually worked the same hours as the men.
women were expected to return to the fields not long after giving birth to children.
the mortality death rate among slaves was high.
slave women were encouraged to have large numbers of children to replace slave losses.
the great majority of whites did not live on plantations.
they often farmed their land on a smaller scale.
applying what you have learned fa how did settlers to the thirteen colonies adapt to their physical environment.
fa how did the southern plantation system make that region unique.
a acting as an amateur historian a historical map shows the way an area was in the past.
the map below provides an outline of the thirteen english colonies.
using z the internet or your local or school library research the following fa identify each of the thirteen brit ish colonies by name.
j fa use different colors to show the three regions of colonial amer ica new england the middle i atlantic colonies and the south em colonies.
fa add other colors to show the j territories claimed by spain and france.
fa identify the appalachian moun j tains st lawrence river mis sissippi river lake erie lake ontario and long island.
j fa identify these ports and towns savannah georgia charleston s c raleigh n c james town va williamsburg va baltimore md philadelphia pa new york ny boston and plymouth ma.
9 9 name chapter 6 life in colonial america 69 the colonists enjoyed several institutions of representative government based on both english political traditions and new practices that emerged in the colonies.
during the middle ages england had developed traditions of liberty and limited self government that were unique in europe.
magna carta in 1215 the english king was forced by his barons to promise not to take away any free mans property or to imprison any free man without following procedures established by the laws of the land.
the great charter guaranteed individuals the right to a fair trial by their peers and forced the king to obtain the consent of a council of nobles before imposing any new taxes.
acting as an amateur.
historian t clause 29.
no freeman shall be taken or imprisoned or have his freehold or liberties taken away or be outlawed or sent away or any other wise destroyed nor will we pass upon him nor condemn him but by lawful judgment of his peers equals or by the law of the land.
we will sell to no man we will not deny or defer to any man either justice or right how did clause 29 of the magna carta help to guarantee the rights of individuals living in england.
why did this become an important feature of political life in the colonies.
the british parliament in the middle ages the english king summoned his nobles and representatives from counties and towns to show support for the crown.
parliament developed into a national legislature consisting of nobles and elected representatives.
new taxes had to be approved by parliament.
after two revolutions in the 1600s parliament achieved supremacy over the king.
bill of rights of 1689 after the glorious revolution of 1688 the rights of english subjects were confirmed by the bill of rights of 1689.
englands rulers agreed not to have a standing army or to impose new taxes without the permission of parliament.
the english bill of rights also guaranteed trial by jury the right to petition parliament and other personal freedoms as well as freedom of speech and debate in parliament.
chapter 6 life in colonial america 71 new yorks governor put zenger on trial.
zenger won his case when his lawyer andrew hamilton showed that his statements were true.
the case established the right of the press to criticize those in power so long as the writer told the truth.
what important individual rights and beliefs about government did the colonists bring from england.
what additional representative institutions did the american colonists create.
acting as an amateur historian select one of the thirteen colonies and conduct research on the internet or at school or your local library on how that colonys government operated.
include information on who ran the colony how laws were made and if the colony had its own court system.
the colonies also saw the growth of religious freedom.
the first two english colonies had people of very different religious backgrounds.
virginia was mainly founded by anglicans those who belonged to the church of england.
massachusetts was founded by pilgrims and puritans members of protestant groups who came to the americas to worship god in their own way.
in massachusetts bay colony puritans originally set high standards for church membership.
they wanted to promote virtue goodness.
puritans thought the members of their church were chosen by god and that only those elected would go to heaven.
each sunday was a day of rest in which the whole community went to church.
the minister often gave a sermon threatening sinners with the punishment of damnation after death.
puritans wore simple plain clothing.
observe the woman carrying a bible.
the puritans believed that a state endorsed religion would insure a bond between members of society helping to maintain order and stability.
they felt that having more than one religion might threaten social stability.
although they came to america to worship god in their own way they did not support religious toleration for others.
name chapter 6 life in colonial america 73 the importance of religion to the colonists was illustrated by the great awakening of the 1740s.
ministers emphasized the importance of religious feelings.
during the great awakening preachers like jonathan edwards and george whitefield often addressed large crowds in open fields.
they told listeners that god was merciful and that people could save themselves from damnation by repenting for their sins.
colonists were told to study the bible for themselves and many became more emotionally engaged in religion.
the great awakening emphasized peoples equality in the eyes of god.
the preachers of the great awakening were also strong supporters of religious free dom and toleration.
they wanted their listeners to accept christianity as an act of free will.
whitefield preaching.
imagine you are a reporter at the salem witchcraft trials or at a gathering during the first great awakening.
write a report about what you witness.
conduct research on the internet or in your local library about the development of religious toleration in the american colonies.
select one colony and summarize how it treated religious differences and beliefs in a written report.
mercantilism the economy of the british colonies was based on mercantilism.
under this economic system parliament passed laws controlling the trade of the colonies in order to benefit the mother country the aim was to get more gold and silver.
under mercantilism colonists were expected to sell their raw materials such as tobacco rice fur and fish at low prices to britain.
in exchange the colonists were supposed to buy british manufactured products such as glass paper and tea which were more expensive.
mercantilists believed this unequal trade would increase the wealth of the mother country european trade with theircolonies i gold silver cfur lumber foodstuffs i mother country low prices colonies 1 t high manufactured j prices manufactured goods chapter 6 life in colonial america 75 colonial society colonial society was divided into several social groups.
a handful of wealthy landowners and merchants stood at the top of colonial society then came independent farmers who worked their own land tradesmen shopkeepers and craftsmen working in towns and villages came next apprentices or servants were below them and at the very bottom of the colonial social ladder were unskilled laborers and slaves.
slavery and the slave trade one of the areas of greatest hardship and profit in colonial society was the slave trade.
no concern was given to the feelings or comfort of the victims of this trade.
slavers usually bought captured africans on the west coast of africa and put them on slave ships for the voyage to the americas.
enslaved africans were treated so harshly that many failed to survive the voyage.
traders were so greedy they sought to carry as many slaves as possible on their ships.
slaves were chained and crammed together below the deck where sitting or standing room was limited.
the air below deck was so stifling that some suffocated.
others tried to starve themselves or to jump over board.
when the slaves reached the americas they were sold off in auctions.
families were broken up.
captured africans experienced horrific conditions on the middle passage enslaved people made up a significant part of the population of colonial america.
the number of africans in new england grew from under 1 000 in 1700 to about 16 000 in the 1770s.
the number of slaves in the south was far greater reaching 125 000 by 1740.
enslaved men and women were owned by plantation owners farmers ministers doctors and merchants.
they were used to perform household chores and skilled jobs as well as field labor.
estimated african american population in the thirteen british colonies 1690 1740 year new england colonies middle atlantic colonies southern colonies 1690 905 2 472 13 307 1700 1 680 5 361 22 476 1710 2 585 6 218 36 063 1720 3 956 10 825 54 058 1730 6 118 11 683 73 220 1740 8 541 16 452 125 031 source historical statistics of the united states name chapter 6 life in colonial america 77 acting as an amateur historian t cotton mather was instrumental in influencing american religion and in starting the first great awakening.
his writings gave advice to young ministers on a wide range of topics such as performing virtuous acts poetry music and writing style.
this passage deals with educating young people where godly schools are not vigorously encouraged whole colonies will sink into a degenerate and contemptible condition and become horribly barbarous.
you will therefore pardon my freedom with you if i address you in the words of luther if ever there be any considerable blow given to the devils kingdom it must be by youth excellently educated.
it is a serious thing a weighty thing and a thing that hath much of the interest of christianity in it that youth be well trained and that schools and school masters be maintained.
learning is an unwelcome guest to the devil and therefore he would fain starve it out what did mather think might happen if colonists failed to educate their youth.
why did mather choose to quote the words of martin luther.
some of the earliest colonial writers were women like anne bradstreet 1612 1672 who wrote poems.
her poetry eloquently expressed the concerns of a puritan wife and mother.
she is considered by many to be the first american poet.
her collection of poems was the first book written by a woman to be published in the united states.
she helped lay the groundwork for other female writers in an era when most women tended to family and domestic matters.
benjamin franklin 1706 1790 was a printer publisher and scientist who became popular with the stories and sayings in poor richards almanac begun in 1733 and in his autobiography 1777.
franklin openly admitted that many of the sayings in poor richard were borrowed rather than coined by himself.
franklin once stated why give my readers bad lines of my own when good ones of other peoples are so plentiful nevertheless these sayings taken from many ages and nations became one of the bases for franklins international fame.
phillis wheatley 1753 1784 was an african who was kidnapped and brought to the colonies as a slave at the age of seven.
she soon learned to speak and write english taught by the daughter of her owner within 16 months she could read difficult passages in the bible.
she became a sensation in the 1760s when her poem on the death of the preacher george whitefield made her famous.
a constant theme running through her poetry was that of christian salvation.
chapter 6 life in colonial america 79 acting as an amateur historian investigating colonial america in this chapter you have learned about life in colonial america.
now you will have an opportunity to study one of the english colonies in greater depth.
your teacher will divide your class into thirteen small groups.
each group will be assigned one colony to research using classroom resources the school library or the internet.
for your colony your group should complete the checklist below.
after your checklist is completed share your results with the other groups for a final overview of colonial america.
it colony name year it was founded it reasons the colony was founded it its climate major landforms and bodies of water it population of the colony in 1700 1750 1775 it number of enslaved people in the colony at these select dates it major ethnic groups living in the colony it main religious groups in the colony it major economic activities it how the colony was governed it important events in the history of the colony chapter 6 life in colonial america 81 thirteen colonies economic and social life in colonies there were 13 colonies along the atlantic coast consisting of three distinct regions new england.
small farms merchants.
colder climates and rocky soil middle atlantic colonies.
fertile soils and uncleared forests people of many ethnic and religious backgrounds southern colonies.
warmer climates grew cash crops included larger plantations with slaves economy based on mercantilism.
colonists sold raw materials to britain.
britain sold finished goods to the colonies.
this brought wealth to britain.
colonial occupations.
most colonists were farmers.
many were also craftsmen.
colonial society.
wealthy landowners and merchants stood at the top independent farmers were next followed by craftsmen.
at the bottom were unskilled laborers and slaves.
colonial government freedom of religion english political traditions.
magna carta 1215.
guaranteed right of trial by jury king could not impose new taxes without consent.
parliament.
included lords and elected representatives in the commons.
english civil war.
parliament established supremacy over the king.
english bill of rights 1689.
guaranteed that englishmen had certain rights.
colonial self government.
house of burgesses 1619 mayflower compact 1620 massachusetts.
served as a haven to certain english religious groups pilgrims.
rhode island.
established religious toleration.
roger williams.
anne hutchinson.
first great awakening.
emphasized the power of religion in people s lives.
jonathan edwards.
george whitefield.
main features of the british colonies directions put a circle around the letter that best answers the question.
use the diagram and your knowledge of social studies to answer questions 1 3.
1 which region of the thirteen colonies is represented by cluster a.
a frontier region b middle atlantic colonies c new england colonies d southern colonies triangular trade mostly small i farms shipbuilding short growing rocky soil season r lacked plentiful harsh winters fishing fertile soil trade large i farms moderate growing season navigable rivers fertile soil allowed grain exports few cities large plantations main crops mt tobacco indigo rice long growing tidewater season area name chapter 6 life in colonial america 83 6 with which statement would a puritan minister in the colony of massachusetts in 1660 have most likely agreed.
f all men and women are created equal hist 3 c j g no man should be required to worship against his will h differences of opinion are essential for a society to improve j both the government and church have a common purpose of promoting virtue 7 how was the virginia house of burgesses important to the development of democracy in the thirteen colonies.
a it was the first representative assembly in the colonies.
f hist 3 b b it created the first written constitution in america c it included a bill of rights to protect individual rights.
d it introduced the principle of electing judges.
8 in which colonial region did good harbors abundant forests rocky soil and a short growing season most influence the economy.
f southern colonies geog 11 a j g northwest territory h middle atlantic colonies j new england colonies use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
t he word of god requires that to maintain the peace and union of a people there should be an orderly and decent government established according to god to order and dispose of the affairs of the people at all seasons as occasion shall require.
we do associate ourselves to be as one public state or commonwealth.
this case houses the original fundamental orders of connecticut.
it is ordered that there shall be yearly two general assemblies or courts one in april the other in september following the first shall be called the court of election it shall be yearly chosen from time to time magistrates and other public officers as needed whereof one is to be chosen governor for the year 9 this passage from the fundamental orders of connecticut was important to the concept of a democratic society because it represented a an effort by the colonists to use force to resist the king ihst 3 b b a step toward self government in colonial america c an early attempt to institute voting rights for all colonists d an effort by the colonists to establish freedom of religion name chapter 6 life in colonial america 85 17 which of these events is in the correct order in which they occurred.
hist 3jalj a start of the virginia house of burgesses magna carta great awakening fundamental orders of connecticut b magna carta fundamental orders of connecticut the great awakening start of the virginia house of burgesses c fundamental orders of connecticut great awakening magna carta start of the virginia house of burgesses d magna carta start of the virginia house of burgesses fundamental orders of connecticut great awakening 18 which statement most accurately describes the people who were allowed to vote in elections of representatives to colonial assemblies in british america.
f they were colonists of means bom in america.
hist 3 a j g they were men who owned property.
h they were women who were able to read and write.
j they were colonists bom in england.
19 which geographic conditions discouraged the development of a plantation economy in the new england colonies.
a a wide coastal plain and an absence of good harbors b rocky soil and a short growing season c numerous rivers and a humid climate d flatlands and a lack of forests use the painting and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
20 the painting to the right by john singleton copley 1765 shows dr joseph warren.
this painting by copley is typical of paintings in colonial america in that it f shows someone in the professions uitwjj g is religious in nature h is a portrait j depicts a government official 21 which city in the thirteen colonies is correctly paired with a geographic feature that contributed to its growth.
a new orleans great lakes geog io b j b new york city atlantic ocean c charleston mississippi river d boston appalachian mountains 22 which best explains why colonial farmers settled near oceans or coastal waterways.
f it was safer since fewer native american indians lived there.
geog ii a j g colonial governments often paid farmers to settle there.
h the land was easier to clear since it had fewer trees and rocks.
j transportation by water of goods and crops was easier.
name the american revolution the road to independence ck of teks chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 plymouth plantation carefully restored the modest village at plymouth looks today much as it did nearly four hundred years ago.
self government for soon the adult male settlers were assembling to make their own laws in open discussion town meetings a vital laboratory of liberty.
the pilgrims rst winter of 1620 1621 took a grisly toll.
only 44 out of the 102 survived.
at one time only 7 were well enough to lay the dead in their frosty graves.
yet when the mayower sailed back to eng land in the spring not a single one of the courageous band of separatists left.
as one of them wrote it is not with us as with other men whom small things can discourage god made his children prosperous so the pilgrims believed.
the next autumn that of 1621 brought bountiful harvests and with them the rst thanksgiving day in new eng land.
in time the frail colony found sound economic legs in fur sh and lumber.
the beaver and the bible were the early mainstays the one for the sustenance of the body the other for the sustenance of the soul.
plymouth proved that the eng lish could maintain themselves in this uninviting region.
the pilgrims were extremely fortunate in their leaders.
prominent among them was the cultured william bradford a self taught scholar who read hebrew greek latin french and dutch.
he was chosen governor thirty times in the annual elections.
among his major worries was his fear that independent nonpuritan settlers on their particular might corrupt his godly experiment in the wilderness.
bustling shing villages and other settlements did sprout to the north of plymouth on the storm lashed shores of massachusetts bay where many people were as much interested in cod as god.
quiet and quaint the little colony of plymouth was never important economically or numerically.
its population numbered only seven thousand by 1691 when still charterless it merged with its giant neighbor the massachusetts bay colony.
but the tiny settlement of pilgrims was big both morally and spiritually.
william bradford 1590 1657 wrote in of plymouth plantation thus out of small beginnings greater things have been produced by his hand that made all things of nothing and gives being to all things that are and as one small candle may light a thousand so the light here kindled hath shone unto many yea in some sort to our whole nation.
religion in the bay colony the bay colony bible commonwealth the separatist pilgrims were dedicated extremists the purest puritans.
more moderate puritans sought to reform the church of eng land from within.
though resented by bishops and monarchs they slowly gathered support especially in parliament.
but when charles i dismissed parliament in 1629 and sanctioned the antipuritan persecutions of the reactionary archbishop william laud many puritans saw catastrophe in the making.
in 1629 an energetic group of non separatist puritans fearing for their faith and for eng lands future secured a royal charter to form the massachusetts bay company.
they proposed to establish a sizable settlement in the infertile massachusetts area with boston soon becoming its hub.
stealing a march on both king and church the newcomers brought their charter with them.
for many years they used it as a kind of constitu map 3 1a sources of the puritan great migration to new england 1620 1650 the shaded areas indicate the main sources of the migration.
56n scotland tion out of easy reach of royal authority.
they steadfastly denied that they wanted to separate from the church of eng land only from its impurities.
but back in eng land the highly orthodox archbishop laud snorted that the bay colony puritans were swine which rooted in gods vineyard the massachusetts bay colony was singularly blessed.
the well equipped expedition of 1630 with eleven vessels carrying nearly a thousand immigrants started the colony off on a larger scale than any of the other eng lish settlements.
continuing turmoil in eng land tossed up additional enriching waves of puritans on the shores of massachusetts in the following decade.
during the great migration of the 1630s about seventy thousand refugees left eng land see map 3 1.
but not all of them were puritans and only about twenty thousand came to massachusetts.
many were attracted to the warm and fertile west indies especially the sugar rich island of barbados.
more puritans came to this caribbean islet than to all of massachusetts.
map 3 1b the great english migration ca.
1630 1642 much of the early history of the united states was written by new englanders who were not disposed to emphasize the larger exodus of english migrants to the caribbean islands.
when the mainland colonists declared independence in 1776 they hoped that these island outposts would join them but the existence of the british navy had a dissuading effect.
interactive map 54n irish sea ireland north sea en g l an d 2000 km.
england 2000 mi.
ea n st 50 mi.
devon to ches kent han english c 50n ne car l france 2w 0 50 00 apeake in st we o t 4w main sources of migration ngland 25 000 m fro land eng 000 000 uda 4 to berm districts dorset woolen districts 6w to new e n orth ameri ca hertfordshire essex woolen london bristol wiltshire somerset 50 km.
a norfolk n gl ia suffolk wales 52n 30w 60w 2e ibbe 0 0 s die 30n tropic of cancer africa an sea sou th ameri ca europe n atlantic ocean chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 many fairly prosperous educated persons immigrated to the bay colony including john winthrop a well to do pillar of eng lish society who became the colonys rst governor.
a successful attorney and manor lord in eng land winthrop eagerly accepted the offer to become governor of the massachusetts bay colony believing that he had a calling from god to lead the new religious experiment.
he served as governor or deputy governor for nineteen years.
the resources and skills of talented settlers like winthrop helped massachusetts prosper as fur trading shing and shipbuilding blossomed into important industries especially sh and ships.
the massachusetts bay colony rapidly shot to the fore as both the biggest and the most inuential of the new eng land outposts.
massachusetts also beneted from a shared sense of purpose among most of the rst settlers.
we shall be as a city upon a hill a beacon to humanity declared governor winthrop.
the puritan bay colonists believed that they had a covenant with god an agreement to build a holy society that would be a model for humankind.
building the bay colony these common convictions deeply shaped the infant colonys life.
soon after the colonists arrival the franchise was extended to all freemen adult males who belonged to the puritan congregations which in time came to be called collectively the congregational church.
unchurched men remained voteless in provincial elections as did women.
on this basis about two fths of adult males enjoyed the franchise in provincial affairs a far larger proportion than in contemporary eng land.
town governments which conducted much important business were even more inclusive.
there all male property holders and in some cases other residents as well enjoyed the priceless boon of publicly discussing local issues often with much heat and of voting on them by a majority rule show of hands.
yet the provincial government liberal by the standards of the time was not a democracy.
the able governor winthrop feared and distrusted the commons as the meaner sort and thought that democracy was the meanest and worst of all forms of government.
if the people be governors asked one puritan clergyman who shall be governed true the freemen annually elected the governor and his assistants as well as a representative assembly called the general court.
but only puritans the visible saints who alone were eligible for church membership could be freemen.
and according to the doctrine of the covenant the whole purpose of government was to enforce gods laws which applied to believers and nonbelievers alike.
moreover nonbelievers as well as believers paid taxes for the government supported church.
religious leaders thus wielded enormous inuence in the massachusetts bible commonwealth they powerfully inuenced admission to church membership by conducting public interrogations of persons claiming to have experienced conversion.
prominent among the early clergy was ery john cotton.
educated at eng lands cambridge university a puritan citadel he emigrated to massachusetts to avoid persecution for his criticism of the church of eng land.
in the bay colony he devoted his considerable learning to defending the governments duty to enforce religious rules.
profoundly pious he sometimes preached and prayed up to six hours in a single day.
but the power of the preachers was not absolute.
a congregation had the right to hire and re its minister and to set his salary.
clergymen were also barred from holding formal political ofce.
puritans in eng land had suffered too much at the hands of a political anglican clergy to permit in the new world another unholy union of religious and government power.
in a limited way the bay colonists thus endorsed the idea of the separation of church and state.
the puritans were a worldly lot despite or even because of their spiritual intensity.
like john winthrop they believed in the doctrine of a calling to do gods work on earth.
they shared in what was later called the protestant ethic which involved serious commitment to work and to engagement in worldly pursuits.
legend to the contrary they also enjoyed simple pleasures they ate plentifully drank heartily sang songs occasionally and made love mostly monogamously.
like other peoples of their time in both america and europe they passed laws aimed at making sure these plea sures stayed simple by repressing certain human instincts.
in new haven for example a young married couple was ned twenty shillings for the crime of kissing in public and in later years connecticut came to be dubbed the blue law state it was so named for the blue paper on which the repressive laws also known as sumptuary laws were printed.
yet to the puritans life was serious business and hell re was real a hell where sinners shriveled and shrieked in vain for divine mercy.
an immensely popular poem in new eng land selling one copy for every twenty people was clergyman michael wigglesworths puritans and dissenters day of doom 1662.
especially horrifying were his descriptions of the fate of the damned they cry they roar for anguish sore and gnaw their tongues for horrour.
but get away without delay christ pitties not your cry depart to hell there may you yell and roar eternally.
trouble in the bible commonwealth the bay colony enjoyed a high degree of social harmony stemming from common beliefs in its early years.
but even in this tightly knit community dissension soon appeared.
quakers who outed the authority of the puritan clergy were persecuted with nes oggings and banishment.
in one extreme case four quakers who deed expulsion one of them a woman were hanged on the boston common.
a sharp challenge to puritan orthodoxy came from anne hutchinson.
she was an exceptionally intelligent strong willed and talkative woman ultimately the mother of fourteen children.
swift and sharp in theological argument she carried to logical extremes the puritan doctrine of predestination.
she claimed that a holy life was no sure sign of salvation and that the truly saved need not bother to obey the law of either god or man.
this assertion known as antinomianism from the greek against the law was high heresy.
brought to trial in 1638 the quick witted hutchinson bamboozled her clerical inquisitors for days until she eventually boasted that she had come by her beliefs through a direct revelation from god.
this was even higher heresy.
the puritan magistrates had little choice but to banish her lest she pollute the entire puritan experiment.
with her family she set out on foot for rhode island though pregnant.
she nally moved to new york where she and all but one of her household were killed by indians.
back in the bay colony the pious john winthrop saw gods hand in her fate.
more threatening to the puritan leaders was a personable and popular salem minister roger williams.
williams was a young man with radical ideas and an unrestrained tongue.
an extreme separatist he hounded his fellow clergymen to make a clean break with the corrupt church of eng land.
he also challenged the legality of the bay colonys charter which he condemned for expropriating the land from the indians without anne hutchinson dissenter mistress hutchinson 1591 1643 held unorthodox views that challenged the authority of the clergy and the very integrity of the puritan experiment in the massachusetts bay colony.
an outcast in her day she has been judged a heroine in the eye of history.
this statue in her honor erected in the nineteenth century now graces the front of the boston massachusetts statehouse.
fair compensation.
as if all this were not enough he went on to deny the authority of civil government to regulate religious behavior a seditious blow at the puritan idea of governments very purpose.
their patience exhausted by 1635 the bay colony authorities found williams guilty of disseminating newe dangerous opinions and ordered him banished.
he was permitted to remain several months longer because of illness but he kept up his criticisms.
the outraged magistrates fearing that he might organize a rival colony of malcontents made plans to exile him to eng land.
but williams foiled them.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 the rhode island sewer 72w 70w 44n maine the smiling valley of the connecticut river one of the few highly fertile expanses of any size in all new england had meanwhile attracted a sprinkling of dutch and eng lish settlers.
hartford was founded in 1635 see 100 km.
new hampshire portsmouth n r connecticut 100 mi.
salem massachusetts cambridge bay boston hudson r springfield hartford connecticut 1635 1636 long island 42n plymouth providence rhode island new new haven haven plymouth pilgrims new england spreads out aided by friendly indians roger williams ed to the rhode island area in 1636 in the midst of a bitter winter.
at providence the courageous and far visioned williams built a baptist church probably the rst in america.
he established complete freedom of religion even for jews and catholics.
he demanded no oaths regarding religious beliefs no compulsory attendance at worship no taxes to support a state church.
he even sheltered the abused quakers although disagreeing sharply with their views.
williamss endorsement of religious tolerance made rhode island more liberal than any of the other eng lish settlements in the new world and more advanced than most old world communities as well.
those outcasts who clustered about roger williams enjoyed additional blessings.
they exercised simple manhood suffrage from the start though this broadminded practice was later narrowed by a property qualication.
opposed to special privilege of any sort the intrepid rhode islanders managed to achieve remarkable freedom of opportunity.
other scattered settlements soon dotted rhode island.
they consisted largely of malcontents and exiles some of whom could not bear the sti ing theological atmosphere of the bay colony.
many of these restless souls in rogues island including anne hutchinson had little in common with roger williams except being unwelcome anywhere else.
the puritan clergy back in boston sneered at rhode island as that sewer in which the lords debris had collected and rotted.
planted by dissenters and exiles rhode island became strongly individualistic and stubbornly independent.
with good reason little rhody was later known as the traditional home of the otherwise minded begun as a squatter colony in 1636 without legal standing it nally established rights to the soil when it secured a charter from parliament in 1644.
a huge bronze statue of the independent man appropriately stands today on the dome of the statehouse in providence.
portsmouth atlantic ocean colonies absorbed by massachusetts bay colony colonies founded by migrants from massachusetts bay colony map 3 2 seventeenth century new england settlements the massachusetts bay colony was the hub of new england.
all earlier colonies grew into it all later colonies grew out of it.
interactive map map 3 2.
the next year witnessed a spectacular beginning of the centuries long westward movement across the continent.
an energetic group of boston puritans led by the reverend thomas hooker swarmed as a body into the hartford area with the ailing mrs hooker carried on a horse litter.
three years later in 1639 the settlers of the new connecticut river colony drafted in open meeting a trailblazing document known as the fundamental orders.
it was in effect a modern constitution which established a regime democratically controlled by the substantial citizens.
essential features of the fundamental orders were later borrowed by connecticut for its colonial charter and ultimately for its state constitution.
another ourishing connecticut settlement began to spring up at new haven in 1638.
it was a prosperous community founded by puritans who contrived to set up an even closer church government alliance than the expansion of new england in massachusetts.
although only squatters without a charter the colonists dreamed of making new haven a bustling seaport.
but they fell into disfavor with charles ii as a result of having sheltered two of the judges who had condemned his father charles i to death.
in 1662 to the acute distress of the new havenites the crown granted a charter to connecticut that merged new haven with the more democratic settlements in the connecticut valley.
far to the north enterprising shermen and furtraders had been active on the coast of maine for a dozen or so years before the founding of plymouth.
after disheartening attempts at colonization in 1623 by sir ferdinando gorges this land of lakes and forests was absorbed by massachusetts bay after a formal purchase in 1677 from the gorges heirs.
it remained a part of massachusetts for nearly a century and a half before becoming a separate state.
granite ribbed new hampshire also sprang from the shing and trading activities along its narrow coast.
it was absorbed in 1641 by the grasping bay colony under a strained interpretation of the massachusetts charter.
the king annoyed by this display of greed arbitrarily separated new hampshire from massachusetts in 1679 and made it a royal colony.
puritans versus indians the spread of eng lish settlements inevitably led to clashes with the indians who were particularly weak in new eng land.
shortly before the pilgrims had arrived at plymouth in 1620 an epidemic probably triggered by contact with eng lish shermen had swept through the coastal tribes and killed more than threequarters of the native people.
deserted indian elds ready for tillage greeted the plymouth settlers and scattered skulls and bones provided grim evidence of the impact of the disease.
in no position to resist the eng lish incursion the local wampanoag indians at rst befriended the settlers.
cultural accommodation was facilitated by squanto a wampanoag who had learned eng lish from a ships captain who had kidnapped him some years earlier.
the wampanoag chieftain massasoit signed a treaty with the plymouth pilgrims in 1621 and helped them celebrate the rst thanksgiving after the autumn harvests that same year.
as more eng lish settlers arrived and pushed inland into the connecticut river valley confrontations between indians and whites ruptured these peaceful relations.
hostilities exploded in 1637 between the attack on a pequot fort during the pequot war of 1637 engraving by j w barber 1830 this was the rst war between natives and europeans in british north america.
it culminated in the puritan militias vicious burning out and slaughtering of nearly three hundred pequot men women and children.
the defeat of the pequots eliminated armed resistance to the new settlements of new haven and guildford.
the connecticut valley would not see signicant indian troubles again for forty years when the indians of new england united in their nal stand against the encroachments of english settlers king philips war.
king philip also known as metacom is shown on the right.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 eng lish settlers and the powerful pequot tribe.
besieging a pequot village on connecticuts mystic river english militiamen and their narragansett indian allies set re to the indian wigwams and shot the eeing survivors.
the slaughter wrote a brutal nish to the pequot war virtually annihilated the pequot tribe and inaugurated four decades of uneasy peace between puritans and indians.
lashed by critics in eng land the puritans made some feeble efforts at converting the remaining indians to christianity although puritan missionary zeal never equaled that of the catholic spanish and french.
a mere handful of indians were gathered into puritan praying towns to make the acquaintance of the english god and to learn the ways of eng lish culture.
the indians only hope for resisting eng lish encroachment lay in intertribal unity a pan indian alliance against the swiftly spreading eng lish settlements.
in 1675 massasoits son metacom called king philip by the eng lish forged such an alliance and mounted a series of coordinated assaults on eng lish villages throughout new eng land.
frontier settlements were especially hard hit and refugees fell back toward the relative safety of boston.
when the war ended in 1676 fty two puritan towns had been attacked and twelve destroyed entirely.
hundreds of colonists and many more indians lay dead.
metacoms wife and son were sold into slavery he himself was captured beheaded and drawn and quartered.
his head was carried on a pike back to plymouth where it was mounted on grisly display for years.
king philips war slowed the westward march of eng lish settlement in new eng land for several decades.
but the war in icted a lasting defeat on new eng lands indians.
drastically reduced in numbers dispirited and disbanded they thereafter posed only sporadic threats to the new eng land colonists.
seeds of colonial unity and independence a path breaking experiment in union was launched in 1643 when four colonies banded together to form the new eng land confederation.
the eng lish civil war was then deeply distracting old eng land throwing the colonists upon their own resources.
the primary purpose of the confederation was defense against foes or potential foes notably the indians the french and the dutch.
purely intercolonial problems such as run away servants and criminals who had ed from one colony to another also came within the jurisdiction of the confederation.
each member colony regardless of size wielded two votes an arrangement highly displeasing to the most populous colony massachusetts bay.
the confederation was essentially an exclusive puritan club.
it consisted of the two massachusetts colonies the bay colony and bantam sized plymouth and the two connecticut colonies new haven and the scattered valley settlements.
the puritan leaders blackballed rhode island as well as the maine outposts.
these places it was charged harbored too many heretical or otherwise undesirable characters.
shockingly one of the maine towns had made a tailor its mayor and had even sheltered an excommunicated minister of the gospel.
weak though it was the confederation was the rst notable milestone on the long and rocky road toward colonial unity.
the delegates took tottering but longoverdue steps toward acting together on matters of intercolonial importance.
rank and le colonists for their part received valuable experience in delegating their votes to properly chosen representatives.
back in eng land the king had paid little attention to the american colonies during the early years of their planting.
they were allowed in effect to become semiautonomous commonwealths.
this era of benign neglect was prolonged when the crown struggling to retain its power became enmeshed during the 1640s in civil wars with the parliamentarians.
but when charles ii was restored to the eng lish throne in 1660 see table 3 1 the royalists and their church of eng land allies were once more rmly in the saddle.
puritan hopes of eventually purifying the old eng lish church withered.
worse charles ii was determined to take an active aggressive hand in the management of the colonies.
his plans ran headlong against the habits that decades of relative independence had bred in the colonists.
deepening colonial deance was nowhere more glaringly revealed than in massachusetts.
one of the kings agents in boston was mortied to nd that royal orders had no more effect than old issues of the london gazette.
punishment was soon forthcoming.
as a slap at massachusetts charles ii gave rival connecticut in 1662 a sea to sea charter grant which legalized the squatter settlements.
the very next year the outcasts in rhode island received a new charter which gave kingly sanction to the most religiously tolerant confederation and dominion in new england table 3 1 the stuart dynasty in eng land name reign relation to america james i 1603 1625 charles i 1625 1649 interregnum 1649 1660 charles ii 1660 1685 james ii 1685 1688 william mary 1689 1702 mary died 1694 va plymouth founded separatists persecuted civil wars 1642 1649 mass md.
founded commonwealth protectorate oliver cromwell the restoration carolinas pa n y founded conn chartered catholic trend glorious revolution 1688 king williams war 1689 1697 see p 29 for predecessors p 113 for successors.
government yet devised in america.
a nal and crushing blow fell on the stiff necked bay colony in 1684 when its precious charter was revoked by the london authorities.
andros promotes the first american revolution massachusetts suffered further humiliation in 1686 when the dominion of new eng land was created by royal authority see map 3 3.
unlike the homegrown new eng land confederation it was imposed from london.
embracing at rst all of new eng land it was expanded two years later to include new york and east and west jersey.
the dominion also aimed at bolstering colonial defense in the event of war with the indians and hence from the imperial viewpoint of parliament was a statesmanlike move.
more importantly the dominion of new eng land was designed to promote urgently needed efciency in the administration of the eng lish navigation laws.
those laws reected the intensifying colonial rivalries of the seventeenth century.
they sought to stitch englands overseas possessions more tightly to the motherland by throttling american trade with countries not ruled by the eng lish crown.
like colonial peoples everywhere the americans chafed at such con nements and smuggling became an increasingly common and honorable occupation.
at the head of the new dominion stood autocratic sir edmund andros an able eng lish military man conscientious but tactless.
establishing headquarters in puritanical boston he generated much hostility by his open af liation with the despised church of eng land.
the colonists were also outraged by his noisy and sabbath profaning soldiers who were accused of teaching the people to drink blaspheme curse and damn andros was prompt to use the mailed st.
he ruthlessly curbed the cherished town meetings laid heavy restrictions on the courts the press and the schools and revoked all land titles.
dispensing with the popular assemblies he taxed the people without the consent of their duly elected representatives.
he also strove to enforce the unpopular navigation laws and suppress smuggling.
liberty loving colonists accustomed to unusual privileges during long decades of neglect were goaded to the verge of revolt.
the people of old eng land soon taught the people of new eng land a few lessons in resisting oppression.
in 1688 1689 they engineered the memorable glorious or bloodless revolution.
dethroning the despotic and unpopular catholic james ii they enthroned the protestant rulers of the netherlands the dutch born william iii and his eng lish wife mary ii daughter of james ii.
when the news of the glorious revolution reached america the ramshackle dominion of new eng land collapsed like a house of cards.
a boston mob catching the fever rose against the existing regime.
sir edmund andros attempted to ee in womens clothing but was betrayed by boots protruding beneath his dress.
he was hastily shipped off to eng land.
massachusetts though rid of the despotic andros did not gain as much from the upheaval as it had hoped.
in 1691 it was arbitrarily made a royal colony with a new charter and a new royal governor.
the permanent loss of the ancient charter was a staggering blow to the proud puritans who never fully recovered.
worst of all the privilege of voting once a monopoly of church chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 andross dominion of new england 70w 200 km.
maine mass.
new hampshire five nations iroquois atlantic ocean massachusetts bay plymouth n y conn r i pa 40n md.
sir edmund andros 1637 1714 a boston broadside urging him to surrender 1689 after being expelled from new england andros eventually returned to the new world as governor of virginia 1692 1697.
members was now to be enjoyed by all qualied male property holders.
eng lands glorious revolution reverberated throughout the colonies from new eng land to the chesapeake.
inspired by the challenge to the crown in old eng land many colonists seized the occasion to strike against royal authority in america.
unrest rocked both new york and maryland from 1689 to 1691 until newly appointed royal governors restored a semblance of order.
most importantly the new monarchs relaxed the royal grip on colonial trade inaugurating a period of salutary neglect when the much resented navigation laws were only weakly enforced.
yet residues remained of charles iis effort to assert tighter administrative control over his empire.
more eng lish ofcials judges clerks customs ofcials east jersey west jersey n map 3 3 andross dominion of new england interactive map now staffed the courts and strolled the wharves of english america.
many were incompetent corrupt hacks who knew little and cared less about american affairs.
appointed by inuential patrons in far off eng land they blocked the rise of local leaders to positions of political power by their very presence.
aggrieved americans viewed them with mounting contempt and resentment as the eighteenth century wore on.
old netherlanders at new netherland late in the sixteenth century the oppressed people of the netherlands unfurled the standard of rebellion against catholic spain.
after bloody and protracted dutch explorers ocratic practices and the governors appointed by the company as directors general were usually harsh and despotic.
religious dissenters who opposed the ofcial dutch reformed church were regarded with suspicion and for a while quakers were savagely abused.
in response to repeated protests by the aggravated colonists tadoussac 1600 50 100 km.
w trois rivires 1634 n in qu e a ta is moh uo on aw q o eid k se sq ca d su ne r l an a no o ir cayu ndag ga a d an rensselaerwyck 1630 fort orange 1614 p ok ew on n l i ak 45n esopus 1653 hudson a n g r he mo salem 1630 boston 1630 plymouth 1620 an o k plymouth et rhode island connecticut new haven 40n yonkers 1646 new amsterdam 1626 ue h a delaware nn r pe a na le new sweden massachusetts bay gl n connecticut r an mahic st ro en l aw lake champlain rio hu n be r re ce c fort richelieu 1642 n g o montral 1642 n al ma fr beauport qubec 1608 an ce mic th e n ew n e n tinicum 1643 fort christina 1638 fort casimir 1651 fort nya elfsborg 1643 na nt o ic maryland k e swaanendael 1631 destroyed 1632 st marys 1634 pow hata n p esa ch virginia 70w area of english settlement y jamestown at l a n t i c ocean area of dutch settlement a eake b ghting they nally succeeded with the aid of protestant eng land in winning their independence.
the seventeenth century the era of rembrandt and other famous artists was a golden age in dutch history.
this vigorous little lowland nation nally emerged as a major commercial and naval power and then it ungratefully challenged the supremacy of its former benefactor eng land.
three great anglo dutch naval wars were fought in the seventeenth century with as many as a hundred ships on each side.
the sturdy dutch dealt blows about as heavy as they received.
the dutch republic also became a leading colonial power with by far its greatest activity in the east indies.
there it maintained an enormous and protable empire for over three hundred years.
the dutch east india company was virtually a state within a state and at one time supported an army of 10 000 men and a eet of 190 ships 40 of them men of war.
seeking greater riches this enterprising company employed an eng lish explorer henry hudson.
disregarding orders to sail northeast he ventured into delaware bay and new york bay in 1609 and then ascended the hudson river hoping that at last he had chanced upon the coveted shortcut through the continent.
but as the event proved he merely led a dutch claim to a magnicently wooded and watered area.
much less powerful than the mighty dutch east india company was the dutch west india company which maintained protable enterprises in the caribbean.
at times it was less interested in trading than in raiding and at one fell swoop in 1628 captured a eet of spanish trea sure ships laden with loot worth 15 million.
the company also established outposts in africa and a thriving sugar industry in brazil which for several decades was its principal center of activity in the new world.
new netherland in the beautiful hudson river area was planted in 1623 1624 on a permanent basis see map 3 4.
established by the dutch west india company for its quick prot fur trade it was never more than a secondary interest of the founders.
the companys most brilliant stroke was to buy manhattan island from the indians who did not actually own it for virtually worthless trinkets twenty two thousand acres of what is now perhaps the most valuable real estate in the world for pennies per acre.
new amsterdam later new york city was a company town.
it was run by and for the dutch company in the interests of the stockholders.
the investors had no enthusiasm for religious toleration free speech or dem area of french settlement 75w area of swedish settlement map 3 4 early settlements in the middle colonies with founding dates interactive map chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 new york aristocrats this prosperous family exemplied the comfortable lives and aristocratic pretensions of the hudson river lords in colonial new york.
a local body with limited lawmaking power was nally established.
this picturesque dutch colony took on a strongly aristocratic tint and retained it for generations.
vast feudal estates fronting the hudson river known as patroonships were granted to promoters who agreed to settle fty people on them.
one patroonship in the albany area was slightly larger than the later state of rhode island.
colorful little new amsterdam attracted a cosmopolitan population as is common in seaport towns.
twenty three jews arrived in 1654 refugees from religious persecution in catholic brazil a harbinger of the citys later reputation as a haven for the homeless and the harried.
a french jesuit missionary visiting in the 1640s noted that eighteen different languages were being spoken in the streets.
new yorks later babel of immigrant tongues was thus foreshadowed.
friction with english and swedish neighbors vexations beset the dutch company colony from the beginning.
the directors general were largely incompetent.
company shareholders demanded their dividends even at the expense of the colonys welfare.
the indians infuriated by dutch cruelties retaliated with horrible massacres.
as a defense mea sure the hardpressed settlers on manhattan island erected a stout wall from which wall street derives its name.
new eng land was hostile to the growth of its dutch neighbor and the people of connecticut nally ejected intruding hollanders from their verdant valley.
the swedes also trespassed on dutch preserves from 1638 to 1655 by planting the anemic colony of new sweden on the delaware river see map 3 4.
this was the golden age of sweden during and following the thirty years war of 1618 1648 in which its brilliant king gustavus adolphus had carried the torch for protestantism.
this outburst of energy in sweden caused it to enter the costly colonial game in america though on something of a shoestring.
resenting the swedish intrusion on the delaware the dutch dispatched a small military expedition in 1655.
it was led by the ablest of the directors general peter stuyvesant who had lost a leg while soldiering in the west indies and was dubbed father wooden leg by the indians.
the main fort fell after a bloodless siege whereupon swedish rule came to an abrupt end.
the colonists were absorbed by new netherland.
new sweden never important soon faded away leaving behind in later delaware a sprinkling of swedish place names and swedish log cabins the rst in america as well as an admixture of swedish blood.
the dutch plant new york new amsterdam 1664 the future metropolis already a bustling port is shown here as it was in the year that the english took over new netherland and renamed it new york.
dutch residues in new york lacking vitality and representing only a secondary commercial interest of the dutch new netherland lay under the menacing shadow of the vigorous english colonies to the north.
in addition it was honeycombed with new eng land immigrants.
numbering about one half of new netherlands ten thousand souls in 1664 they might in time have seized control from within.
the days of the dutch on the hudson were numbered for the eng lish regarded them as intruders.
in 1664 after the imperially ambitious charles ii had granted the area to his brother the duke of york a strong eng lish squadron appeared off the decrepit defenses of new amsterdam.
a fuming peter stuyvesant short of all munitions except courage was forced to surrender without ring a shot.
new amsterdam was thereupon renamed new york in honor of the duke of york.
eng land won a splendid harbor strategically located in the middle of the mainland colonies and the stately hudson river penetrating the interior.
with the removal of this foreign wedge the eng lish banner now waved triumphantly over a solid stretch of territory from maine to the carolinas.
the conquered dutch province tenaciously retained many of the illiberal features of earlier days.
an autocratic spirit survived and the aristocratic element gained strength when certain corrupt eng lish governors granted immense acreage to their favorites.
inuential landowning families such as the livingstons and the de lanceys wielded disproportionate power in the affairs of colonial new york.
these monopolistic land policies combined with the lordly at mosphere discouraged many european immigrants from coming.
the physical growth of new york was correspondingly retarded.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 quakers in the colonial era quakers or friends were renowned for their simplicity of architecture dress manner and speech.
they also distinguished themselves from most other protestant denominations by allowing women to speak in quaker meetings and to share in making decisions for the church and the family.
the dutch peppered place names over the land including harlem haarlem brooklyn breuckelen and hell gate hellegat.
they likewise left their imprint on the gambrel roofed architecture.
as for social customs and folkways no other foreign group of comparable size has made so colorful a contribution.
noteworthy are easter eggs santa claus wafes sauerkraut bowling sleighing skating and kolf golf a dangerous game played with heavy clubs and forbidden in settled areas.
penns holy experiment in pennsylvania a remarkable group of dissenters commonly known as quakers arose in eng land during the mid 1600s.
their name derived from the report that they quaked when under deep religious emotion.
ofcially they were known as the religious society of friends.
quakers were especially offensive to the authorities both religious and civil.
they refused to support the established church of eng land with taxes.
they built simple meetinghouses congregated without a paid clergy and spoke up themselves in meetings when moved.
believing that they were all children in the sight of god they kept their broad brimmed hats on in the presence of their betters and addressed others with simple thee s and thou s rather than with conventional titles.
they would take no oaths because jesus had commanded swear not at all this pecu liarity often embroiled them with government ofcials for test oaths were still required to establish the fact that a person was not a roman catholic.
the quakers beyond a doubt were a people of deep conviction.
they abhorred strife and warfare and refused military ser vice.
as advocates of passive resistance they would turn the other cheek and rebuild their meetinghouse on the site where their enemies had torn it down.
their courage and devotion to principle nally triumphed.
although at times they seemed stubborn and unreasonable they were a simple devoted democratic people contending in their own high minded way for religious and civic freedom.
william penn a wellborn and athletic young englishman was attracted to the quaker faith in 1660 when only sixteen years old.
his father disapproving administered a sound ogging.
after various adventures in the army the best portrait of the peaceful quaker has him in armor the youth rmly embraced the despised faith and suffered much persecution.
the courts branded him a saucy and impertinent fellow.
several hundred of his less fortunate fellow quakers died of cruel treatment and thousands more were ned ogged or cast into dank prisons.
the quakers in pennsylvania penns thoughts naturally turned to the new world where a sprinkling of quakers had already ed notably to rhode island north carolina and new jersey.
eager to establish an asylum for his people he also hoped to experiment with liberal ideas in government and at the same time make a prot.
finally in 1681 he managed to secure from the king an immense grant of fertile land in consideration of a monetary debt owed to his deceased father by the crown.
the king called the area pennsylvania penns woodland in honor of the sire.
the modest son fearing that critics would accuse him of naming it after himself sought unsuccessfully to change the name.
pennsylvania was by far the best advertised of all the colonies.
its founder the rst american advertising man sent out paid agents and distributed countless pamphlets printed in eng lish dutch french and german.
unlike the lures of many other american real estate promoters then and later penns inducements were generally truthful.
he especially welcomed forward looking spirits and substantial citizens including industrious carpenters masons shoemakers and other manual workers.
his liberal land policy which encouraged substantial holdings was instrumental in attracting a heavy inow of immigrants.
quaker pennsylvania and its neighbors penn formally launched his colony in 1681.
his task was simplied by the presence of several thousand squatters dutch swedish eng lish welsh who were already scattered along the banks of the delaware river.
philadelphia meaning brotherly love in greek was more carefully planned than most colonial cities and consequently enjoyed wide and attractive streets.
penn farsightedly bought land from the indians including chief tammany later patron saint of new yorks political tammany hall.
his treatment of the native peoples was so fair that the quaker broad brims went among them unarmed and even employed them as baby sitters.
for a brief period pennsylvania seemed the promised land of amicable indian white relations.
some southern tribes even migrated to pennsylvania seeking the quaker haven.
but ironically quaker tolerance proved the undoing of quaker indian policy.
as non quaker european immigrants ooded into the province they undermined the quakers own benevolent policy toward the indians.
the feisty scots irish were particularly unpersuaded by quaker idealism.
penns treaty by edward hicks the peace loving quaker founder of pennsylvania made a serious effort to live in harmony with the indians as this treaty signing scene illustrates.
but the westward thrust of white settlement eventually caused friction between the two groups as in other colonies.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 in a boston lecture in 1869 ralph waldo emerson 1803 1882 declared the sect of the quakers in their best representatives appear to me to have come nearer to the sublime history and genius of christ than any other of the sects.
penns new proprietary regime was unusually liberal and included a representative assembly elected by the landowners.
no tax supported state church drained coffers or demanded allegiance.
freedom of worship was guaranteed to all residents although penn under pressure from london was forced to deny catholics and jews the privilege of voting or holding ofce.
the death penalty was imposed only for treason and murder as compared with some two hundred capital crimes in eng land.
among other noteworthy features no provision was made by the peace loving quakers of pennsylvania for a military defense.
no restrictions were placed on immigration and naturalization was made easy.
the humane quakers early developed a strong dislike of black slavery and in the genial glow of pennsylvania some progress was made toward social reform.
with its many liberal features pennsylvania attracted a rich mix of ethnic groups.
they included numerous religious mists who were repelled by the harsh practices of neighboring colonies.
this quaker refuge boasted a surprisingly modern at mosphere in an unmodern age and to an unusual degree afforded economic opportunity civil liberty and religious freedom.
even so blue laws prohibited ungodly revelers stage plays playing cards dice games and excessive hilarity.
under such generally happy auspices penns brainchild grew lustily.
the quakers were shrewd businesspeople and in a short time the settlers were exporting grain and other foodstuffs.
within two years philadelphia claimed three hundred houses and twenty ve hundred people.
within nineteen years by 1700 the colony was surpassed in population and wealth only by long established virginia and massachusetts.
william penn who altogether spent about four years in pennsylvania was never fully appreciated by his colonists.
his governors some of them incompetent and tactless quarreled bitterly with the people who were constantly demanding greater political control.
penn himself became too friendly with james ii the deposed catholic king.
thrice arrested for treason thrust for a time into a debtors prison and af icted by a paralytic stroke he died full of sorrows.
his enduring monument was not only a noble experiment in government but also a new commonwealth.
based on civil and religious liberty and dedicated to freedom of conscience and worship it held aloft a hopeful torch in a world of semidarkness.
small quaker settlements ourished next door to pennsylvania.
new jersey was started in 1664 when two noble proprietors received the area from the duke of york.
a substantial number of new eng landers including many whose weary soil had petered out ocked to the new colony.
one of the proprietors sold west new jersey in 1674 to a group of quakers who here set up a sanctuary even before pennsylvania was launched.
east new jersey was also acquired in later years by the quakers whose wings were clipped in 1702 when the crown combined the two jerseys in a royal colony.
swedish tinged delaware consisted of only three counties two at high tide the witticism goes and was named after lord de la warr the harsh military governor who had arrived in virginia in 1610.
harboring some quakers and closely associated with penns prosperous colony delaware was granted its own assembly in 1703.
but until the american revolution it remained under the governor of pennsylvania.
the middle way in the middle colonies the middle colonies new york new jersey delaware and pennsylvania enjoyed certain features in common.
in general the soil was fertile and the expanse of land was broad unlike rock bestrewn new eng land.
pennsylvania new york and new jersey came to be known as the bread colonies by virtue of their heavy exports of grain.
rivers also played a vital role.
broad languid streams notably the susquehanna the delaware and the hudson tapped the fur trade of the interior and beckoned adventuresome spirits into the backcountry.
the rivers had few cascading waterfalls unlike new eng lands and hence presented little inducement to milling or manufacturing with water wheel power.
a surprising amount of industry nonetheless hummed in the middle colonies.
virginal forests abounded for lumbering and shipbuilding.
the presence of deep river estuaries and landlocked harbors a seventeenth century valuables cabinet n 1999 a boatyard worker on cape cod and his sister a new hampshire teacher inherited a small 20 pound 16 inch high chest that had always stood on their grandmothers hall table known in the family as the franklin chest eager to learn more about it they set out to discover the original owner tracing their family genealogy and consulting with furniture experts.
in january 2000 this rare seventeenth century cabinet its full provenance now known appeared on the auction block and sold for a record 2 4 million to the peabody essex museum in salem massachusetts.
no less extraordinary than the price was the history of its creator and its owners embodied in the piece.
salem cabinetmaker james symonds 1636 1726 had made the chest for his relatives joseph pope 1650 1712 and bathsheba folger 1652 1726 to commemorate their 1679 marriage.
symonds carved the popes initials and the date i on the door of the cabinet.
he also put elaborate s curves on the sides remarkably similar to the mannerist carved oak paneling produced in norfolk england from which his own cabinetmaker father had emigrated.
behind the chests door are ten drawers where the popes would have kept jewelry money deeds and writing materials.
surely they prized the chest as a sign of re nement to be shown off in their best room a sentiment passed down through the next thirteen generations even as the popes identities were lost.
the chest may have become known as the franklin chest because bathsheba was benjamin franklins aunt but also because that identication appealed more to descendants ashamed that the quaker popes whose own parents had been persecuted for their faith were virulent accusers during the salem witch trials of 1692.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 stimulated both commerce and the growth of seaports such as new york and philadelphia.
even albany more than a hundred miles up the hudson was a port of some consequence in colonial days.
the middle colonies were in many respects midway between new eng land and the southern plantation group.
except in aristocratic new york the landholdings were generally intermediate in size smaller than in the plantation south but larger than in small farm new eng land.
local government lay somewhere between the personalized town meeting of new eng land and the diffused county government of the south.
there were fewer industries in the middle colonies than in new eng land more than in the south.
yet the middle colonies which in some ways were the most american part of america could claim certain distinctions in their own right.
generally speaking the population was more ethnically mixed than that of other settlements.
the people were blessed with an unusual degree of religious toleration and democratic control.
earnest and devout quakers in particular made a compassionate contribution to human freedom out of all proportion to their numbers.
desirable land was more easily acquired in the middle colonies than in new eng land or in the tidewater south.
one result was that a considerable amount of economic and social democracy prevailed though less so in aristocratic new york.
modern minded benjamin franklin often regarded as the most representative american personality of his era was a child of the middle colonies.
although it is true that franklin was born a yankee in puritanical boston he entered philadelphia as a seventeen yearold in 1720 with a loaf of bread under each arm and immediately found a congenial home in the urbane open at mosphere of what was then north americas biggest city.
one pennsylvanian later boasted that franklin came to life at seventeen in philadelphia by the time franklin arrived in the city of brotherly love the american colonies were themselves coming to life population was growing robustly.
transportation and communication were gradually improving.
the british for the most part continued their handsoff policies leaving the colonists to fashion their own local governments run their own churches and develop networks of intercolonial trade.
as people and products crisscrossed the colonies with increasing frequency and in increasing volume americans began to realize that far removed from mother eng land they were not merely surviving but truly thriving.
chronology martin luther begins protestant reformation 1642 eng lish civil war john calvin of geneva publishes institutes of the christian religion new eng land confederation formed pilgrims sail on the mayower to plymouth bay william bradford completes of plymouth plantation dutch found new netherland new netherland conquers new sweden charles i dismisses parliament and persecutes puritans eng land seizes new netherland from dutch east and west jersey colonies founded puritans found massachusetts bay colony roger williams convicted of heresy and founds rhode island colony 1675 king philips war 1635 william penn founds pennsylvania colony 1635 connecticut and new haven colonies founded royal authority creates dominion of new eng land pequot war anne hutchinson banished from massachusetts colony 1688 glorious revolution overthrows stuarts and dominion of new eng land connecticuts fundamental orders drafted varying viewpoints key terms people to know calvinism 46 predestination 47 conversion 47 puritans 47 separatists 47 mayower compact 47 massachusetts bay colony 49 great migration 49 antinomianism 51 fundamental orders 52 pequot war 54 king philips war 54 eng lish civil war 54 dominion of new eng land 55 navigation laws 55 glorious or bloodless revolution 55 salutary neglect 56 patroonships 58 blue laws 62 martin luther john calvin william bradford john winthrop anne hutchinson roger williams massasoit metacom king philip charles ii sir edmund andros william iii mary ii henry hudson peter stuyvesant duke of york william penn europeanizing america or americanizing europe.
t he history of discovery and colonization raises perhaps the most fundamental question about all american history.
should it be understood as the extension of european civilization into the two continents of the new world or as the gradual development of uniquely american cultures.
an older school of thought tended to emphasize the europeanization of america.
historians of that persuasion paid close attention to the situation in europe particularly eng land and spain in the fteenth and sixteenth centuries.
they also focused on the exportation of the values and institutions of the mother countries to the new lands in the western sea.
although some historians also examined the transforming effect of america on europe this approach too remained essentially eurocentric.
more recently historians have concentrated on the distinctiveness of america.
the concern with european origins has evolved into a comparative treatment of european settlements in the new world.
eng land spain holland and france now attract more attention for the divergent kinds of societies they fostered in america than for the way they commonly pursued old world ambitions in the new.
the newest trend to emerge is a transatlantic history that views european empires and their american colonies as part of a process of cultural cross fertilization affecting not only the colonies but europe and africa as well.
this less eurocentric approach has also changed the way historians explain the colonial development of america.
rather than telling the story of colonization as the imposition of european ways of life through discovery and conquest historians increasingly view the colonial period as one of contact and adaptation between european african and native american ways of life.
scholars including richard white alfred crosby william cronon karen kupperman and timothy silver have enhanced understanding of the cultural as well as the physical transformations that resulted from contact.
an environment of forests and meadows for example gave way to a landscape of elds and fences as europeans sought to replicate the agricultural villages they had known in europe.
aggressive deforestation even produced climatic changes as treeless tracts made for colder winters hotter summers and earth gouging oods.
ramon gutierrezs when jesus came the corn mothers went away 1991 has expanded the colonial stage to include interactions between spanish settlers and native americans in the southwest.
chapter 3 settling the northern colonies 1619 1700 j h elliotts magisterial work empires of the atlantic world 2006 makes brilliant use of the comparative approach to illuminate the worlds of the british and spanish empires.
spain had a grand imperial plan that it pursued with notable consistency exclude jews and moors muslims from its domains convert the native peoples to catholicism follow military conquest with military rule and eventually defer to colonial elites for the orderly administration of its possessions.
britain had no comparably systematic plan.
it showed relatively little interest in converting the indians tolerated all kinds of immigrants to its colonies long left them alone to cultivate institutions of self government and representative democracy and when it eventually tried to tighten its imperial grip pressured local elites into open revolt.
the two empires left consequential and contrasting legacies of political stability in the united states and chronic political turmoil in latin america.
as one reviewer summarized the argument george washington could draw on an inherited political culture whereas the great latin american liberator simn bolvar had to invent one the variety of american societies that emerged out of the interaction of europeans and native americans is now well appreciated.
early histories by esteemed historians like perry miller exaggerated the extent to which the new eng land puritan experience de ned the essence of america.
not only did these historians overlook non eng lish experiences but they failed to recognize the diversity in motives methods and consequences that existed even within eng lish colonization.
the numbers alone tell an interesting story.
by 1700 about 220 000 eng lish colonists had immigrated to the caribbean about 120 000 to the southern mainland colonies and only about 40 000 to the middle atlantic and new eng land colonies although by the mid eighteenth century those headed for the latter destination would account for more than half of the total.
studies such as richard s dunns sugar and slaves 1972 emphasize the importance of the caribbean in early eng lish colonization efforts and make clear that the desire for economic gain more than the quest for religious freedom fueled the migration to the caribbean islands.
similarly edmund s morgans american slavery american freedom 1975 stresses the role of economic ambition in explaining the eng lish peopling of the chesapeake and the eventual importation of african slaves to that region.
studies by bernard bailyn and david hackett fischer demonstrate that there was scarcely a typical eng lish migrant to the new world.
eng lish colonists migrated both singly and in families and for economic social political and religious reasons.
recent studies have also paid more attention to the con icts that emerged out of this diversity in settler populations and colonial societies.
this perspective emphasizes the contests for economic and political supremacy within the colonies such as the efforts of the massachusetts bay elite to ward off the challenges of religious heretics and the pressures that an increasingly restless lower class put on wealthy merchants and large landowners.
nowhere was internal con ict so prevalent as in the ethnically diverse middle colonies where factional antagonisms became the de ning feature of public life.
the picture of british colonial north america that is emerging from all this new scholarship is of a society unique and diverse from inception.
no longer simply europe transplanted british america by 1700 is now viewed as an outgrowth of many intertwining roots of different european and african heritages of varied encounters with native peoples and a wilderness environment and of complicated mixtures of settler populations each with its own distinctive set of ambitions.
to learn more to learn more patricia bonomi a factious people politics and society in colonial new york 1971 timothy h breen puritans and adventurers 1980 jon butler awash in a sea of faith christianizing the american people 1990 john demos the unredeemed captive a family story from early america 1994.
david hall worlds of wonder days of judgment popular religious belief in early new england 1989 donna merwick the shame and the sorrow dutchamerindian encounters in new netherland 2006 edmund s morgan roger williams the church and state 1967 jenny hale pulsipher subjects unto the same king indians english and the contest for authority in colonial new england 2005 oliver a rink holland on the hudson an economic and social history of dutch new york 1986 harry stout the new england soul preaching and culture in colonial new england 1986 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at american life in the seventeenth century 1607 1692 being thus passed the vast ocean and a sea of troubles before in their preparation.
they had now no friends to wellcome them nor inns to entertaine or refresh their weatherbeaten bodys no houses or much less towns to repaire too to seeke for succore.
a s the seventeenth century unfolded the crude encampments of the rst colonists slowly gave way to permanent settlements.
durable and distinctive ways of life emerged as europeans and africans adapted to the new world and as native americans adapted to the newcomers.
even the rigid doctrines of puritanism softened somewhat in response to the circumstances of life in america.
and though all the colonies remained tied to eng land and all were stitched tightly into the fabric of an atlantic economy regional differences continued to crystallize notably the increasing importance of slave labor to the southern way of life.
the unhealthy chesapeake life in the american wilderness was nasty brutish and short for the earliest chesapeake settlers.
malaria dysentery and typhoid took a cruel toll cutting ten years off the life expectancy of newcomers from eng land.
half the people born in early virginia and maryland did not survive to celebrate their twentieth birthdays.
few of the remaining half lived to see their ftieth or even their fortieth if they were women.
the disease ravaged settlements of the chesapeake grew only slowly in the seventeenth century mostly through fresh immigration from eng land.
the great majority of immigrants were single men in their late teens and early twenties and most perished soon after arrival.
surviving males competed for the affections of the extremely scarce women whom they outnumbered nearly six to one in 1650 and still outnumbered by three to two at the end of the century.
eligible women did not remain single for long.
families were both few and fragile in this ferocious environment.
most men could not nd mates.
most marriages were destroyed by the death of a partner within seven years.
scarcely any children reached this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the importance of tobacco adulthood under the care of two parents and almost no one knew a grandparent.
weak family ties were reected in the many pregnancies among unmarried young girls.
in one maryland county more than a third of all brides were already pregnant when they wed.
yet despite these hardships the chesapeake colonies struggled on.
the native born inhabitants eventually acquired immunity to the killer diseases that had ravaged the original immigrants.
the presence of more women allowed more families to form and by the end of the seventeenth century the white population of the chesapeake was growing on the basis of its own birthrate.
as the eighteenth century opened virginia with some fty nine thousand people was the most populous colony.
maryland with about thirty thousand was the third largest after massachusetts.
the tobacco economy although unhealthy for human life the chesapeake was immensely hospitable to tobacco cultivation.
prot hungry settlers often planted tobacco to sell before they planted corn to eat.
but intense tobacco cultivation quickly exhausted the soil creating a nearly insatiable demand for new land.
relentlessly seeking fresh elds to plant in tobacco commercial growers plunged ever farther up the river valleys provoking ever more indian attacks.
leaf laden ships annually hauled some 1 5 million pounds of tobacco out of chesapeake bay by the 1630s and almost 40 million pounds a year by the end of the century.
this enormous production depressed prices but colonial chesapeake tobacco growers responded to falling prices in the familiar way of farmers by planting still more acres to tobacco and bringing still more product to market.
an agent for the virginia company in london submitted the following description of the virginia colony in 1622 i found the plantations generally seated upon mere salt marshes full of infectious bogs and muddy creeks and lakes and thereby subjected to all those inconveniences and diseases which are so commonly found in the most unsound and most unhealthy parts of england.
early tobacco advertising crude woodcuts like this one were used to identify various brands of tobacco one of the rst products to be sold by brandname advertising.
more tobacco meant more labor but where was it to come from.
families procreated too slowly to provide it by natural population increase.
indians died too quickly on contact with whites to be a reliable labor force.
african slaves cost too much money.
but eng land still had a surplus of displaced workers and farmers desperate for employment.
many of them were young men who had ed the disastrous slump in the cloth trades that hit eng land in the early seventeenth century.
others were tenants who had been forced from their modest farms when landlords enclosed ever more acreage for sheep grazing.
making their way from town to town in search of wages they eventually drifted into port cities like bristol and london.
there they boarded ship for america as indentured servants voluntarily mortgaging the sweat of their bodies for several years usually four to seven to chesapeake masters.
in exchange they received transatlantic passage and eventual freedom dues including an ax and chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 ministers and mistresses.
fatefully for north america louis xiv also took a deep interest in overseas colonies.
after rocky beginnings success nally rewarded the exertions of france in the new world.
in 1608 the year after the founding of jamestown the permanent beginnings of a vast empire see map 6 1 were established at qubec a granite sentinel commanding the st lawrence river.
the leading gure was samuel de champlain an intrepid soldier and explorer whose energy and leadership fairly earned him the title father of new france champlain entered into friendly relations a fateful friendship with the nearby huron indian tribes.
at their request he joined them in battle against their foes the federated iroquois tribes of the upper new york area.
two volleys from the lightning sticks of the whites routed the terried iroquois who left behind three dead and one wounded.
france to its sorrow 180 100w 20w 40w 60w 80w n 140w 120w 160w thus earned the lasting enmity of the iroquois tribes.
they thereafter hampered french penetration of the ohio valley sometimes ravaging french settlements and frequently serving as allies of the british in the prolonged struggle for supremacy on the continent.
the government of new france canada nally fell under the direct control of the king after various commercial companies had faltered or failed.
this royal regime was almost completely autocratic.
the people elected no representative assemblies nor did they enjoy the right to trial by jury as in the eng lish colonies.
the population of catholic new france grew at a listless pace.
as late as 1750 only sixty thousand or so whites inhabited new france.
landowning french peasants unlike the dispossessed eng lish tenant farmers who embarked for the british colonies had little economic motive to move.
protestant huguenots who might have had a religious motive to migrate were denied a refuge in this raw colony.
the french government in any case favored its caribbean island colonies rich in sugar and rum over the snow cloaked wilderness of canada.
newfoundland hudson bay n qubec montral missouri r.
m ip iss iss r do ora.
pacific ocean pi r c ol detroit illinois country nova scotia port 0n royal 4 r io oh la salle murdered saintdomingue g ul f of m exi co mexico city territorial claims atlantic ocean fr.
n 20 car i bbe an sea british french spanish 500 1000 km.
map 6 1 frances american empire at its greatest extent 1700 interactive map qubec scene by jean baptiste louis franquelin ca.
1699 detail the metal cooking pot and the indians clothing and blankets show the native americans growing reliance on european trade goods.
130w 110w 120w 100w 80w 90w 70w 60w hudson bay n wr en e s upe rior la l eri 40n e ean lak e mi c hi gan.
ario io r an r r n mis r ed r a ea tl ip pi oc as siss ka ns n ti oh c r oc r ar ic do ir nt l o ron pacif ra tte ipp hu i r pla c ol o ss k e s our er.
mi miss sn ak si la lak lumbia r st co ce r 50 30n o ri gr an de french trading post 1604 1760 gulf of mexico hudsons bay company 1670 1869 montral based fur trade 1763 1784 north west company 1784 1821 spain and new mexico 1598 1821 400 km.
map 6 2 fur trading posts to serve the needs of european fashion fur traders pursued the beaver for more than two centuries over the entire continent of north america.
they brought many indians for the rst time into contact with white culture.
new france fans out new france did contain one valuable resource the beaver.
european fashion setters valued beaver pelt hats for their warmth and opulent appearance.
to adorn the heads of europeans french fur trappers ranged over the woods and waterways of north america in pursuit of beaver.
these colorful coureurs de bois runners of the woods were also runners of risks two sted drinkers free spenders free livers and lovers.
they littered the land with scores of place names including baton rouge red stick terre haute high land des moines some monks and grand teton big breast.
singing paddle swinging french voyageurs also recruited indians into the fur business.
the indian fur interactive map otilla arriving in montral in 1693 numbered four hundred canoes.
but the fur trade had some disastrous drawbacks.
indians recruited into the fur business were decimated by the white mans diseases and debauched by his alcohol.
slaughtering beaver by the boatload also violated many indians religious beliefs and sadly demonstrated the shattering effect that contact with europeans wreaked on traditional indian ways of life.
pursuing the sharp toothed beaver ever deeper into the heart of the continent the french trappers and their indian partners hiked rode snowshoed sailed and paddled across amazing distances.
they trekked in a huge arc across the great lakes into present day saskatchewan and manitoba along the valleys of the platte the arkansas and the missouri west to the rockies and south to the border of spanish texas see map 6 2.
chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 in the process they all but extinguished the beaver population in many areas in icting incalculable ecological damage.
french catholic missionaries notably the jesuits labored zealously to save the indians for christ and from the fur trappers.
some of the jesuit missionaries their efforts scorned suffered unspeakable tortures at the hands of the indians.
but though they made few permanent converts the jesuits played a vital role as explorers and geographers.
other explorers sought neither souls nor fur but empire.
to thwart eng lish settlers pushing into the ohio valley antoine cadillac founded detroit the city of straits in 1701.
to check spanish penetration into the region of the gulf of mexico ambitious robert de la salle oated down the mississippi in 1682 to the point where it mingles with the gulf.
he named the great interior basin louisiana in honor of his sovereign louis xiv.
dreaming of empire he returned to the gulf three years later with a colonizing expedition of four ships.
but he failed to nd the mississippi delta landed in spanish texas and in 1687 was murdered by his mutinous men.
undismayed french ofcials persisted in their efforts to block spain on the gulf of mexico.
they planted several fortied posts in what is now mississippi and louisiana the most important of which was new orleans 1718.
commanding the mouth of the mississippi river this strategic semitropical outpost also tapped the fur trade of the huge interior valley.
the fertile illinois country where the french established forts and trading posts at kaskaskia cahokia and vincennes became the garden of frances north american empire.
surprising amounts of grain were oated down the mississippi for transshipment to the west indies and to europe.
the clash of empires the earliest contests among the european powers for control of north america known to the british colonists as king williams war 1689 1697 and queen annes war 1702 1713 see table 6 1 mostly pitted british colonists against the french coureurs de bois with both sides recruiting whatever indian allies they chief of the taensa indians receiving la salle march 20 1682 by george catlin 1847 1848 detail driven by the dream of a vast north american empire for france la salle spent years exploring the great lakes region and the valleys of the illinois and mississippi rivers.
this scene of his encounter with an indian chieftain was imaginatively re created by the nineteenth century artist george catlin.
world wars rock america table 6 1 later english monarchs name reign relation to america william iii 1689 1702 anne 1702 1714 george i 1714 1727 george ii 1727 1760 george iii 1760 1820 collapse of dominion of new eng land king williams war queen annes war 1702 1713 navigation laws laxly enforced salutary neglect ga founded king georges war seven years war american revolution 1775 1783 see pp.
000 and 000 for earlier monarchs.
neither france nor britain at this stage considered america worth the commitment of large detachments of regular troops so the combatants waged a kind of primitive guerrilla warfare.
indian allies of the french ravaged with torch and tomahawk the british colonial frontiers visiting especially bloody violence on the villages of schenectady new york and deereld massachusetts see map 6 3.
spain eventually allied with france probed from its florida base at outlying south carolina settlements.
for their part the british colonists failed miserably in sallies against qubec and montral but scored a signal victory when they temporarily seized the stronghold of port royal in acadia present day nova scotia.
peace terms signed at utrecht in 1713 revealed how badly france and its spanish ally had been beaten see map 6 4.
britain was rewarded with french populated map 6 3 scenes of the french wars the arrows indicate french indian attacks.
schenectady was burned to the ground in the raid of 1690.
at deereld site of one of the new england frontiers bloodiest confrontations invaders killed fty inhabitants and sent more than a hundred others eeing for their lives into the winter wilderness.
the indian attackers also took over one hundred deereld residents captive including the child titus king.
he later wrote captivity is an awful school for children when we see how quick they will fall in with the indian ways.
nothing seems to be more taking appealing.
in six months time they forsake father and mother forget their own land refuse to speak their own tongue and seemingly be wholly swallowed up with the indians interactive map 75w 70w 65w 60w gulf of st lawrence cape breton island qubec.
ce r nova scotia montral port royal ut r.
st la en wr n hudson r schenectady albany atlantic ocean conne ctic l ontario deerfield 45n louisbourg captured boston french indian attacks town destroyed french claims ca.
1700 new york 40n 75 150 km.
british claims ca.
1700 british gains 1713 chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 180 160w 140w 120w 100w 20w 40w 60w 80w newfoundland hudson bay n nova scotia port 0n royal 4 qubec montral missouri r.
m ip iss iss pi r.
acadia which the british renamed nova scotia or new scotland and the wintry wastes of newfoundland and hudson bay.
these immense tracts pinched the st lawrence settlements of france foreshadowing their ultimate doom.
a generation of peace ensued during which britain provided its american colonies with decades of salutary neglect fertile soil for the roots of independence.
by the treaty of 1713 the british also won limited trading rights in spanish america but these later involved much friction over smuggling.
ill feeling ared up when the british captain robert jenkins encountering spanish revenue authorities had one ear sliced off by a sword.
the spanish commander reportedly sneered carry this home to the king your master whom if he were present i would serve in like fashion the victim with a tale of woe on his tongue and a shriveled ear in his hand aroused furious resentment when he returned home to britain.
the war of jenkinss ear curiously but aptly named broke out in 1739 between the british and the spaniards.
it was con ned to the caribbean sea and to the much buffeted buffer colony of georgia where philanthropist soldier james oglethorpe fought his spanish foe to a standstill.
this small scale scufe with spain in america soon merged with the large scale war of austrian succession in europe see table 6 2 and came to be called king georges war in america.
once again france allied itself with spain.
and once again a rustic force of new eng landers invaded new france.
with help from a british eet and with a great deal of good luck the raw and sometimes drunken recruits captured the reputedly impregnable french fortress of louisbourg which was on cape breton island and commanded the approaches to the st lawrence river see map 6 3 on p 113.
when the peace treaty of 1748 handed louisbourg back to their french foe the victorious new eng landers n r io oh atlantic ocean pacific ocean g ul f of me x i co n 20 jamaica territorial claims gr.
c a rib b e a n sea british french spanish 500 1000 km.
map 6 4 north america after two wars 1713 interactive map were outraged.
the glory of their arms never terribly lustrous in any event seemed tarnished by the wiles of old world diplomats.
worse louisbourg was still a cocked pistol pointed at the heart of the american continent.
france powerful and unappeased still clung to its vast holdings in north america.
table 6 2 the nine world wars dates in europe in america 1688 1697 1701 1713 1740 1748 1756 1763 1778 1783 1793 1802 1803 1815 1914 1918 1939 1945 war of the league of augsburg war of spanish succession war of austrian succession seven years war war of the american revolution wars of the french revolution napoleonic wars world war i world war ii king williams war 1689 1697 queen annes war 1702 1713 king georges war 1744 1748 french and indian war 1754 1763 american revolution 1775 1783 undeclared french war 1798 1800 war of 1812 1812 1814 world war i 1917 1918 world war ii 1941 1945 the french indian showdown new englanders capture louisbourg 1745 when the nal peace settlement of 1748 returned this fortress to france the american colonists felt betrayed by their british masters.
george washington inaugurates war with france as the dogght intensied in the new world the ohio valley became the chief bone of contention between the french and british.
the ohio country was the critical area into which the westward pushing british colonists would inevitably penetrate.
for france it was also the key to the continent that the french had to retain particularly if they were going to link their canadian holdings with those of the lower mississippi valley.
by the mid 1700s the british colonists painfully aware of these basic truths were no longer so reluctant to bear the burdens of empire.
alarmed by french landgrabbing and cutthroat fur trade competition in the ohio valley they were determined to ght for their economic security and for the supremacy of their way of life in north america.
rivalry for the lush lands of the upper ohio valley brought tensions to the snapping point.
in 1749 a group of british colonial speculators chiey inuential virginians including the washington family had secured shaky legal rights to some 500 000 acres in this region.
in the same disputed wilderness the french were in the process of erecting a chain of forts commanding the strategic ohio river.
especially formidable was fort duquesne at the pivotal point where the monongahela and allegheny rivers join to form the ohio the later site of pittsburgh.
in 1754 the governor of virginia ushered george washington a twenty one year old surveyor and fellow virginian onto the stage of history.
to secure the virginians claims washington was sent to the ohio country as a lieutenant colonel in command of about 150 virginia militiamen.
encountering a small detachment of french troops in the forest about forty miles from fort duquesne see map 6 5 the virginians red the rst shots of the globe girdling new war.
the french leader was killed and his men retreated.
an exultant washington wrote i heard the bullets whistle and believe me there is something charming in the sound it soon lost its charm.
chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 the french promptly returned with reinforcements who surrounded washington in his hastily constructed breastworks fort necessity.
after a ten hour siege he was forced to surrender his entire command in july 1754 ironically the fourth of july.
but he was permitted to march his men away with the full honors of war.
with the shooting already started and in danger of spreading the british authorities in nova scotia took vigorous action.
understandably fearing a stab in the back from the french acadians whom britain had conquered in 1713 the british brutally uprooted some four thousand of them in 1755.
these unhappy french deportees were scattered as far south as louisiana where the descendants of the french speaking aca dians are now called cajuns and number nearly a million.
global war and colonial disunity the rst three anglo french colonial wars had all started in europe but the tables were now reversed.
the fourth struggle sometimes known as the french and indian war began in america.
touched off by george washington in the wilds of the ohio valley in 1754 it rocked along on an undeclared basis for two years and then widened into the most far ung con ict the world had yet seen the seven years war.
it was fought not map 6 5 the french and indian war in north america 1754 1760 interactive map 80w 70w n 200 mi.
e n w f r new frances boundary with maine new hampshire and new york was uncertain.
a n c qubec e gulf of st lawrence ac ad ia maine ke an ge rs la montral mass.
fort niagara fort ticonderoga fort oswego l iroquois fort presque isle fort le boeuf conn fort machault boston r i allegheny r british territory pennsylvania n j new york braddock defeated british forces french forces md.
washington 1753 1754 fort necessity washington defeated july 1754 monongahela r virginia french territory disputed territory philadelphia oh io r fort duquesne mass.
hudso new york erie ake fort beausejour ia ot sc halifax british deport a v 6 000 acadians o summer of 1755.
n fort crown point fort william henry n h lake george n r on mo nt ca lm rogers r hur lake ontario louisbourg fort gaspereau st franois st lawrence r 40n 60w 200 km.
at l a n t i c o c e a n british fort french fort british victory french victory the french and indian war only in america but in europe in the west indies in the philippines in africa and on the ocean.
the seven years war was a seven seas war see map 6 6.
in europe the principal adversaries were britain and prussia on one side arrayed against france spain austria and russia on the other.
the bloodiest theater was in germany where frederick the great deservedly won the title of great by repelling french austrian and russian armies often with the opposing forces outnumbering his own three to one.
the london government unable to send him effective troop reinforcements liberally subsidized him with gold.
luckily for the british colonists the french wasted so much strength in this european bloodbath that they were unable to throw an adequate force into the new world.
america was conquered in germany declared britains great statesman william pitt.
in previous colonial clashes the americans had revealed an astonishing lack of unity.
colonists who were nearest the shooting had responded much more generously with volunteers and money than those enjoying the safety of remoteness.
even the indians had laughed at the inability of the colonists to pull together.
now with musketballs already splitting the air in ohio the crisis demanded concerted action.
in 1754 the british government summoned an intercolonial congress to albany new york near the iroquois indian country.
travel weary delegates from only seven of the thirteen colonies showed up.
the immediate purpose was to keep the scalping knives of the iroquois tribes loyal to the british in the spreading war.
the chiefs were harangued at length and then presented with thirty wagonloads of gifts including guns.
the longer range purpose at albany was to achieve greater colonial unity and thus bolster the common defense against france.
a month before the congress assembled ingenious benjamin franklin published in his pennsylvania gazette the most famous cartoon of the colonial era.
showing the separate colonies as parts of a disjointed snake it broadcast the slogan join or die franklin himself a wise and witty counselor was the leading spirit of the albany congress.
his outstanding contribution was a well devised but premature scheme for colonial home rule.
the albany delegates unanimously adopted the plan but the individual colonies spurned it as did the london regime.
to the colonists it did not seem to give enough independence to the british ofcials it seemed to give too much.
the disappointing result con rmed one of franklins sage observations all people agreed on the need for union famous cartoon by benjamin franklin delaware and georgia were omitted.
but their weak noddles were perfectly distracted when they attempted to agree on details.
braddocks blundering and its aftermath the opening clashes of the french and indian war went badly for the british colonists.
haughty and bullheaded general edward braddock a sixty year old ofcer experienced in european warfare was sent to virginia with a strong detachment of british regulars.
after foraging scanty supplies from the reluctant colonists he set out in 1755 with some two thousand men to capture fort duquesne.
a considerable part of his force consisted of ill disciplined colonial militiamen buckskins whose behind the tree methods of ghting indians won bulldog braddocks professional contempt.
braddocks expedition dragging heavy artillery moved slowly.
axmen laboriously hacked a path through the dense forest thus opening a road that was later to be an important artery to the west.
a few miles from fort duquesne braddock encountered a much smaller french and indian army.
at rst the enemy force was repulsed but it quickly melted into the thickets and poured a murderous re into the ranks of the redcoats.
in the ensuing battle george washington an energetic and fearless aide to braddock had two horses shot from under him and four bullets pierced his coat.
braddock himself was mortally wounded.
the entire british force was routed after appalling losses.
inamed by this easy victory the indians took to a wider warpath.
the whole frontier from pennsylvania events of the seven years war 120e philippine is.
territorial claims ca.
virginia pennsylvania ohio 1753 1764 2.
nova scotia 1754 3.
hudson river lake champlain 1755 1760 4.
minorca 1756 5.
central europe 1756 1762 6.
bengal 1757 7.
louisbourg 1758 8.
west africa 1758 9.
madras 1758 1759 10.
qubec and upper st lawrence 1759 1760 11.
eastern caribbean 1759 1762 12.
iberian coast 1759 13.
french coast 1759 1761 14.
upper great lakes 1759 1764 15.
pondicherry 1760 1762 16.
spain 1762 17.
newfoundland 1762 18.
havana 1762 19.
manila 1762 20.
pontiacs rebellion 1763 1764 french netherlands china portuguese spanish 150e 90e 6.
indian ocean a s i a india 9.
arctic ocean pacific ocean 15.
arabian sea 60e 120w north america arabia ruperts land france n l o u is i an a 3 10.
gulf of m exic o new france 13.
portugal 7.
2 ea me rr a 16.
florida te di spain 17.
thirteen colonies n netherlands great britain e u r o p e 60n n new s p a in se a 5.
africa atlantic ocean 18.
30e cuba ca 90w rib be an 8.
se a senegambia 11.
60w 30w map 6 6 global scale of the seven years war among the rst of the truly world wars of the modern era the seven years war sucked in several nations who did battle around the globe.
0 interactive map a world at war to north carolina left virtually naked by braddocks bloody defeat felt their fury.
scalping forays occurred within eighty miles of philadelphia and in desperation the local authorities offered bounties for indian scalps 50 for a womans and 130 for a warriors.
george washington with only three hundred men tried desperately to defend the scorched frontier.
the british launched a full scale invasion of canada in 1756 now that the undeclared war in america had at last merged into a world con ict.
but they unwisely tried to attack a number of exposed wilderness posts simultaneously instead of throwing all their strength at qubec and montral.
if these strongholds had fallen all the smaller outposts to the west would have withered for lack of riverborne supplies.
but the british ignored such sound strategy and defeat after defeat tarnished their arms both in america and in europe.
pitts palms of victory in the hour of crisis britain brought forth as it repeatedly has a superlative leader william pitt.
a tall and imposing gure whose ashing eyes were set in a hawklike face he was popularly known as the great commoner pitt drew much of his strength from the common people who admired him so greatly that on occasion they kissed his horses.
a splendid orator endowed with a majestic voice he believed passionately in his cause in his country and in himself.
in 1757 pitt became a foremost leader in the london government.
throwing himself headlong into his task he soon earned the title organizer of victory he wisely decided to soft pedal assaults on the french west indies which had been bleeding away much british strength and to concentrate on the vitals of canada the qubec montral area.
he also picked young and energetic leaders thus bypassing incompetent and cautious old generals.
pitt rst dispatched a powerful expedition in 1758 against louisbourg.
the frowning fortress though it had been greatly strengthened fell after a blistering siege.
wild rejoicing swept britain for this was the rst signicant british victory of the entire war.
qubec was next on pitts list.
for this crucial expedition he chose the thirty two year old james wolfe who had been an ofcer since the age of fourteen.
view of the taking of qubec 1759 on the night of september 13 british forces scaled the rocky cliffs of qubec and defeated the french army defending the city.
the following year montral frances last bastion in north america surrendered.
fighting continued in the caribbean europe and the philippines for two more years until the treaty of paris was signed in 1763 eliminating france as a colonial power in north america.
chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 though slight and sickly wolfe combined a mixture of dash with painstaking attention to detail.
the british attackers were making woeful progress when wolfe in a daring night move sent a detachment up a poorly guarded part of the rocky eminence protecting qubec.
this vanguard scaled the cliff pulling itself upward by the bushes and showing the way for the others.
in the morning the two armies faced each other on the plains of abraham on the outskirts of qubec the british under wolfe and the french under the marquis de montcalm.
both commanders fell fatally wounded but the french were defeated and the city surrendered.
the battle of qubec in 1759 ranks as one of the most signicant engagements in british and american history.
when montral fell in 1760 the french ag had uttered in canada for the last time.
by the peace settlement at paris 1763 french power was thrown completely off the continent of north america leaving behind a fertile french population that is to this day a strong minority in canada.
this bitter pill was sweet ened somewhat when the french were allowed to retain several small but valuable sugar islands in the west indies and two never to be fortied islets in the gulf of st lawrence for shing stations.
a nal blow came when the french to compensate their luckless spanish ally for its losses ceded to spain all transmississippi louisiana plus the outlet of new orleans.
spain for its part turned florida over to britain in return for cuba where havana had fallen to british arms see map 6 7.
great britain thus emerged as the dominant power in north america while taking its place as the leading naval power of the world.
restless colonists britains colonists baptized by re emerged with increased condence in their military strength.
they had borne the brunt of battle at rst they had fought bravely 180 20w 160w 140w 120w n 140w 120w 100w 40w 60w 80w 160w 100w 20w 40w 60w 80w n 180 hudson bay hudson bay n r n m pi r do o ra col.
r io oh atlantic ocean territorial claims n 20 new york philadelphia richmond territorial claims at l a n t i c ocean savannah san new orleans antonio g ul f of me x i co saintdomingue n 20 car i bbe an sea french mexico city br.
c a rib b e a n honduras sea spanish french russian io oh r british br.
honduras british st louis santa f e nd nd e gul f of mexi co spanish pac i f ic ocean r rio gra ra ri o g pacific ocean r n boston.
pi r ip iss iss c ol do ora qubec montral missouri r.
n ip iss is s m a missouri r.
columbi 500 1000 km.
map 6 7 north america before 1754 russian proclamation line of 1763 500 1000 km.
north america after 1763 after french losses interactive map impact of the global struggle alongside the crack british regulars and they had gained valuable experience ofcers and men alike.
in the closing days of the con ict some twenty thousand american recruits were under arms.
the french and indian war while bolstering colonial self esteem simultaneously shattered the myth of british invincibility.
on braddocks bloody eld the buckskin militia had seen the demoralized regulars huddling helplessly together or eeing their unseen enemy.
ominously friction had developed during the war between arrogant british ofcers and the raw colonial boors displaying the contempt of the professional soldier for amateurs the british refused to recognize any american militia commission above the rank of captain a demotion humiliating to colonel george washington.
they also showed the usual condescension of snobs from the civilized old country toward the scum who had confessed failure by eeing to the outhouses of civilization general wolfe referred to the colonial militia with exaggeration as in general the dirtiest most contemptible cowardly dogs that you can conceive energetic and hard working american settlers in contrast believed themselves to be the cutting edge of british civilization.
they felt that they deserved credit rather than contempt for risking their lives to secure a new world empire.
british ofcials were further distressed by the reluctance of the colonists to support the common cause wholeheartedly.
american shippers using fraudulent papers developed a golden trafc with the enemy ports of the spanish and french west indies.
this treason the reverend andrew burnaby an observant church of england clergyman who visited the colonies in the closing months of the seven years war scoffed at any possibility of unication 1760.
for re and water are not more heterogeneous than the different colonies in north america.
nothing can exceed the jealousy and emulation which they possess in regard to each other.
were they left to themselves there would soon be a civil war from one end of the continent to the other while the indians and negros would.
impatiently watch the opportunity of exterminating them all together.
able trade in foodstuffs actually kept some of the hostile islands from starving at the very time when the british navy was trying to subdue them.
in the nal year of the war the british authorities forced to resort to drastic mea sures forbade the export of all supplies from new eng land and the middle colonies.
other colonists self centered and alienated by distance from the war refused to provide troops and money for the con ict.
they demanded the rights and privileges of eng lishmen without the duties and responsibilities of eng lishmen.
not until pitt had offered to reimburse the colonies for a substantial part of their expenditures some 900 000 did they move with some enthusiasm.
if the americans had to be bribed to defend themselves against a relentless and savage foe would they ever unite to strike the mother country.
the curse of intercolonial disunity present from early days had continued throughout the recent hostilities.
it had been caused mainly by enormous distances by geographical barriers like rivers by con icting religions from catholic to quaker by varied nationalities from german to irish by differing types of colonial governments by many boundary disputes and by the resentment of the crude backcountry settlers against the aristocratic bigwigs.
yet unity received some encouragement during the french and indian war.
when soldiers and statesmen from widely separated colonies met around common camp res and council tables they were often agreeably surprised by what they found.
despite deep seated jealousy and suspicion they discovered that they were all fellow americans who generally spoke the same language and shared common ideals.
barriers of disunity began to melt although a long and rugged road lay ahead before a coherent nation would emerge.
wars fateful aftermath the removal of the french menace in canada profoundly affected american attitudes.
while the french hawk had been hovering in the north and west the colonial chicks had been forced to cling close to the wings of their british mother hen.
now that the hawk was killed they could range far aeld with a new spirit of independence.
the french humiliated by the british and saddened by the fate of canada consoled themselves with one wishful thought.
perhaps the loss of their american empire would one day result in britains loss of its american empire.
in a sense the history of the united chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 states began with the fall of qubec and montral the infant republic was cradled on the plains of abraham.
the spanish and indian menaces were also now substantially reduced.
spain was temporarily eliminated from florida although entrenched in louisiana and new orleans and was still securely in possession of much of western north america including the vast territory from present day texas to cal i fornia.
as for the indians the treaty of paris that ended the seven years war dealt a harsh blow to the iroquois creeks and other interior tribes.
the spanish removal from florida and the french removal from canada deprived the indians of their most powerful diplomatic weapon the ability to play off the rival european powers against one another.
in the future the indians would have to negotiate exclusively with the british.
sensing the newly precarious position of the indian peoples the ottawa chief pontiac in 1763 led several tribes aided by a handful of french traders who remained in the region in a violent campaign to drive the british out of the ohio country.
pontiacs uprising laid siege to detroit in the spring of 1763 and eventually overran all but three british posts west of the appalachians kill ing some two thousand soldiers and settlers.
the british retaliated swiftly and cruelly.
waging a primitive version of biological warfare one british commander ordered blankets infected with smallpox to be distributed among the indians.
such tactics crushed the uprising and brought an uneasy truce to the frontier.
his bold plan frustrated pontiac himself perished in 1769 at the hands of a rival chieftain.
as for the british the bloody episode convinced them of the need to stabilize relations with the western indians and to keep regular troops stationed along the restless frontier a mea sure for which they soon asked the colonists to foot the bill.
land hungry american colonists were now free to burst over the dam of the appalachian mountains and ood out over the verdant western lands.
a tiny rivulet of pioneers had already trickled into tennessee and kentucky other courageous settlers made their preparations for the long dangerous trek over the mountains.
then out of a clear sky the london government issued its proclamation of 1763.
it atly prohibited settlement in the area beyond the appalachians pending further adjustments see map 6 8.
the truth is that this hastily drawn document was not designed to oppress the colonists at all but to work out the indian problem detroit 1794 a key french outpost from 1701 to 1760 detroit fell to britain during the seven years war.
the british remained at detroit even after the american war of independence exciting bitter resentment in the infant american republic see pp.
qubec european settlement before 1700 maine european settlement 1700 1763 mass.
frontier 1763 lake superior proclamation line of 1763 montral pontiacs uprising 1763.
r fort michilimackinac 200 mi.
lake huron ie susqueh a lake michiga a nn r portsmouth boston hartford newport new haven rhode island conn 40n n j new york penn.
perth amboy burlington philadelphia new castle fort pitt 70w po baltimore delaware to m annapolis ac r io r r oh a.
illi no is r er hudson r.
ir pp ab e n h mass.
n y are r law ssi w sh k la albany de missi fort detroit ce en rio onta ke l a fort niagara n wr connecticut r 200 km.
la st maryland st marys virginia james r jamestown.
ohio r r roano ke a a t l an tic o ce an new bern siss mis tenness ee r.
sa va n a alt na h south carolina r n charleston georgia ha ma r territory claimed by spain and britain wilmington r tee san ippi r erl cumb r north carolina nd spanish louisiana.
williamsburg savannah 30n st augustine new orleans gulf of mexico 90w 80w map 6 8 british colonies at end of the seven years war 1763 this map showing the colonies thirteen years before the declaration of independence helps to explain why the british would be unable to conquer their offspring.
the colonists were spreading rapidly into the backcountry where the powerful british navy could not ush them out.
during the revolutionary war the british at one time or another captured the leading colonial cities boston new york philadelphia and charleston but the more remote interior remained a sanctuary for rebels.
interactive map chapter 6 the duel for north america 1608 1763 fairly and prevent another bloody eruption like pontiacs uprising.
but countless americans especially land speculators were dismayed and angered.
was not the land beyond the mountains their birthright.
had they not in addition purchased it with their blood in the recent war.
in complete deance of the proclamation they clogged the westward trails.
in 1765 an estimated one thousand wagons rolled through the town of salisbury north carolina on their way up west this wholesale outing of royal authority boded ill for the longevity of british rule in america.
the seven years war also caused the colonists to develop a new vision of their destiny.
with the path cleared for the conquest of a continent with their birthrate high and their energy boundless they sensed that they were a potent people on the march.
and they were in no mood to be restrained.
lordly britons whose suddenly swollen empire had tended to produce swollen heads were in no mood for back talk.
puffed up over their recent victories they were already annoyed with their unruly colonial subjects.
the stage was set for a violent family quarrel.
chronology edict of nantes repealed in 1685 champlain colonizes qubec for france louis xiv becomes king of france 1744 king georges war war of austrian succession washington battles french on frontier albany congress la salle explores mississippi river to the gulf of mexico 1756 seven years war french and indian war 1689 king williams war war of the league of augsburg braddocks defeat 1702 pitt emerges as leader of british government queen annes war war of spanish succession battle of qubec french found new orleans war of jenkinss ear peace of paris pontiacs uprising proclamation of 1763 key terms huguenots 109 edict of nantes 109 coureurs de bois 111 voyageurs 111 king williams war 112 queen annes war 112 war of jenkinss ear 114 king georges war 114 acadians 116 people to know french and indian war seven years war 116 albany congress 117 regulars 117 qubec battle of 120 pontiacs uprising 122 proclamation of 1763 122 louis xiv samuel de champlain edward braddock william pitt james wolfe pontiac to learn more to learn more fred anderson crucible of war the seven years war and the fate of empire in british north america 1754 1766 2001 david armitage ed the british atlantic world 1500 1800 2002 colin g calloway the scratch of a pen 1763 and the transformation of america 2006 david dixon never come to peace again pontiacs uprising and the fate of the british empire in north america 2005 francis jennings empire of fortune crowns colonies and tribes in the seven years war in america 1988 elizabeth mancke and carole shammas eds the creation of the british atlantic world 2005 paul david nelson william tryon and the course of empire a life in british imperial service 1990 carolyn podruchny making the voyageur world travelers and traders in the north american fur trade 2006 james pritchard in search of empire the french in the americas 1670 1730 2004 armstrong starkey european and native american warfare 1615 1815 1998 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the road to revolution 1763 1775 the revolution was effected before the war commenced.
the revolution was in the minds and hearts of the people.
john adams 1818 v ictory in the seven years war made britain the master of a vastly enlarged imperial domain in north america.
but victory including the subsequent need to garrison ten thousand troops along the sprawling american frontier was painfully costly.
the london government therefore struggled after 1763 to compel the american colonists to shoulder some of the nancial costs of empire.
this change in british colonial policy reinforced an emerging sense of american political identity and helped to precipitate the american revolution.
the eventual con ict was by no means inevitable.
indeed given the tightening commercial military and cultural bonds between colonies and mother country since the rst crude settlements a century and a half earlier it might be considered remarkable that the revolution happened at all.
the truth is that americans were reluctant revolutionaries.
until late in the day they sought only to claim the rights of eng lishmen not to separate from the mother country.
but what began as a squabble about economic policies soon exposed irreconcilable differences between americans and britons over cherished political principles.
the ensuing clash gave birth to a new nation.
the deep roots of revolution in a broad sense america was a revolutionary force from the day of its discovery by europeans.
the new world nurtured new ideas about the nature of society citizen and government.
in the old world many humble folk had long lived in the shadow of graveyards that contained the bones of their ancestors for a thousand years past.
few people born into such changeless surroundings dared to question their social status.
but european immigrants in the new world were not so easily subdued by the scowl of their superiors.
in the american wilderness they encountered a world that was theirs to make afresh.
two ideas in particular had taken root in the minds of the american colonists by the mid eighteenth century one was what historians call republicanism.
looking to the models of the ancient greek and roman this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website new ideas in the new world republics exponents of republicanism de ned a just society as one in which all citizens willingly subordinated their private selsh interests to the common good.
both the stability of society and the authority of government thus depended on the virtue of the citizenry its capacity for selessness self sufciency and courage and especially its appetite for civic involvement.
by its very nature republicanism was opposed to hierarchical and authoritarian institutions such as aristocracy and monarchy.
a second idea that fundamentally shaped american political thought derived from a group of british political commentators known as radical whigs.
widely read by the colonists the whigs feared the threat to liberty posed by the arbitrary power of the monarch and his ministers relative to elected representatives in parliament.
the whigs mounted withering attacks on the use of patronage and bribes by the kings ministers symptoms of a wider moral failure in society that they called corruption in the sense of rot or decay.
the whigs warned citizens to be on guard against corruption and to be eternally vigilant against possible conspiracies to denude them of their hardwon liberties.
together republican and whig ideas predisposed the american colonists to be on hairtrigger alert against any threat to their rights.
the circumstances of colonial life had done much to bolster those attitudes.
dukes and princes barons and bishops were unknown in the colonies while property ownership and political participation were relatively accessible.
the americans had also grown accustomed to running their own affairs largely unmolested by remote ofcials in london.
distance weakens authority great distance weakens authority greatly.
so it came as an especially jolting shock when britain after 1763 tried to enclose its american colonists more snugly in its grip.
mercantilism and colonial grievances britains empire was acquired in a t of absentmindedness an old saying goes and there is much truth in the jest.
not one of the original thirteen colonies except georgia was formally planted by the british government.
all the others were haphazardly founded by trading companies religious groups or land speculators.
the british authorities nevertheless embraced a theory called mercantilism that justied their control over the colonies.
mercantilists believed that wealth the female combatants 1776 britain is symbolized as a lady of fashion her rebellious daughter america as an indian princess.
their shields of obedience and liberty seem mutually exclusive standards.
compare this cartoon with the one on p 168 was power and that a countrys economic wealth and hence its military and political power could be mea sured by the amount of gold or silver in its treasury.
to amass gold or silver a country needed to export more than it imported.
possessing colonies thus conferred distinct advantages since the colonies could both supply raw materials to the mother country thereby reducing the need for foreign imports and provide a guaranteed market for exports.
the london government looked on the american colonists more or less as tenants.
they were expected to furnish products needed in the mother country such as tobacco sugar and ships masts to refrain from making for export certain products such as woolen cloth or beaver hats to buy imported manufactured goods exclusively from britain and not to indulge in bothersome dreams of economic self sufciency or worse self government.
from time to time parliament passed laws to regulate the mercantilist system.
the rst of these the navigation law of 1650 was aimed at rival dutch shippers chapter 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies profit and piety competing visions for english settlement in the spring of 1644 john winthrop governor of massachusetts bay learned that native americans had overrun the scattered tobacco plantations of virginia killing as many as five hundred colonists.
winthrop never thought much of the chesapeake settlements.
he regarded the people who had migrated to that part of america as grossly materialistic and because virginia had recently expelled several puritan ministers winthrop decided the hostilities were gods way of punishing the tobacco planters for their worldliness.
it was observable he related that this massacre came upon them soon after they had driven out the godly ministers we had sent to them when virginians appealed to massachusetts for military supplies they received a cool reception.
we were weakly provided ourselves winthrop explained and so could not afford them any help of that kind in 1675 the tables turned.
native americans declared all out war against the new englanders and soon reports of the destruction of puritan communities were circulating in virginia.
the indians in new england have burned considerable villages wrote one leading tobacco planter and have made them the new englanders desert more than one hundred and fifty miles of those places they had formerly seated sir william berkeley virginias royal governor was not displeased by news of new englands adversity.
he and his friends held the puritans in contempt.
indeed the new englanders reminded them of the religious fanatics who had provoked civil war in england and who in 1649 had executed charles i.
during this particular crisis berkeley noted that he might have shown more pity for the beleaguered new englanders had they deserved it of the king the governor sounding like a puritan himself described the warring indians as the instruments with which god intended to destroy the kings enemies for good measure virginia outlawed the export of foodstuffs to their embattled northern neighbors.
in 1608 powhatan the father of pocahontas gave this shell decorated ceremonial cloak to captain christopher newport commander of the fleet that brought the first english settlers to jamestown.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies uch extraordinary disunity in the colonies not to mention lack of compassion comes as a surprise to anyone searching for the roots of modern nationalism in this early period.
english colonization in the seventeenth century did not spring from a desire to build a centralized empire in the new world similar to that of spain or france.
instead the english crown awarded colonial charters to a wide variety of entrepreneurs religious idealists and aristocratic adventurers who established separate and profoundly different colonies.
not only did new englanders have little in common with the earliest virginians and carolinians but they were often divided among themselves.
migration itself helps to explain this striking competition and diversity.
at different times different colonies appealed to different sorts of people.
men and women moved to the new world for various reasons and as economic political and religious conditions changed on both sides of the atlantic during the course of the seventeenth century so too did patterns of english migration.
s breaking away what were some of the social problems facing britain in the 16th and 17th centuries that helped push english colonists to cross the atlantic.
english people in the early decades of the seventeenth century experienced what seemed to them an accelerating pace of social change.
what was most evident was the rapid growth of population.
between 1580 and 1650 a period during which many men and women elected to journey to the new world the population of england expanded from about 3 5 million to more than 5 million.
among other things the expansion strained the nations agrarian economy.
competition for food and land drove up prices and people desperate for work took to the roads.
those migrants many of them drawn into the orbit of london by tales of opportunity frightened the traditional leaders of english society.
to the propertied class the wandering poor represented a threat to good order and particularly during the early decades of the seventeenth century landholders urged local magistrates throughout the kingdom to enforce the laws against vagrancy.
even by modern standards the english population of this period was quite mobile.
to be sure most men and women lived out their days rooted in the tiny country villages of their birth.
a growing number of english people however were migrant laborers who took seasonal work.
many others relocated from the countryside to london already a city of several hundred thousand inhabitants by the early seventeenth century.
because health conditions in london were poor a large number of the new arrivals quickly died and had their places not been taken by other migrants from the rural villages the population of london would almost certainly have decreased.
other more exotic destinations also beckoned.
a large number of english settlers migrated to ireland while lucrative employment and religious freedom attracted people to holland.
the pilgrims people who separated themselves from the established church of england initially hoped to make a new life in leyden.
the migrations within europe serve as reminders that ordinary people had choices.
a person who was upset about the state of the church of england or who had lost a livelihood did not have to move to america.
that some men and women consciously selected this much more dangerous and expensive journey set them apart from their contemporaries.
english colonists crossed the atlantic for many reasons.
some wanted to institute a purer form of worship more closely based on their interpretation of scripture.
others dreamed of owning land and improving their social position.
a few came to the new world to escape bad marriages jail terms or the dreary prospect of lifelong poverty.
since most seventeenth century migrants especially those who transferred to the chesapeake colonies left almost no records of their previous lives in england it is futile to try to isolate a single cause or explanation for their decision to leave home.
whatever their reasons for crossing the ocean english migrants to america in this period left a nation wracked by recurrent often violent political and religious controversy.
during the 1620s autocratic stuart monarchs james i r 1603 1625 and his son charles i r 1625 1649 who succeeded queen elizabeth on the english throne fought constantly with the elected members of parliament.
at stake were rival notions of constitutional and representative government.
many royal policies the granting of lucrative commercial monopolies to court favorites for example fueled popular discontent but the crowns hostility to far reaching religious reform sparked the most vocal protest.
throughout the kingdom puritans became adamant in their demand for radical purification of ritual.
tensions grew so severe that in 1629 charles attempted to rule the country without parliaments assistance.
the autocratic strategy backfired.
when charles finally was forced to recall parliament in 1640 because he was running out of money parliament demanded major constitutional reforms.
militant puritans supported by many members of parliament insisted on restructuring the church abolishing the office of bishop was high on their list.
in this angry political atmosphere charles took up arms against the supporters of parliament.
the confrontation between royalists and parliamentarians set off a long and bloody conflict known as the english civil war.
in 1649 the victorious parliamentarians beheaded charles and for almost a decade oliver cromwell a skilled general and committed puritan governed england as lord protector.
in 1660 following cromwells death from natural causes the stuarts returned to the english throne.
during a period known as the restoration neither charles ii r 1660 1685 nor james ii r 1685 1688 both sons of charles i was able to establish genuine political stability.
when the authoritarian james lifted some of the restrictions governing catholics a protestant nation rose up in what the english people called the glorious revolution 1688 and sent james into permanent exile.
the glorious revolution altered the course of english political history and therefore that of the american colonies as well.
the monarchs who followed james ii surrendered some of the prerogative powers that had destabilized english politics for almost a century.
the crown was still a potent force in the political life of the nation but never again would an english king or queen attempt to govern without parliament.
the chesapeake dreams of wealth the stuart monarchs james i r 1603 1625 charles i r 1625 executed 1649 james ii r 1685 deposed 1688 charles ii r 1660 1685 william iii prince of orange r 1688 1702 m mary ii r 1688 1695 new world.
these advocates argued that the north american mainland contained resources of incalculable value.
an innovative group they insisted might reap great profits and at the same time supply england with raw materials that it would otherwise be forced to purchase from european rivals holland france and spain.
moreover any enterprise that annoyed catholic spain or revealed its weakness in america seemed a desirable end in itself to patriotic english protestants.
anti catholicism and hatred of spain became an integral part of english national identity during this period and unless one appreciates just how deeply those sentiments ran in the popular mind one cannot fully understand anne i r 1702 1714 view the map the colonies to 1740 such political events coupled with periodic economic recession and religious repression determined in large measure the direction and flow of migration to america.
during times of political turmoil religious persecution and economic insecurity men and women thought more seriously about transferring to the new world than they did during periods of peace and prosperity.
obviously people who moved to america at different times came from different social and political environments.
a person who emigrated to pennsylvania in the 1680s for example left an england unlike the one that a virginian in 1607 or a bay colonist in 1630 might have known.
moreover the young men and women who migrated to london in search of work and who then in their frustration and poverty decided to move to the chesapeake carried a very different set of memories from those people who moved directly to new england from the small rural villages of their homeland.
regardless of the exact timing of departure english settlers brought with them ideas and assumptions that helped them make sense of their everyday experiences in an unfamiliar environment.
their values were tested and sometimes transformed in the new world but they were seldom destroyed.
settlement involved a complex process of adjustment.
the colonists developed different subcultures in america and in each it is possible to trace the interaction between the settlers values and the physical elements such as the climate crops and soil of their new surroundings.
the chesapeake the new england colonies the middle colonies and the southern colonies formed distinct regional identities that have survived to the present day.
susquehannock re wa la de lenni lenape delaware maryland ar law de conoy po to severn m ac r r e ba y no an ah pp ra ck r nanticoke r r parnunkey eake bay esap jam es ch st mary s city jamestown nottoway at l a n t i c ocean virginia tutelo tuscarora pamlico the chesapeake dreams of wealth why did the chesapeake colonies not prosper during the earliest years of settlement.
after the roanoke debacle in 1590 english interest in american settlement declined and only a few aging visionaries such as richard hakluyt kept alive the dream of colonies in the 50 miles 100 kilometers chesapeake colonies 1640 the many deep rivers flowing into the chesapeake bay provided scattered english planters with a convenient transportation system linking them directly to european markets.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies why ordinary people who had no direct financial stake in the new world so generously supported english efforts to colonize america.
soon after james i ascended to the throne adventurers were given an opportunity to put their theories into practice in the colonies of virginia and maryland an area known as the chesapeake or somewhat later as the tobacco coast.
entrepreneurs in virginia during elizabeths reign the major obstacle to successful colonization of the new world had been raising money.
no single person no matter how rich or well connected could underwrite the vast expenses a new world settlement required.
the solution to this financial problem was the joint stock company a business organization in which scores of people could invest without fear of bankruptcy.
a merchant or landowner could purchase a share of stock at a stated price and at the end of several years the investor could anticipate recovering the initial amount plus a portion of whatever profits the company had made.
joint stock ventures sprang up like mushrooms.
affluent english citizens and even some of more modest fortunes rushed to invest in the companies and as a result some projects were able to amass large amounts of capital enough certainly to launch a new colony in virginia.
on april 10 1606 james issued the first virginia charter.
the document authorized the london company to establish plantations in virginia.
the london company was an ambitious business venture.
its leader sir thomas smith was reputedly londons wealthiest merchant.
smith and his partners gained possession of the territory lying between present day north carolina and the hudson river.
these were generous but vague boundaries to be sure but the virginia company as the london company soon called itself set out immediately to find the treasures hakluyt had promised.
in december 1606 the susan constant the godspeed and the discovery sailed for america.
the ships carried 104 men and boys who had been instructed to establish a fortified outpost somehundred miles up a large navigable river.
the natural beauty and economic potential of the region was apparent to everyone.
a voyager on the expedition reported seeing faire meaddowes and goodly tall trees with such fresh waters running through the woods as almost ravished us at first sight the leaders of the colony selected without consulting resident native americans what the europeans considered a promising location more than thirty miles from the mouth of the james river.
a marshy peninsula jutting out into the river became the site for one of americas most unsuccessful villages jamestown.
modern historians have criticized the choice for the low lying ground proved to be a disease ridden death trap even the drinking water was contaminated with salt.
but the first virginians were neither stupid nor suicidal.
jamestown seemed the ideal place to build a fort since surprise attack by spaniards or native americans rather than sickness appeared the more serious threat in the early months of settlement.
almost immediately dispirited colonists began quarreling.
the adventurers were not prepared for the challenges that confronted them in america.
part of the problem was cultural.
most of them had grown up in a depressed agricultural economy that could not provide full time employment for all who wanted it.
in england laborers shared what little work was available.
one man for example might perform a certain chore while others simply watched.
later the men who had been idle were given an opportunity to work for an hour or two.
this labor system may have been appropriate for england but in virginia it nearly destroyed the colony.
adventurers sat around jamestown while other men performed crucial agricultural tasks.
it made little sense of course to share work in an environment in which people were starving because too little labor was expended on the planting and harvesting of crops.
not surprisingly some modern historians those who assumed all workers should put in an eight hour day branded the early virginians as lazy irresponsible beings who preferred to play while others labored.
in point of fact however the first settlers were merely attempting to replicate a traditional work experience.
avarice exacerbated the problems.
the adventurers had traveled to the new world in search of the sort of instant wealth they imagined the spaniards to have found in mexico and peru.
published tales of rubies and diamonds lying on the beach probably inflamed their expectations.
even when it must have been apparent that such expectations were unfounded the first settlers often behaved in virginia as if they fully expected to become rich.
instead of cooperating for the common good guarding or farming for example individuals pursued personal interests.
they searched for gold when they might have helped plant corn.
no one was willing to take orders and those who were supposed to govern the colony looked after their private welfare while disease war and starvation ravaged the settlement.
spinning out of control virginia might have gone the way of roanoke had it not been for captain john smith.
by any standard he was a resourceful man.
before coming to jamestown he had traveled throughout europe and fought with the hungarian army against the turks and if smith is to be believed he was saved from certain death by various beautiful women.
because of his reputation for boasting historians have discounted smiths account of life in early virginia.
recent scholarship however has affirmed the truthfulness of his curious story.
in virginia smith brought order out of anarchy.
while members of the council in jamestown debated petty politics he traded with the local indians for food mapped the chesapeake bay and may even have been rescued from execution by a young indian girl pocahontas.
in the fall of 1608 he seized control of the ruling council and instituted a tough military discipline.
under smith no one enjoyed special privilege.
individuals whom he forced to work came to hate him.
but he managed to keep them alive no small achievement in such a deadly environment.
leaders of the virginia company in london recognized the need to reform the entire enterprise.
after all they had spent considerable sums and had received nothing in return.
in 1609 the company directors obtained a new charter from the king which completely reorganized the virginia government.
henceforth all commercial and political decisions affecting the colonists rested with the company a fact that had not been made sufficiently clear in the 1606 charter.
moreover in the chesapeake dreams of wealth read the document john smith the starving time john smith c 1580 1630 was a professional mercenary and adventurer who fought against both the spanish and the ottomans before being hired by the virginia company to assist in the establishment of its new colony at jamestown.
an effort to raise scarce capital the original partners opened the joint stock company to the general public.
for a little more than 12 approximately one years wages for an unskilled english laborer a person or group of persons could purchase a stake in virginia.
it was anticipated that in 1616 the profits from the colony would be distributed among the shareholders.
the company sponsored a publicity campaign pamphlets and sermons extolled the colonys potential and exhorted patriotic english citizens to invest in the enterprise.
between 1609 and 1611 the remaining virginia settlers lacked capable leadership and perhaps as a result they lacked food.
the terrible winter of 1609 1610 was termed the starving time a few desperate colonists were driven to cannibalism an ironic situation since early explorers had assumed that only native americans would eat human flesh.
in england smith heard that one colonist had killed his wife powdered salted her and had eaten part of her before it was known for which he was executed the captain who possessed a droll sense of humor observed now whether she was better roasted broiled or carbonadoed sliced i know not but such a dish as powdered wife i never heard of other people simply lost the will to live.
the presence of so many native americans heightened the danger.
the first colonists found themselves living or attempting to live in territory controlled by what was probably the most powerful indian confederation east of the mississippi river.
under the leadership of their werowance powhatan these indians had by 1608 created a loose association of some thirty tribes and when captain john smith arrived to lead several hundred adventurers the powhatans named for their king numbered some fourteen thousand people of whom thirty two hundred were warriors.
these people hoped initially to enlist the europeans as allies against native enemies.
when it became clear that the two groups holding such different notions about labor and property and about the exploitation of the natural environment could not coexist in peace the powhatans tried to drive the invaders out of virginia once in 1622 and again in 1644.
the failure of the second campaign ended in the complete destruction of the powhatan empire.
in june 1610 the settlers who had survived despite starvation and conflicts with the indians actually abandoned virginia.
through a stroke of luck however they encountered a small fleet led by the colonys governor the baron de la warr just as they commenced their voyage down the james river.
de la warr and the deputy governors who succeeded him sir thomas gates and sir thomas dale ruled by martial law.
the new colonists many of them male and female servants employed by the company were marched to work by the beat of the drum.
such methods saved the colony but could not make it flourish.
in 1616 company shareholders received no profits.
their only reward was the right to a piece of unsurveyed land located three thousand miles from london.
stinking weed the economic solution to virginias problems grew in the vacant lots of jamestown.
only indians bothered to cultivate tobacco until john rolfe a settler who achieved notoriety by marrying pocahontas realized this local weed might be a valuable export.
rolfe experimented with the crop eventually growing in virginia a milder variety that had been developed in the west indies and was more appealing to european smokers.
virginians suddenly possessed a means to make money.
tobacco proved relatively easy to grow and settlers who had avoided work now threw themselves into its production with single minded diligence.
in 1617 one observer found that jamestowns streets and all other spare places are planted with tobacco.
the colony dispersed all about planting tobacco although king james i originally considered smoking immoral and unhealthy he changed his mind when the duties he collected on tobacco imports began to mount.
he was neither the first nor the last ruler who decided a vice that generates revenue is not really so bad.
the company sponsored another ambitious effort to transform virginia into a profitable enterprise.
in 1618 sir edwin chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies read the document james i a counterblaste to tobacco this tobacco label advertises virginias valuable export tobacco.
despite king jamess initial attitude toward the stinking weed once the government saw that tobacco made a profit it dropped its moral criticism of the american crop.
sandys pronounced sands led a faction of stockholders that began to pump life into the dying organization by instituting a series of sweeping reforms and eventually ousting sir thomas smith and his friends.
sandys wanted private investors to develop their own estates in virginia.
before 1618 there had been little incentive to do so but by relaxing dales martial law and promising an elective representative assembly called the house of burgesses sandys thought he could make the colony more attractive to wealthy speculators.
even more important was sandyss method for distributing land.
colonists who covered their own transportation cost to america were guaranteed a headright a 50 acre lot for which they paid only a small annual rent.
adventurers were granted additional headrights for each servant they brought to the colony.
this procedure allowed prosperous planters to build up huge estates while they also acquired dependent laborers.
this land system persisted long after the companys collapse.
so too did the notion that the wealth of a few justified the exploitation many others.
time of reckoning between 1619 and 1622 colonists arrived in virginia in record number.
company records reveal that during this short period 3 570 individuals were sent to the colony.
people seldom moved to virginia in families.
although the first women arrived in jamestown in 1608 most emigrants were single males in their teens or early twenties who came to the new world as indentured servants.
in exchange for transportation across the atlantic they agreed to serve a master for a stated number of years.
the length of service depended in part on the age of the servant.
the younger the servant the longer he or she served.
in return the master promised to give the laborers proper care and at the conclusion of their contracts to provide them with tools and clothes according to the custom of the country powerful virginians corrupted the system.
poor servants wanted to establish independent tobacco farms.
as they discovered however headrights were awarded not to the newly freed servant but to the great planter who had borne the cost of the servants transportation to the new world and paid for food and clothing during the indenture.
and even though indentured servants were promised land at the moment of freedom they were most often cheated becoming members of a growing disaffected landless class in seventeenth century virginia.
whenever possible planters in virginia purchased ablebodied workers in other words persons preferably male capable of performing hard agricultural labor.
this preference dramatically skewed the colonys sex ratio.
in the early decades men outnumbered women by as much as six to one.
as one historian edmund s morgan observed women were scarcer than corn or liquor in virginia and fetched a higher price such gender imbalance meant that even if a male servant lived to the end of his indenture an unlikely prospect he could not realistically expect to start a family of his own.
moreover despite apparent legal safeguards masters could treat dependent workers as they pleased after all these people were legally considered property.
servants were sold traded even gambled away in games of chance.
it does not require much imagination to see that a society that tolerated such an exploitative labor system might later embrace slavery.
most virginians then did not live long enough to worry about marriage.
death was omnipresent.
indeed extraordinarily high mortality was a major reason the chesapeake colonies developed so differently from those of new england.
on the eve of the 1618 reforms virginias population stood at approximately 700.
the company sent at least 3 000 more people but by 1622 only 1 240 were still alive.
it consequentilie followes declared one angry shareholder that we had then lost 3 000 persons within those 3 yeares the major killers were contagious diseases.
salt in the water supply also took a toll.
and on good friday march 22 1622 the powhatan indians slew 347 europeans in a well coordinated surprise attack.
no one knows for certain what effect such a horrendous mortality rate had on the men and women who survived.
at the very least it must have created a sense of impermanence a desire to escape virginia with a little money before sickness or violence ended the adventure.
the settlers who drank to excess aboard the tavern ships anchored in the james river described the colony not as a place of habitacion but only of a short sojourninge corruption and reform on both sides of the atlantic people wondered who should be blamed.
why had so many colonists died in a land so rich in potential.
the burden of responsibility lay in large measure with the chesapeake dreams of wealth read the document wessell webling his indenture 1622 indentured white servants provided much of the labor necessary for the founding of the early colonies.
here workers are shown clearing lands for agriculture and splitting logs to make boards for building or sale.
the virginia company.
sandys and his supporters were in too great a hurry to make a profit.
settlers were shipped to america but neither housing nor food awaited them in jamestown.
weakened by the long sea voyage they quickly succumbed to contagious disease.
the companys scandalous mismanagement embarrassed the king and in 1624 he dissolved the bankrupt enterprise and transformed virginia into a royal colony.
the crown appointed a governor and a council.
no provision was made however for continuing the local representative assembly an institution the stuarts heartily opposed.
the house of burgesses had first convened in 1619.
while elections to the burgesses were hardly democratic the assembly did provide wealthy planters with a voice in government.
even without the kings authorization the representatives gathered annually after 1629 and in 1639 charles recognized the bodys existence.
he had no choice.
the colonists who served on the council or in the assembly were strong willed ambitious men.
they had no intention of surrendering control over local affairs.
since charles was having political troubles of his own and lived three thousand miles from jamestown he usually allowed the virginians to have their own way.
in 1634 the assembly divided the colony into eight counties.
in each one a group of appointed justices of the peace the wealthy planters of the area convened as a court of law as well as a governing body.
the county court was the most important institution of local government in virginia and long after the american revolution it served as a center for social political and commercial activities.
changes in government had little impact on the character of daily life in virginia.
the planters continued to grow tobacco ignoring advice to diversify and as the indians were killed made into tributaries or pushed north and south virginians took up large tracts of land along the colonys many navigable rivers.
the focus of their lives was the isolated plantation a small cluster of buildings housing the planters family and dependent workers.
these were modest wooden structures.
not until the eighteenth century did the chesapeake gentry build the great georgian mansions that still attract tourists.
the dispersed pattern of settlement retarded the development of institutions such as schools and churches.
besides jamestown there were no population centers and as late as 1705 robert beverley a leading planter reported that virginia did not have a single place that may reasonably bear the name of a town maryland a troubled refuge for catholics the driving force behind the founding of maryland was sir george calvert later lord baltimore.
calvert a talented and well educated man enjoyed the patronage of james i.
he was awarded lucrative positions in the government the most important being the kings secretary of state.
in 1625 calvert shocked almost everyone by publicly declaring his catholicism in this fiercely anti catholic society persons who openly supported the church of rome were immediately stripped of civil office.
although forced to resign as secretary of state calvert retained the crowns favor.
before resigning calvert sponsored a settlement on the coast of newfoundland but after visiting the place the proprietor concluded that no english person whatever his or her religion would transfer to a place where the ayre is so intolerably cold he turned his attention to the chesapeake and on june 30 1632 charles i granted george calverts son cecilius a charter for a colony to be located north of virginia.
the boundaries of the settlement named maryland in honor of charless queen were so vaguely defined that they generated legal controversies not fully resolved until the mid eighteenth century when charles mason and jeremiah dixon surveyed their famous line between pennsylvania and maryland.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies read the document george aslop from a character of the province of maryland cecilius calvert the second lord baltimore insisted that maryland tolerate all christian religions including catholicism something no other colony was willing to do.
the young slave in the background reminds us who did the hard labor in the chesapeake colonies.
cecilius the second lord baltimore wanted to create a sanctuary for englands persecuted catholics.
he also intended to make money.
without protestant settlers it seemed unlikely maryland would prosper and cecilius instructed his brother leonard the colonys governor to do nothing that might frighten off hypersensitive protestants.
the governor was ordered to cause all acts of the roman catholic religion to be done as privately as may be and.
to instruct all roman catholics to be silent upon all occasions of discourse concerning matters of religion on march 25 1634 the ark and dove carrying about 150 settlers landed safely and within days the governor purchased from the yaocomico indians a village that became st marys city the capital of maryland.
the colonys charter was an odd document a throwback to an earlier feudal age.
it transformed baltimore into a palatine lord a proprietor with almost royal powers.
settlers swore an oath of allegiance not to the king of england but to lord baltimore.
in england such practices had long ago passed into obsolescence.
as the proprietor lord baltimore owned outright almost 6 million acres he possessed absolute authority over anyone living in his domain.
on paper at least everyone in maryland was assigned a place in an elaborate social hierarchy.
members of a colonial ruling class persons who purchased 6 000 acres from baltimore were called lords of the manor.
these landed aristocrats were permitted to establish local courts of law.
people holding less acreage enjoyed fewer privileges particularly in government.
baltimore figured that land sales and rents would adequately finance the entire venture.
baltimores feudal system never took root in chesapeake soil.
people simply refused to play the social roles the lord proprietor had assigned.
these tensions affected the operation of marylands government.
baltimore assumed that his brother acting as his deputy in america and a small appointed council of local aristocrats would pass necessary laws and carry out routine administration.
when an elected assembly first convened in 1635 baltimore allowed the delegates to discuss only those acts he had prepared.
the members of the assembly bridled at such restrictions insisting on exercising traditional parliamentary privileges.
neither side gained a clear victory in the assembly and for almost twenty five years legislative squabbling contributed to the widespread political instability that almost destroyed maryland.
the colony drew both protestants and catholics and the two groups might have lived in harmony had civil war not broken out in england.
when cromwell and the puritan faction executed charles transforming england briefly into a republic it seemed baltimore might lose his colony.
to head off such an event and to placate marylands restless protestants in 1649 the proprietor drafted the famous act concerning religion which extended toleration to all individuals who accepted the divinity of christ.
at a time when european rulers regularly persecuted people for their religious beliefs baltimore championed liberty of conscience.
however laudable the act may have been it did not heal religious divisions in maryland and when local puritans seized the colonys government they promptly repealed the act.
for almost two decades vigilantes roamed the countryside and during the plundering time 1644 1646 one armed group temporarily drove leonard calvert out of maryland.
in 1655 civil war flared again.
in this troubled sanctuary ordinary planters and their workers cultivated tobacco on plantations dispersed along riverfronts.
in 1678 baltimore complained that he could not find fifty houses in a space of thirty miles.
tobacco affected almost every aspect of local culture.
in virginia and maryland one calvert explained tobacco as our staple is our all and indeed leaves no room for anything else a steady stream of indentured servants supplied the plantations with dependent laborers until they were replaced by african slaves at the end of the seventeenth century.
europeans sacrificed much by coming to the chesapeake.
for most of the century their standard of living was primitive when compared with that of people of the same social class who had reforming england in america remained in england.
two thirds of the planters for example lived in houses of only two rooms and of a type associated with the poorest classes in contemporary english society.
reforming england in america how did differences in religion affect the founding of the new england colonies.
the pilgrims enjoy almost mythic status in american history.
these brave refugees crossed the cold atlantic in search of religious liberty signed a democratic compact aboard the mayflower landed at plymouth rock and gave us our thanksgiving day.
as with most legends this one contains only a core of truth.
the pilgrims were not crusaders who set out to change the world.
rather they were humble english farmers.
their story began in the early 1600s in scrooby manor a small community located approximately 150 miles north of london.
many people living in this area believed the church of england retained too many traces of its catholic origin.
to support such a corrupt institution was like winking at the devil.
its very rituals compromised gods true believers and so in the early years of the reign of james i the scrooby congregation formally left the established state church.
like others who followed this logic they were called separatists.
since english statute required citizens to attend anglican services the scrooby separatists moved to holland in 1608 1609 rather than compromise.
the netherlands provided the separatists with a good home too good.
the members of the little church feared they were losing their distinct identity their children were becoming dutch.
in 1617 therefore a portion of the original scrooby congregation vowed to sail to america.
included in this group was william bradford a wonderfully literate man who wrote of plymouth plantation one of the first and certainly most poignant accounts of an early american settlement.
poverty presented the major obstacle to the pilgrims plans.
they petitioned for a land patent from the virginia company of london.
at the same time they looked for someone willing to underwrite the staggering costs of colonization.
the negotiations went well or so it seemed.
after stopping in england to take on supplies and laborers the pilgrims set off for america in 1620 aboard the mayflower armed with a patent to settle in virginia and indebted to a group of english investors who were only marginally interested in religious reform.
because of an error in navigation the pilgrims landed not in virginia but in new england.
the patent for which they had worked so diligently had no validity in the region.
in fact the crown had granted new england to another company.
without a patent the colonists possessed no authorization to form a civil government a serious matter since some sailors who were not pilgrims threatened mutiny.
to preserve the struggling community from anarchy forty one men signed an agreement known as the mayflower compact to covenant and combine our selves together into a civil body politick although later praised for its democratic character the mayflower compact could not ward off disease and hunger.
during the first months in plymouth death claimed approximately half of the 102 people who had initially set out from england.
moreover debts contracted in england severely burdened the new colony.
to their credit the pilgrims honored their financial obligations but it took almost twenty years to satisfy the english investors.
without bradford whom they elected as governor the settlers might have allowed adversity to overwhelm them.
through strength of will and self sacrifice however bradford persuaded frightened men and women that they could survive in america.
bradford had a lot of help.
almost anyone who has heard of the plymouth colony knows of squanto a patuxt indian who welcomed the first pilgrims in excellent english.
in 1614 unscrupulous adventurers had kidnapped squanto and sold him in spain as a slave.
somehow this resourceful man escaped bondage making his way to london where a group of merchants who owned land in newfoundland taught him to speak english.
they apparently hoped that he would deliver moving public testimonials about the desirability of moving to the new world.
in any case squanto returned to the plymouth area just before the pilgrims arrived.
squanto joined massasoit a local native american leader in teaching the pilgrims much about hunting and agriculture a debt that bradford freely acknowledged.
although evidence for the so called first thanksgiving is extremely sketchy it is certain that without native american support the europeans would have starved.
in time the pilgrims replicated the humble little farm communities they had once known in england.
they formed separatist congregations to their liking the population slowly increased.
the settlers experimented with commercial fishing and the fur trade but the efforts never generated substantial income.
most families relied on mixed husbandry grain and livestock.
because plymouth offered only limited economic prospects it attracted only a trickle of new settlers.
in 1691 the colony was absorbed into its larger and more prosperous neighbor massachusetts bay.
the great migration in the early decades of the seventeenth century an extraordinary spirit of religious reform burst forth in england and before it had burned itself out puritanism had transformed the face of england and america.
modern historians have difficulty comprehending this powerful spiritual movement.
some consider the puritans rather neurotic individuals who condemned liquor and sex dressed in drab clothes and minded their neighbors business.
the crude caricature is based on a profound misunderstanding of the actual nature of this broad popular movement.
the seventeenth century puritans were more like todays radical political reformers men and women committed to far reaching institutional change than like naive do gooders or narrow fundamentalists.
to their enemies of course the puritans were irritants always pointing out civil and ecclesiastical imperfections and urging everyone to try to fulfill the commands of scripture.
a great many people however shared their vision and not only did they found several american colonies but they also sparked the english civil war an event that generated bold new thinking about republican government and popular sovereignty.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies the puritans were products of the protestant reformation.
they accepted a calvinist notion that an omnipotent god predestined some people to salvation and damned others throughout eternity see chapter 1.
but instead of waiting passively for judgment day the puritans examined them selves for signs of grace for hints that god had in fact placed them among his elect a member of this select group they argued would try to live according to scripture to battle sin and eradicate corruption.
for the puritans the logic of everyday life was clear.
if the church of england contained unscriptural elements clerical vestments for example then they must be eliminated.
if the pope in rome was in league with the antichrist then protestant kings had better not form alliances with catholic states.
if god condemned licentiousness and intoxication then local officials should punish whores and drunks.
there was nothing improper about an occasional beer or passionate physical love within marriage but when sex and drink became ends in themselves the puritans thought englands ministers and magistrates should read the document john winthrop a model of christian charity 1830 voters in massachusetts who were called freemen reelected john winthrop governor many times an indication of his success in translating puritan values into practical policy.
persons of this temperament were more combative than the pilgrims had been.
they wanted to purify the church of england from within and before the 1630s at least separatism held little appeal for them.
from the puritan perspective the early stuarts james i and charles i seemed unconcerned about the spiritual state of the nation.
james tolerated corruption within his own court he condoned gross public extravagance.
his foreign policy appeased european catholic powers.
at one time he even tried to marry his son to a catholic princess.
neither king showed interest in purifying the anglican church.
in fact charles assisted the rapid advance of william laud a bishop who represented everything the puritans detested.
laud defended church ceremonies that they found obnoxious.
he persecuted puritan ministers forcing them either to conform to his theology or lose their licenses to preach.
as long as parliament met puritan voters in the various boroughs and countries throughout england elected men sympathetic to their point of view.
these outspoken representatives criticized royal policies and hounded laud.
because of their defiance charles decided in 1629 to rule england without parliament and four years later named laud archbishop of canterbury.
the last doors of reform slammed shut.
the corruption remained.
john winthrop the future governor of massachusetts bay was caught up in these events.
little about his background suggested such an auspicious future.
he owned a small manor in suffolk one that never produced sufficient income to support his growing family.
he dabbled in law.
but the core of winthrops life was his faith in god a faith so intense his contemporaries immediately identified him as a puritan.
the lord he concluded was displeased with england.
time for reform was running out.
in may 1629 he wrote to his wife i am verily perswaded god will bringe some heavye affliction upon this lande and that speedylye he was however confident that the lord would provide a shelter and a hidinge place for us other puritans some wealthier and politically better connected than winthrop reached similar conclusions about englands future.
they turned their attention to the possibility of establishing a colony in america and on march 4 1629 their massachusetts bay company obtained a charter directly from the king.
charles and his advisers apparently thought the massachusetts bay company was a commercial venture no different from the dozens of other joint stock companies that had recently sprung into existence.
winthrop and his associates knew better.
on august 26 1629 twelve of them met secretly and signed the cambridge agreement.
they pledged to be ready in our persons and with such of our severall familyes as are to go with us.
to embark for the said plantation by the first of march next there was one loophole.
the charters of most joint stock companies designated a specific place where business meetings were to be held.
for reasons not entirely clear a timely bribe is a good guess the charter of the massachusetts bay company did not contain this standard clause.
it could hold meetings anywhere the stockholders called freemen desired even america and if they were in america the king and his archbishop could not easily interfere in their affairs.
reforming england in america a city on a hill the winthrop fleet departed england in march 1630.
by the end of the first year almost two thousand people had arrived in massachusetts bay and before the great migration concluded in the early 1640s more than sixteen thousand men and women had arrived in the new puritan colony.
a great deal is known about the background of these particular settlers.
a large percentage of them originated in an area northeast of london called east anglia a region in which puritan ideas had taken deep root.
london kent and the west country also contributed to the stream of emigrants.
in some instances entire villages were reestablished across the atlantic.
many bay colonists had worked as farmers in england but a surprisingly large number came from industrial centers such as norwich where cloth was manufactured for the export trade.
whatever their backgrounds they moved to massachusetts as nuclear families fathers mothers and their dependent children a form of migration strikingly different from the one that peopled virginia and maryland.
moreover because the settlers had already formed families in england the colonys sex ratio was more balanced than that found in the chesapeake colonies.
finally and perhaps more significantly once they had arrived in massachusetts these men and women survived.
indeed their life expectancy compares favorably to that of modern americans.
many factors help explain this phenomenon clean drinking water and a healthy climate for example.
while the puritans could not have planned to live longer than did colonists in other parts of the new world this remarkable accident reduced the emotional shock of long distance migration.
the first settlers possessed another source of strength and stability.
they were bound together by a common sense of purpose.
god they insisted had formed a special covenant with the people of massachusetts bay.
on his part the lord expected them to live according to scripture to reform the church in other words to create an old testament city on a hill that would stand as a beacon of righteousness for the rest of the christian world.
if they fulfilled their side of the bargain the settlers could anticipate peace and prosperity.
no one not even the lowliest servant was excused from this divine covenant for as winthrop stated wee must be knitt together in this worke as one man even as the first ships were leaving england john cotton a popular puritan minister urged the emigrants to go forth with a publicke spirit looking not on your owne things only but also on the things of others many people throughout the ages have espoused such communal rhetoric but these particular men and women went about the business of forming a new colony as if they truly intended to transform a religious vision into social reality.
the bay colonists gradually came to accept a highly innovative form of church government known as congregationalism.
under the system each village church was independent of outside interference.
the american puritans of course wanted nothing of bishops.
the people the saints were the church and as a body they pledged to uphold gods law.
in the salem church for example the members covenanted with the lord and with one another and do bind ourselves in the presence of god to walk together in all his ways simply because a person happened to live in a certain community did not mean he or she automatically belonged to the local church.
th e churches of massachusetts were voluntary institutions and in order to join one a man or woman had to provide testimony a confession of faith before neighbors who had already been admitted as full members.
it was a demanding process.
whatever the personal strains however most men and women in early massachusetts aspired to full membership which entitled them to the sacraments and gave some of them responsibility for choosing ministers disciplining backsliders and determining difficult questions of theology.
although women and blacks could not vote for ministers they did become members of the congregational churches.
over the course of the seventeenth century women made up an increasingly large share of the membership.
some aspects of community religiosity in early massachusetts may of course strike modern americans as morbid.
ministers expected people convicted of capital crimes to offer a full public confession of their sins just before their own execution.
such rituals reinforced everyday moral values by reminding ordinary men and women those who listened to the confession of the fatal consequences awaiting those who ignored the teachings of scripture.
in creating a civil government the bay colonists faced a particularly difficult challenge.
their charter allowed the investors in a joint stock company to set up a business organization.
when the settlers arrived in america however company leaders men like winthrop moved quickly to transform the commercial structure into a colonial government.
an early step in this direction took place on may 18 1631 when the category of freeman was extended to all adult males who had become members of a congregational church.
this decision greatly expanded the franchise of massachusetts bay and historians estimate that during the 1630s at least 40 percent of the colonys adult males could vote in elections.
while this percentage may seem low by modern or even jacksonian standards it was higher than anything the emigrants would have known in england.
the freemen voted annually for a governor a group of magistrates called the court of assistants and after 1634 deputies who represented the interests of the individual towns.
even military officers were elected every year in massachusetts bay.
two popular misconceptions about this government should be dispelled.
it was neither a democracy nor a theocracy.
the magistrates elected in massachusetts did not believe they represented the voters much less the whole populace.
they ruled in the name of the electorate but their responsibility as rulers was to god.
in 1638 winthrop warned against overly democratic forms since the best part of the people is always the least and of that best part the wiser is always the lesser and second the congregational ministers possessed no formal political authority in massachusetts bay.
they could not even hold civil office and it was not unusual for the voters to ignore the recommendations of a respected minister such as john cotton.
in new england the town became the center of public life.
in other regions of british america where the county was the focus of local government people did not experience the same density of social and institutional interaction.
in massachusetts complete the assignment the children who refused to come home captivity and conversion on myhistorylab feature essay the children who refused to come home captivity and conversion portrait of esther wheelwright as an ursuline nun.
t he spread of terrorism throughout the modern world and reports of journalists and civilian workers captured in war zones have forced many americans to contemplate a deeply unsettling question how would they behave if they were kidnapped by members of a group hostile to the fundamental values of the united states.
such concerns are not new.
during the colonial period new englanders who settled along the frontier with french canada knew that at any moment they might be carried away to quebec or montreal as captives and under fearful conditions might discover the fragility of their own ethnic and religious identities.
between 1675 and 1763 the french and british empires waged almost constant war.
often the conflicts turned on dynastic rivalries in europe but whatever the causes the fighting extended to north america where in an effort to contain the expansion of english settlement the french and their indian allies raided exposed communities from the coast of maine to western massachusetts.
during these years approximately 1 641 english colonists were taken captive nearly half of them children and many other people died in the violent clashes.
on the long trek back to canada the french and indians killed those prisoners who resisted or who were too weak to keep up the pace.
the reverend cotton mather new englands most influential late seventeenth century minister invited his parishioners to imagine the terrifying experience of capture the captives.
are every minute looking when they shall be roasted alive to make a sport and a feast for the most execrable cannibals.
captives that must see their nearest relations butchered before their eyes and yet be afraid of letting those eyes drop a tear although the french aimed to advance their imperial designs through attacks on english settlements their indian allies often entered the frontier wars for different reasons.
the abenaki for example harbored grievances against the english colonists from earlier conflicts and hoped with the help of the french to reap vengeance on them.
other indian groups regarded the english captives as a source of revenue.
after all someone from massachusetts was sure to offer a ransom for an unfortunate relative and as one might predict in such a market the price of liberation rose substantially over time.
the mohawk indians however viewed the captives as replacements for warriors killed in battle and whenever possible they worked to incorporate the new englanders into their own culture.
they knew from experience that children especially young girls offered the best prospects for successful adoption.
for the french and many of their indian allies who had converted to catholicism religion served to justify frontier violence.
french officials championed the catholic faith and they regarded new englanders not only as representatives of the british empire but also as protestant heretics.
the english gave as good as they got.
they accepted as absolute truth that catholicism was an utterly corrupt religion and that priests especially jesuits could not be trusted in spiritual matters.
french religious and political leaders looked upon new england captives as possible converts to catholicism for in this ongoing imperial controversy news that an english protestant had given up his or her faith for rome represented a major symbolic victory.
as historian james axtell explained if the english could not preserve their religious identities as captives then their pretensions to the status as gods chosen people.
would be cast in grave doubt the odds of converting young new englanders to catholicism in these circumstances must have appeared extraordinarily small.
the captives taken in war had come from highly religious communities where they had received regular instruction in the basic tenets of reformed protestantism.
as children puritans learned to equate the pope with satan.
their forefathers had traveled to the new world to cleanse the church of england from practices associated with catholicism.
and yet amazingly once they arrived in canada a significant number of prisoners perhaps as much as fifty percent accepted the catholic faith married french or indian spouses and settled comfortably into the routines of life in canada.
one such convert was esther wheelwright.
abenaki indians captured her in wells maine in 1703 when she was only seven years old and adopted her.
she was later taken in by nuns who taught her french.
she became a keen student of catholicism.
over time the sincerity of her new faith won her many admirers and eventually esther renamed esther marie joseph de lenfant jesus became an ursuline nun.
some years later she was appointed superior of the entire ursuline order in canada.
when new englanders attempted to negotiate her release they discovered that she does not wish to return because of the change of her religion esthers mother and father reluctantly accepted their daughters decision.
they even gave money to her convent and in recognition of their generosity and forgiveness she sent a portrait of herself as a nun to her bewildered protestant family.
in the long contest for religious and cultural superiority eunice williams posed an even more difficult challenge for new englanders.
after all she was the daughter of a leading congregational minister no one doubted the quality of her religious instruction.
eunices ordeal began on february 29 1704 when a large force of french and indians overran deerfield an agricultural community in western massachusetts.
within a short time the raiders killed many inhabitants including several members of her family.
her mother died during the long march to canada.
eventually the reverend williams negotiated his freedom as well as that of several surviving children.
eunice refused to join them.
she had fallen in love with an indian and although friends and relatives begged her to reject catholicism and life among the kahnawake mohawks she politely but firmly rejected their pleas.
over the next several decades eunice and her indian husband visited new england.
on one occasion in 1741 her cousin the reverend solomon williams pointed out in a sermon that eunice had accepted the thickness of popish darkness superstition lamenting her pitiful and sorrowful condition he urged her to reaffirm the faith of her father.
unhappily for solomon eunice had forgotten all that she once knew of the english language and so the force of his shrill condemnation was lost on her.
no society easily accepts rejection.
new englanders struggled to comprehend why so many of their children would not come home and they tried as best they could to explain to themselves why eunice and the other captives refused to be redeemed.
they assured each other that crafty priests had bribed or even coerced the children.
a few ministers such as cotton mather and eunices father suggested that god had punished the protestant communities for their sinful behavior.
whatever contemporaries may have thought of these accounts modern historians have demonstrated that catholic priests seldom employed force or promises of worldly goods in winning converts.
some captives may have felt gratitude to the french and indians who had spared their lives.
but undoubtedly love marriage and a growing sense of security in a new society helped sever ties with a new england culture that slowly faded from memory.
the reverend john williamss own narrative of the deerfield captives entitled the redeemed captive returning to zion 1707 addressed the crisis.
it became a best seller in a colony eager to hear the story of those redeemed from captivity those returned to the fold.
at the end of the day however the problem of abandoning ones nation and ones faith continued to haunt ordinary men and women who fervently identified with england and protestantism.
by turning their backs on european civilization english culture and the protestant religion these captives challenged foundational values even more powerfully than did the french and indians.
questions for discussion 1.
why did so many new england captives refuse to return home.
why did the french and indians view english children especially young girls as the most likely converts to their religion and way of life.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies groups of men and women voluntarily covenanted together to observe common goals.
the community constructed a meetinghouse where religious services and town meetings were held.
this powerful sense of shared purpose something that later americans have greatly admired should not obscure the fact that the founders of new england towns also had a keen eye for personal profit.
seventeenth century records reveal that speculators often made a good deal of money from selling shares in village lands.
but acquisitiveness never got out of control and recent studies have shown that entrepreneurial practices rarely disturbed the peace of the puritan communities.
inhabitants generally received land sufficient to build a house to support a family.
although villagers escaped the kind of feudal dues collected in other parts of america they were expected to contribute to the ministers salary pay local and colony taxes and serve in the militia.
limits of religious dissent the european settlers of massachusetts bay managed to live in peace at least with each other.
this was a remarkable achievement considering the chronic instability that plagued other colonies at this time.
the bay colonists disagreed over many issues sometimes vociferously whole towns disputed with neighboring villages over common boundaries.
but the people inevitably relied on the civil courts to mediate differences.
they believed in a rule of law and in 1648 the colonial legislature called the general court drew up the lawes and liberties the first alphabetized code of law printed in english.
this is a document of fundamental importance in american constitutional history.
in clear prose it explained to ordinary colonists their rights and responsibilities as citizens of the commonwealth.
the code engendered public trust in government and discouraged magistrates from the arbitrary exercise of authority.
the puritans never supported the concept of religious toleration.
they transferred to the new world to preserve their own freedom of worship about religious freedom of those deemed heretics they expressed little concern.
the most serious challenges to puritan orthodoxy in massachusetts bay came from two brilliantly charismatic individuals.
the first roger williams arrived in 1631 and immediately attracted a body of loyal followers.
indeed everyone seemed to have liked williams as a person.
williamss religious ideas however created controversy.
he preached extreme separatism.
the bay colonists he exclaimed were impure in the sight of the lord so long as they remained even nominal members of the church of england.
moreover he questioned the validity of the colonys charter since the king had not first purchased the land from the indians a view that threatened the integrity of the entire colonial experiment.
williams also insisted that the civil rulers of massachusetts had no business punishing settlers for their religious beliefs.
it was gods responsibility not mens to monitor peoples consciences.
the bay magistrates were prepared neither to tolerate heresy nor to accede to williamss other demands and in 1636 after attempts to reach a compromise had failed they banished him from the colony.
williams worked out the logic of his ideas in providence a village he founded in what would become rhode island.
the magistrates of massachusetts bay rightly concluded that the second individual anne hutchinson posed an even graver threat to the peace of the commonwealth.
this extremely intelligent woman her husband william and her children followed john cotton to the new world in 1634.
even contemporaries found her religious ideas usually termed antinomianism somewhat confusing.
whatever her thoughts hutchinson shared them with other bostonians many of them women.
her outspoken views scandalized orthodox leaders of church and state.
she suggested that all but two ministers in the colony had lost touch with the holy spirit and were preaching a doctrine in the congregational churches that was little better than that of archbishop laud.
when authorities demanded she explain her unusual opinions she suggested that she experienced divine inspiration independently of either the bible or the clergy.
in other words hutchinsons teachings could not be tested by scripture a position that seemed dangerously subjective.
indeed hutchinsons theology called the very foundation of massachusetts bay into question.
without clear external standards one persons truth was as valid as anyone elses and from winthrops perspective hutchinsons teachings invited civil and religious anarchy.
but her challenge to authority was not simply theological.
as a woman her aggressive speech sparked a deeply misogynistic response from the colonys male leaders.
when this woman described congregational ministers some of them the leading divines of boston as unconverted men the general court intervened.
for two very tense days in 1637 the ministers and magistrates of massachusetts bay crossexamined hutchinson in this intense theological debate she more than held her own.
she knew as much about the bible as did her inquisitors.
hutchinson defied the ministers and magistrates to demonstrate exactly where she had gone wrong.
just when it appeared hutchinson had outmaneuvered indeed thoroughly embarrassed her opponents she let down her guard declaring forcefully that what she knew of god came by an immediate revelation.
by the voice of his own spirit to my soul here was what her accusers had suspected all along but could not prove.
she had confessed in open court that the spirit can live without the moral law.
this antinomian statement fulfilled the worst fears of the bay rulers and they were relieved to exile hutchinson and her followers to rhode island.
mobility and division massachusetts bay spawned four new colonies three of which survived to the american revolution.
new hampshire became a separate colony in 1677.
its population grew very slowly and for much of the colonial period new hampshire remained economically dependent on massachusetts its commercial neighbor to the south.
far more people were drawn to the fertile lands of the connecticut river valley.
in 1636 settlers founded the villages of hartford windsor and wethersfield.
no one forced these men and women to leave massachusetts and in their new surroundings they created a society that looked much like the one they had reforming england in america connecti cut r maine part of mass.
new hampshire part of mass.
hudson r portsmouth massachusetts bay salem boston hartford new haven providence plymouth wethersfield connecticut new haven new haven conn conn new n e t h e r l and narragansett bay rhode island atlantic ocean not surprisingly these men and women appreciated the need for toleration.
no one was persecuted in rhode island for his or her religious beliefs.
one might have thought the separate rhode island communities would cooperate for the common good.
they did not.
villagers fought over land and schemed with outside speculators to divide the tiny colony into even smaller pieces.
in 1644 parliament issued a patent for the providence plantations and in 1663 the rhode islanders obtained a royal charter.
these successes did not calm political turmoil.
for most of the seventeenth century colonywide government existed in name only.
despite their constant bickering however the settlers of rhode island built up a profitable commerce in agricultural goods.
allies and enemies plymouth windsor 100 miles 100 kilometers new england colonies 1650 the early settlers quickly carved up new england.
new haven briefly flourished as a separate colony before being taken over by connecticut in 1662.
long island later became part of new york plymouth was absorbed into massachusetts and in 1677 new hampshire became a separate colony.
known in the bay colony.
through his writings thomas hooker connecticuts most prominent minister helped all new englanders define congregational church polity.
puritans on both sides of the atlantic read hookers beautifully crafted works.
in 1639 representatives from the connecticut towns passed the fundamental orders a blueprint for civil government and in 1662 charles ii awarded the colony a charter of its own.
in 1638 another group led by theophilus eaton and the reverend john davenport settled new haven and several adjoining towns along long island sound.
these emigrants many of whom had come from london lived briefly in massachusetts bay but then insisted on forming a puritan commonwealth of their own one that established a closer relationship between church and state than the bay colonists had allowed.
the new haven colony never prospered and in 1662 it was absorbed into connecticut.
rhode island experienced a wholly different history.
from the beginning it drew people of a highly independent turn of mind and according to one dutch visitor rhode island was the receptacle of all sorts of riff raff people.
all the cranks of new england retire thither this description of course was an exaggeration.
roger williams founded providence in 1636 two years later anne hutchinson took her followers to portsmouth.
other groups settled around narragansett bay.
puritan expansion in new england did not occur unopposed.
during the 1620s the pequots a numerous tribe whose home territory centered on the thames and mystic rivers dominated the trade of southern new england.
the pequots collected furs from other indian peoples in the region sold them to the dutch and then resold the european goods they obtained to their indian clients.
this middleman status proved highly profitable for the pequots giving them first access to the metal weapons firearms and other tools sold by the dutch.
their commercial and military power allowed the pequots to impose their political control over much of the region and to force their trading partners to pay them tribute.
the founding of the english colonies offered potential new trading partners for the indians of new england.
the pilgrims and puritans may have come to new england for religious reasons but this did not stop them from participating in the regions lucrative fur trade.
the pequots resented this intrusion.
they saw the english traders as a threat to their regional power.
the english for their part saw the dutch and their pequot trading partners as a challenge to english control of new england.
in 1636 an english trader named john oldham was killed by unknown indians.
the english eventually came to blame the pequots resulting in war.
the english allied themselves with the mohegan indians a tribe that had formerly been tributaries to the pequots and the narragansetts who had recently had some of their land seized by the pequots.
the pequot nation was already in decline when the war started.
the pequots had been ravaged by epidemic disease in 1619 and 1633.
from a pre contact population of 13 000 only 3 000 pequots remained.
the pequot war as it came to be known all but destroyed the tribe.
the english and their allies quickly routed the pequots.
the english waged an especially vicious campaign.
for example in 1637 english soldiers surrounded a pequot village on the mystic river that contained mostly women children and old men.
the english soldiers set the village on fi re and then shot down any pequots who tried to escape.
after the war the english took most of the surviving pequots as slaves giving some to their allies and selling the remainder to the english plantations in the west indies.
the english won the war but their savage tactics alienated their indian allies.
chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies diversity in the middle colonies how did ethnic diversity shape the development of the middle colonies.
new york new jersey pennsylvania and delaware were settled for quite different reasons.
william penn for example envisioned a quaker sanctuary the duke of york worried chiefly about his own income.
despite the founders intentions however some common characteristics emerged.
each colony developed a strikingly heterogeneous population men and women of different ethnic and religious backgrounds.
this cultural diversity became a major influence on the economic political and ecclesiastical institutions of the middle colonies.
the raucous partisan public life of the middle colonies foreshadowed later american society.
anglo dutch rivalry on the hudson by the early decades of the seventeenth century the dutch had established themselves as europes most aggressive traders.
holland a small loosely federated nation possessed the worlds largest merchant fleet.
its ships vied for the commerce of asia africa and america.
dutch rivalry with spain a fading though still formidable power was in large measure responsible for the settlement of new netherland.
while searching for the ce fran abenaki lake champlain new york lake ontario mahican ware r ela hudson r mass.
na r ehan susqu d pennsylvania n h albany iroquois confederation ie er ke a l connecticut r.
w ne delaware lenni lenape conn new york east jersey germantown philadelphia susquehannock md.
va west jersey atlantic ocean three counties of delaware 100 miles 100 kilometers middle colonies 1685 until the revolution the iroquois blocked european expansion into western new york.
the jerseys and pennsylvania initially attracted english and irish quakers who were soon joined by thousands of protestant irish and germans.
elusive northwest passage in 1609 henry hudson an english explorer employed by a dutch company sailed up the river that now bears his name.
further voyages led to the establishment of trading posts in new netherland and on the connecticut river although permanent settlement at new netherland did not occur until 1624.
the area also seemed an excellent base from which to attack spains colonies in the new world.
the directors of the dutch west india company sponsored two small outposts fort orange albany located well up the hudson river and new amsterdam new york city on manhattan island.
the first dutch settlers were not actually colonists.
rather they were salaried employees and their superiors in holland expected them to spend most of their time gathering animal furs.
they did not receive land for their troubles.
needless to say this arrangement attracted relatively few dutch immigrants.
the colonys population may have been small only 270 in 1628 but it contained an extraordinary ethnic mix.
one visitor to new amsterdam in 1644 maintained he had heard eighteen different languages spoken in the city.
even if this report was exaggerated there is no doubt the dutch colony drew english finns germans and swedes.
by the 1640s a sizable community of free blacks probably former slaves who had gained their freedom through self purchase had developed in new amsterdam adding african tongues to the cacophony of languages.
the colonys culture was further fragmented by new england puritans who left massachusetts and connecticut to stake out farms on eastern long island.
new netherland lacked capable leadership.
the company sent a number of director generals to oversee judicial and political affairs.
without exception these men were temperamentally unsuited to govern an american colony.
they adopted autocratic procedures lined their own pockets and in one case blundered into a war that needlessly killed scores of indians and settlers.
the company made no provision for an elected assembly.
as much as they were able the scattered inhabitants living along the hudson river ignored company directives.
they felt no loyalty to the trading company that had treated them so shabbily.
long island puritans complained bitterly about the absence of representative institutions.
the dutch system has aptly been described as unstable pluralism in august 1664 the dutch lost their tenuous hold on new netherland.
the english crown eager to score an easy victory over a commercial rival dispatched a fleet of warships to new amsterdam.
the commander of this force colonel richard nicolls ordered the colonists to surrender.
the last director general a colorful character named peter stuyvesant 1647 1664 rushed wildly about the city urging the settlers to resist the english.
but no one obeyed.
even the dutch remained deaf to stuyvesants appeals.
they accepted the articles of capitulation a generous agreement that allowed dutch nationals to remain in the province and to retain their property.
charles ii had already granted his brother james the duke of york a charter for the newly captured territory and much else besides.
the duke became absolute proprietor over maine marthas vineyard nantucket long island and the rest of new york all the way to delaware bay.
the king perhaps diversity in the middle colonies read the document father isaac jogues description of new york 1640 it had been under the dutch west india company a loose collection of independent communities ruled by an ineffectual central government.
confusion in new jersey only three months after receiving a charter for new york the duke of york made a terrible mistake something this stubborn humorless man was prone to do.
as a gift to two courtiers who had served charles during the english civil war the duke awarded the land lying between the hudson and delaware rivers to john lord berkeley and sir george carteret.
this colony was named new jersey in honor of carterets birthplace the isle of jersey in the english channel.
when nicolls heard what the duke had done he exploded.
in his estimation this fertile region contained the most improveable land in all new york and to give it away so casually seemed the height of folly.
the dukes impulsive act bred confusion.
soon it was not clear who owned what in new jersey.
before nicolls had learned of jamess decision the governor had allowed migrants from new england to take up farms west of the map of new york city presented to james duke of york the future james ii shortly after the english hudson river.
he promised the settlers an captured new amsterdam from the dutch in 1664 opportunity to establish an elected assembly a headright system and liberty of wanted to encircle new englands potentially disloyal puritan conscience.
in exchange for these privileges nicolls asked only that population but whatever his aims may have been he created a they pay a small annual quitrent to the duke.
the new proprietors bureaucratic nightmare.
berkeley and carteret recruited colonists on similar terms.
they assumed of course that they would receive the rent money.
during the english civil war the duke had acquired a thorthe result was chaos.
some colonists insisted that nicolls had ough aversion to representative government.
after all parliament authorized their assembly.
others equally insistent claimed that had executed the dukes father charles i and raised up oliver berkeley and carteret had done so.
both sides were wrong.
neither cromwell.
the new proprietor had no intention of letting such a the proprietors nor nicolls possessed any legal right whatsoever participatory system take root in new york.
i cannot but suspect to set up a colonial government.
james could transfer land to the duke announced that an assembly would be of dangerous favorite courtiers but no matter how many times the land changed consequence the long islanders felt betrayed.
in part to appease hands the government remained his personal responsibility.
these outspoken critics governor nicolls one of the few compeknowledge of the law failed to quiet the controversy.
through it all tent administrators to serve in the middle colonies drew up in the duke showed not the slightest interest in the peace and welfare march 1665 a legal code known as the dukes laws.
it guaranteed of the people of new jersey.
religious toleration and created local governments.
berkeley grew tired of the venture.
it generated headaches there was no provision however for an elected assembly or rather than income and in 1674 he sold his proprietary rights for that matter for democratic town meetings.
the legal code disapto a group of surprisingly quarrelsome quakers.
the sale necespointed the puritan migrants on long island and when the dukes sitated the division of the colony into two separate governments officers attempted to collect taxes these people protested that they known as east and west jersey.
neither half prospered.
carteret were inslavd under an arbitrary power and his heirs tried unsuccessfully to turn a profit in east jersey.
the dutch kept silent.
for several decades they remained in 1677 the quaker proprietors of west jersey issued a remarka large unassimilated ethnic group.
they continued to speak able democratic plan of government the laws concessions and their own language worship in their own churches dutch agreements.
but they fought among themselves with such intenreformed calvinist and eye their english neighbors with sity that not even william penn could bring tranquility to their suspicion.
in fact the colony seemed little different from what chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies affairs.
penn wisely turned his attention to the unclaimed territory across the delaware river.
the west jersey proprietors went bankrupt and in 1702 the crown reunited the two jerseys into a single royal colony.
in 1700 the population of new jersey stood at approximately fourteen thousand.
largely because it lacked a good deepwater harbor the colony never developed a commercial center to rival new york city or philadelphia.
its residents lived on scattered often isolated farms villages of more than a few hundred people were rare.
visitors commented on the diversity of the settlers.
there were colonists from almost every european nation.
congregationalists presbyterians quakers baptists anabaptists and anglicans somehow managed to live together peacefully in new jersey.
read the document william penn model for government 1681 quakers in america how did the quaker religion influence the development of pennsylvania.
the founding of pennsylvania cannot be separated from the history of the quaker movement.
believers in an extreme form of antinomianism the quakers saw no need for a learned ministry since one persons interpretation of scripture was as valid as anyone elses.
this radical religious sect a product of the social upheaval in england during the civil war gained its name from the derogatory term that english authorities sometimes used to describe those who tremble at the word of the lord the name persisted even though the quakers preferred being called professors of the light or more commonly friends.
quaker beliefs and practice by the time the stuarts regained the throne in 1660 the quakers had developed strong support throughout england.
one person responsible for their remarkable success was george fox 1624 1691 a poor shoemaker whose own spiritual anxieties sparked a powerful new religious message that pushed beyond traditional reformed protestantism.
according to fox he experienced despair so that i had nothing outwardly to help me.
but then i heard a voice which said there is one even christ jesus that can speak to thy condition throughout his life fox and his growing number of followers gave testimony to the working of the holy spirit.
indeed they informed ordinary men and women that if only they would look they too would discover they possessed an inner light this was a wonderfully liberating invitation especially for persons of lower class origin.
with the lords personal assistance they could attain greater spiritual perfection on earth.
gone was the stigma of original sin discarded was the notion of eternal predestination.
everyone could be saved.
quakers practiced humility in their daily lives.
they wore simple clothes and employed old fashioned forms of address that set them apart from their neighbors.
friends refused to honor worldly position and accomplishment or to swear oaths in courts of law.
they were also pacifists.
according to fox all persons were william penn 1644 1718 received a charter for pennsylvania from king charles ii in 1681.
penn intended his colony to serve as a religious haven for both his fellow quakers who faced persecution both from the church of england and from the puritans in new england and for members of other persecuted protestant sects.
equal in the sight of the lord a belief that generally annoyed people of rank and achievement.
moreover the quakers never kept their thoughts to themselves.
they preached conversion constantly spreading the truth throughout england ireland and america.
the friends played important roles in the early history of new jersey rhode island and north carolina as well as pennsylvania.
in some places the publishers of truth wore out their welcome.
english authorities harassed the quakers.
thousands including fox himself were jailed and in massachusetts bay between 1659 and 1661 puritan magistrates ordered several friends put to death.
such measures proved counterproductive for persecution only inspired the martyred quakers to redouble their efforts.
penns holy experiment william penn lived according to the inner light a commitment that led eventually to the founding of pennsylvania.
penn possessed a curiously complex personality.
he was an athletic quakers in america person who threw himself into intellectual pursuits.
he was a bold visionary capable of making pragmatic decisions.
he came from an aristocratic family and yet spent his entire adult life involved with a religious movement associated with the lower class.
precisely when penns thoughts turned to america is not known.
he was briefly involved with the west jersey proprietorship.
this venture may have suggested the possibility of an even larger enterprise.
in any case penn negotiated in 1681 one of the more impressive land deals in the history of american real estate.
charles ii awarded penn a charter making him the sole proprietor of a vast area called pennsylvania literally penns woods.
the name embarrassed the modest penn but he knew better than to look the royal gift horse in the mouth.
why the king bestowed such generosity on a leading quaker remains a mystery.
perhaps charles wanted to repay an old debt to penns father.
the monarch may have regarded the colony as a means of ridding england of its troublesome quaker population or quite simply he may have liked penn.
in 1682 the new proprietor purchased from the duke of york the so called three lower counties that eventually became delaware.
this astute move guaranteed that pennsylvania would have access to the atlantic and determined even before philadelphia had been established that it would become a commercial center.
in designing his government penn drew heavily on the writings of james harrington 1611 1677.
this english political philosopher argued that no government could ever be stable unless it refl ected the actual distribution of landed property within society.
both the rich and poor had to have a voice in political affairs neither should be able to overrule the legitimate interests of the other class.
the frame of government envisioned a governor appointed by the proprietor a 72 member provincial council responsible for initiating legislation and a 200 person assembly that could accept or reject the bills presented to it.
penn apparently thought the council would be filled by the colonys richest landholders or in the words of the frame persons of most note for their wisdom virtue and ability the governor and council were charged with the routine administration of justice.
smaller landowners spoke through the assembly.
it was a clumsy structure and in america the entire edifice crumbled under its own weight.
settling pennsylvania penn promoted his colony aggressively throughout england ireland and germany.
he had no choice.
his only source of revenue was the sale of land and the collection of quitrents.
penn commissioned pamphlets in several languages extolling the quality of pennsylvanias rich farmland.
the response was overwhelming.
people poured into philadelphia and the surrounding area.
in 1685 alone eight thousand immigrants arrived.
most of the settlers were irish welsh and english quakers and they generally moved to america as families.
but penn opened the door to men and women of all nations.
he asserted that the people of pennsylvania are a collection of divers nations in europe as french dutch germans swedes danes finns scotch irish and english the settlers were by no means all quakers.
the founder of germantown francis daniel pastorius called the vessel that read the document letter by william penn to the committee of the free society of traders 1683 william penns plan for philadelphia shows the city laid out where the schuylkill and delaware rivers parallel each other.
four of the five public squares were intended to be parks while the fifth at the center was designated for public buildings.
today it is the site of philadelphias city hall.
brought him to the new world a noahs ark of religions and within his own household there were servants who subscribed to the roman catholic to the lutheran to the calvinistic to the anabaptist and to the anglican church and only one quaker ethnic and religious diversity were crucial in the development of pennsylvanias public institutions and its politics took on a quarrelsome quality absent in more homogeneous colonies such as virginia and massachusetts.
penn himself emigrated to america in 1682.
his stay however was unexpectedly short and unhappy.
the council and assembly reduced now to more manageable size fought over the right to initiate legislation.
wealthy quaker merchants most of them residents of philadelphia dominated the council.
by contrast the assembly included men from rural settlements and the three lower counties who showed no concern for the holy experiment.
penn did not see his colony again until 1699.
during his absence much had changed.
the settlement had prospered.
its agricultural products especially its excellent wheat were in demand throughout the atlantic world.
despite this economic success however the population remained deeply divided.
even the quakers had briefly split into hostile factions.
penns handpicked governors had failed to win general support for the proprietors policies and one of them exclaimed in anger that each quaker prays for his neighbor on first days and then preys on him the other six as the seventeenth century closed few colonists still shared the founders desire to create a godly paternalistic society.
in 1701 legal challenges in england again forced penn to depart for the mother country.
just before he sailed penn signed the charter of liberties a new frame of government chapt er 2 new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies that established a unicameral or one house legislature the only one in colonial america and gave the representatives the right to initiate bills.
penn also allowed the assembly to conduct its business without proprietary interference.
the charter provided for the political separation of the three lower counties delaware from pennsylvania something people living in the area had demanded for years.
this hastily drafted document served as pennsylvanias constitution until the american revolution.
his experience in america must have depressed penn now both old and sick.
in england penn was imprisoned for debts incurred by dishonest colonial agents and in 1718 pennsylvanias founder died a broken man.
planting the carolinas how did the barbadian background of the early settlers shape the economic development of the carolinas.
in some ways carolina society looked much like the one that had developed in virginia and maryland.
in both areas white planters forced african slaves to produce staple crops for a world market.
but such superficial similarities masked substantial regional differences.
in fact the south certainly the fabled solid south of the early nineteenth century did not exist during the colonial period.
the carolinas joined much later by georgia stood apart from their northern neighbors.
as a historian of colonial carolina explained the southern colonies were never a cohesive section in the same way that new england was.
the great diversity of population groups.
discouraged southern sectionalism proprietors of the carolinas carolina was a product of the restoration of the stuarts to the english throne.
court favorites who had followed the stuarts into exile during the civil war demanded tangible rewards for their loyalty.
new york and new jersey were obvious plums.
so too was carolina.
sir john colleton a successful english planter returned from barbados organized a group of eight powerful courtiers who styled themselves the true and absolute lords proprietors of carolina.
on march 24 1663 the king granted these proprietors a charter to the vast territory between virginia and florida and running west as far as the south seas the failure of similar ventures in the new world taught the carolina proprietors valuable lessons.
unlike the first virginians for example this group did not expect instant wealth.
rather the proprietors reasoned that they would obtain a steady source of income from rents.
what they needed of course were settlers to pay those rents.
recruitment turned out to be no easy task.
economic and social conditions in the mother country improved considerably after its civil war and english people were no longer so willing to transfer to the new world.
even if they had shown interest the cost of transporting settlers across the atlantic seemed prohibitively expensive.
the proprietors concluded therefore that with the proper incentives a generous land policy for example they could attract men and women from established american colonies and thereby save themselves a great deal of money.
unfortunately for the men who owned carolina such people were not easily persuaded.
they had begun to take for granted certain rights and privileges and as the price of settlement they demanded a representative assembly liberty of conscience and a liberal headright system.
colleton and his associates waited for the money to roll in but to their dismay no one seemed particularly interested in moving to the carolina frontier.
a tiny settlement at port royal failed.
one group of new englanders briefly considered taking up land in the cape fear area but these people were so disappointed by what they saw that they departed leaving behind only a sign that tended not only to the disparagement of the land.
but also to the great discouragement of all those that should hereafter come into these parts to settle by this time a majority of surviving proprietors had given up on carolina.
the barbadian connection anthony ashley cooper later earl of shaftesbury was the exception.
in 1669 he persuaded the remaining carolinian proprietors to invest their own capital in the colony.
without such financial support cooper recognized the project would surely fail.
once he received sufficient funds this energetic organizer dispatched three hundred english colonists to port royal under the command of joseph west.
the fleet put in briefly at barbados to pick up additional recruits and in march 1670 after being punished by atlantic gales that destroyed one ship the expedition arrived at its destination.
only one hundred people were still alive.
the unhappy settlers did not remain long at port royal an unappealing low lying place badly exposed to spanish attack.
they moved northward locating eventually along the more secure ashley river.
later the colonys administrative center charles town it did not become charleston until 1783 was established at the junction of the ashley and cooper rivers.
cooper also wanted to bring order to the new society.
with assistance from john locke the famous english philosopher 1632 1704 cooper devised the fundamental constitutions of carolina.
like penn cooper had been influenced by the writings of harrington.
the constitutions created a local aristocracy consisting of proprietors and lesser nobles called landgraves and cassiques terms as inappropriate to the realities of the new world as was the idea of creating a hereditary landed elite.
persons who purchased vast tracts of land automatically received a title and the right to sit in the council of nobles a body designed to administer justice oversee civil affairs and initiate legislation.
a parliament in which smaller landowners had a voice and could accept or reject bills drafted by the council.
the very poor were excluded from political life altogether.
cooper thought his scheme maintained the proper balance of government between aristocracy and democracy a concept central to harringtons philosophy.
not surprisingly the constitutions had little impact on the actual structure of government.
planting the carolinas before 1680 almost half the men and women who settled in the port royal area came from barbados.
this small caribbean island which produced an annual fortune in sugar depended on slave labor.
by the third quarter of the seventeenth century barbados had become overpopulated.
wealthy families could not provide their sons and daughters with sufficient land to maintain social status and as the crisis intensified barbadians looked to carolina for relief.
these migrants many of whom were quite rich traveled to carolina both as individuals and family groups.
some even brought gangs of slaves with them to the american mainland.
the barbadians carved out plantations on the tributaries of the cooper river and established themselves immediately as the colonys most powerful political faction.
so it was wrote historian richard dunn that these caribbean pioneers helped to create on the north american coast a slave based plantation society closer in temper to the islands they fled from than to any other mainland english settlement much of the planters time was taken up with the search for a profitable crop.
the early settlers experimented with a number of plants tobacco cotton silk and grapes.
the most successful items turned out to be beef skins and naval stores especially tar used to maintain ocean vessels.
by the 1680s some carolinians had built up great herds of cattle seven or eight hundred head in some cases.
traders who dealt with indians brought back thousands of deerskins from the interior and they often returned with indian slaves as well.
these commercial resources together with tar and turpentine enjoyed a good market.
it was not until the 1690s that englands principal mainland colonies original purpose virginia new amsterdam new york plymouth commercial venture 1607 commercial venture 1613 made english colony 1664 captain john smith peter stuyvesant duke of york tobacco furs grain 64 560 19 107 refuge for english 1620 absorbed by separatists massachusetts 1691 commercial venture 1623 william bradford grain john mason refuge for english puritans refuge for english catholics expansion of massachusetts refuge for dissenters from massachusetts commercial venture john winthrop wood naval stores grain wood included with massachusetts 4 958 55 941 tobacco 34 100 lord baltimore george calvert thomas hooker grain 25 970 roger williams grain 5 894 peter minuit william penn grain 2 470 anthony ashley cooper anthony ashley cooper sir george carteret wood naval 10 720 stores tobacco naval stores 5 720 rice indigo grain 14 010 william penn grain 18 950 james oglethorpe rice wood naval stores 5 200 in 1750 new hampshire massachusetts maryland connecticut rhode island new sweden delaware date of founding north carolina 1638 included in penn grant 1681 given separate assembly 1703 commercial venture 1663 south carolina commercial venture 1663 new jersey consolidation of new 1664 english territory quaker settlement refuge for english quakers discourage spanish 1733 expansion charity pennsylvania georgia principal founder major export estimated population ca.
1700 name sources u s bureau of the census historical statistics of the united states colonial times to 1970 washington dc 1975 john j mccusker and russell r menard the economy of british america 1607 1789 chapel hill 1985.
new world experiments englands seventeenth century colonies pennsylvania claimed by virginia ee r an tuscarora ca north pe carolina r r chattahoochee wilmington cape fear south carolina yamasee georgetown charles town savannah creek added to georgia 1763 st marks albemarle sound r new bern r d oa br georgia chesapeake bay.
rr catawba roa no ke a fe pa cherokee williamsburg virginia d ee ap i ch la ta un mo s in e pe te nn es s carolina grant 1663 n j baltimore del.
shenandoah r james r spani the founding of georgia md.
va er sa l ge mu oc the planters came to appreciate fully the value of rice but once they had done so it quickly became the colonys main staple.
proprietary carolina was in a constant political uproar.
factions vied for special privilege.
the barbadian settlers known locally as the goose creek men resisted the proprietors policies at every turn.
a large community of french huguenots located in craven county distrusted the barbadians.
the proprietors an ineffectual group following the death of cooper appointed a series of utterly incompetent governors who only made things worse.
one visitor observed that the inhabitants of carolina should be as free from oppression as any people in the universe.
if their own differences amongst themselves do not occasion the contrary by the end of the century the commons house of assembly had assumed the right to initiate legislation.
in 1719 the colonists overthrew the last proprietary governor and in 1729 the king created separate royal governments for north and south carolina.
r chapt er 2 coo sa atlantic ocean altamaha r sh st augustine timucua f carolina grant 1663 ri da the early history of georgia was strikingly different from that of britains other mainland colonies.
its settlement was really an act of aggression against spain a country that had as good a claim to this area as did the english.
during the eighteenth century the two nations were often at war see chapter 4 and south carolinians worried that the spaniards moving up from bases in florida would occupy the disputed territory between florida and the carolina grant.
the colony owed its existence primarily to james oglethorpe a british general and member of parliament who believed that he could thwart spanish designs on the area south of charles town while at the same time providing a fresh start for londons worthy poor saving them from debtors prison.
although oglethorpe envisioned georgia as an asylum as well as a garrison the military aspects of his proposal were especially appealing to the leaders of the british government.
in 1732 the king granted oglethorpe and a board of trustees a charter for a new colony to be located between the savannah and altamaha rivers and from sea to sea the trustees living in the mother country were given complete control over georgia politics a condition the settlers soon found intolerable.
during the first years of colonization georgia fared no better than had earlier utopian experiments.
the poor people of england showed little desire to move to an inclement frontier and the trustees in their turn provided little incentive for emigration.
each colonist received only 50 acres.
another 50 acres could be added for each servant transported to georgia but in no case could a settler amass more than 500 acres.
moreover land could be passed only to an eldest son and if a planter had no sons at the time of his death the holding reverted to the trustees.
slavery was prohibited.
so too was rum.
almost as soon as they arrived in georgia the settlers complained.
the colonists demanded slaves pointing out to the gulf of mexico lo how was the founding of the carolinas different from the founding of georgia.
lake okeechobee boundary lines of colonies 1740 200 miles 200 kilometers the carolinas and georgia caribbean sugar planters migrated to the goose creek area where with knowledge supplied by african slaves they eventually mastered rice cultivation.
poor harbors in north carolina retarded the spread of european settlement in that region.
trustees that unless the new planters possessed an unfree labor force they could not compete economically with their south carolina neighbors.
the settlers also wanted a voice in local government.
in 1738 121 people living in savannah petitioned for fundamental reforms in the colonys constitution.
oglethorpe responded angrily the idle ones are indeed for negroes.
if the petition is countenanced the province is ruined the settlers did not give up.
in 1741 they again petitioned oglethorpe this time addressing him as our perpetual dictator while the colonists grumbled about various restrictions oglethorpe tried and failed to capture the spanish fortress at saint augustine 1740.
this personal disappointment coupled with the growing popular unrest destroyed his interest in georgia.
the trustees were forced to compromise their principles.
in 1738 they eliminated all restrictions on the amount of land a man could own they allowed women to inherit land.
in 1750 they permitted the settlers to import slaves.
soon georgians could drink rum.
in 1751 the trustees returned georgia to the king undoubtedly relieved to be free of what had become a hard drinking slave owning plantation society much like that study resources in south carolina.
the king authorized an assembly in 1751 but even with these social and political changes georgia attracted very few new settlers.
conclusion living with diversity long after he had returned from his adventures in virginia captain john smith reflected on the difficulty of establishing colonies in the new world.
it was a task for which most people were not temperamentally suited.
it requires smith counseled all the best parts of art judgment courage honesty constancy diligence and industry even to do neere well on another occasion charles i warned lord baltimore that new settlements commonly have rugged and laborious beginnings over the course of the seventeenth century women and men had followed leaders such as baltimore smith winthrop bradford penn and berkeley to the new world in anticipation of creating a successful new society.
some people were religious visionaries others were hardheaded businessmen.
the results of their efforts their struggles to survive in an often hostile environment and their interactions with various native american groups yielded a spectrum of settlements along the atlantic coast ranging from the quasifeudalism of south carolina to the puritan commonwealth of massachusetts bay.
the diversity of early english colonization must be emphasized precisely because it is so easy to overlook.
even though the colonists eventually banded together and fought for independence persistent differences separated new englanders from virginians pennsylvanians from carolinians.
the interpretive challenge of course is to comprehend how european colonists managed over the course of the eighteenth century to overcome fragmentation and to develop the capacity to imagine themselves a nation.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 2 new world experiments on myhistorylab time line 1607 first english settlers arrive at jamestown 1608 1609 scrooby congregation pilgrims 1634 colony of maryland is founded 1636 harvard college is established puritan settlers found leaves england for holland 1609 1611 starving time in virginia threatens survival of the colonists 1616 1618 plague destroys native american populations of coastal new england 1619 virginia assembly called house of burgesses meets for the first time first slaves sold at jamestown 1620 pilgrims sign the mayflower compact 1622 surprise indian attack devastates virginia 1624 dutch investors create permanent settlements along hudson river james i king of england dissolves virginia company 1625 charles i ascends english throne 1630 john winthrop transfers massachusetts bay charter to new england hartford and other connecticut valley towns anne hutchinson exiled to rhode island theophilus eaton and john davenport lead settlers to new haven colony connecticut towns accept fundamental orders second major indian attack in virginia charles i executed during english civil war stuarts restored to the english throne rhode island obtains royal charter proprietors receive charter for carolina english soldiers conquer new netherland new hampshire becomes a royal colony william penn granted patent for his holy experiment east and west jersey unite to form single colony james oglethorpe receives charter for georgia chapt er 2 chapter review chapter review breaking away what were some of the social problems facing britain in the 16th and 17th centuries that helped push english colonists to cross the atlantic.
the colony and ethnic rivalries shaped the politics of new york for decades.
in 1681 charles ii granted william penn a quaker a charter to establish pennsylvania.
penns guarantee to respect all christian settlers liberty of conscience drew immigrants from across northern europe.
p 44 quakers in america between 1580 and 1650 an expanding population strained englands agrarian economy.
competition for food and land threatened to disrupt law and order and drove many people to migrate from rural areas to london or across the atlantic.
p 30 te nn es s a fe roa m tuscarora no n ke ca r ia north pe ee ch carolina la pa cherokee catawba ap r r coo sa hattahoochee.
rr georgia w r ca south carolina yamasee georgeto charles town savannah how did the barbadian background of the early settlers shape the economic development of the carolinas.
about half the early settlers of carolina came from barbados a british caribbean island where the economy depended on the production of sugar by slave labor.
in the carolina colony these migrants recreated a similar slave based plantation economy that by the 1690s was based primarily on the cultivation of rice as a cash crop.
p 48 p ohio r.
claimed by virginia the founding of georgia shenandoah r s in ta un mo tuscarora n c r ia north ee ch carolina la pa cherokee catawba ap d ee r georgia how was the founding of the carolinas different from the founding of georgia.
r r ah nn va sa mu oc r e pe te nn es s carolina grant 1663 d oa br how did ethnic diversity shape the development of the middle colonies.
virginia r diversity in the middle colonies carolina grant 1663 r ah nn.
va er sa lge mu oc religious persecution drove thousands of puritans to new england.
john winthrop hoped the settlers would reform english protestantism and create a city on a hill the puritans did not welcome dissent.
they exiled roger williams and anne hutchinson to rhode island for their religious beliefs.
stable nuclear families and good health helped puritans avoid the social turmoil that plagued the chesapeake colonies.
p 37 planting the carolinas james r ns ai nt ou d oa br how did differences in religion affect the founding of the new england colonies.
m shenandoah r d ee reforming england in america pennsylvan ohio r.
claimed by virginia e pe until tobacco began to be cultivated as a profitable cash crop around 1617 the virginia colony suffered from disease hunger misgovernment and social dissension.
maryland which had been founded as a refuge for english catholics in the late 1630s and where tobacco also became the economic mainstay endured decades of political and religious conflict before a stable government was established there in the 1660s.
p 31 coo sa why did the chesapeake colonies not prosper during the earliest years of settlement.
william penn the founder of pennsylvania was a quaker a protestant sect that emphasized simplicity and the possibility of salvation for all in religious practice and belief and humility and tolerance in daily life.
he guaranteed that settlers in pennsylvania would enjoy liberty of conscience freedom from persecution no taxation without representation and due process of law.
the chesapeake dreams of wealth how did the quaker religion influence the development of pennsylvania.
south carolina immigrants from barbados began settling in the carolinas in the 1670s.
barbadian immigrants to the carolinas many of whom were wealthy planters seeking new lands for plantations brought slavery with them when they moved.
georgia was founded in 1732 as an alternative to debtors prison for impoverished englishmen and as a military outpost to guard against the spanish in florida.
p 50 after conquering the dutch colony of new netherland in 1664 the english renamed it new york.
despite the conquest the dutch remained an influential minority in key terms and definitions joint stock company business enterprise that enabled investors to pool money for commerce and funding for colonies.
p 32 house of burgesses virginia.
p 34 the elective representative assembly in colonial headright system of land distribution in which settlers were granted a 50 acre plot of land from the colonial government for each servant or dependent they transported to the new world.
it encouraged the recruitment of a large servile labor force.
p 34 mayflower compact agreement among the pilgrims aboard the mayflower in 1620 to create a civil government at plymouth colony.
p 37 puritans members of a reformed protestant sect in europe and america that insisted on removing all vestiges of catholicism from religious practice.
p 37 great migration migration of 16 000 puritans from england to the massachusetts bay colony during the 1630s.
p 39 antinomianism religious belief rejecting traditional moral law as unnecessary for christians who possess saving grace and affirming that a person could experience divine revelation and salvation without the assistance of formally trained clergy.
p 42 quakers members of a radical religious group formally known as the society of friends that rejects formal theology and stress each persons inner light a spiritual guide to righteousness.
p 46 study resources critical thinking questions 1.
would the first chesapeake colonies have survived if the settlers had 3.
how did william penns leadership style compare to those of john not discovered tobacco as a profitable cash crop.
would the historical development of new england have been winthrop and captain john smith.
how were the european migrants who were attracted to georgia and different if the puritans had developed a profitable cash crop like tobacco or rice.
the carolinas different from the migrants from the chesapeake and middle colonies.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 2 on myhistorylab the chesapeake dreams of wealth view the map diversity in the middle colonies the colonies to 1740 p 31 read the document father isaac jogues description of new york 1640 p 45 read the document john smith the starving quakers in america time p 33 read the document james i a counterblaste to tobacco p 34 read the document wessell webling his indenture 1622 p 35 read the document george aslop from a character of the province of maryland p 36 reforming england in america read the document john wintrhrop a model of christian charity 1830 p 38 complete the assignment the children who refused to come home captivity and conversion p 40 read the document william penn model for government 1681 p 46 read the document letter by william penn to the committee of the free society of traders 1683 p 47 indicates study plan media assignment putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society contents and learning objectives sources of stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century pg.
56 rise of a commercial empire pg.
66 what factors explain the remarkable social stability achieved in early new england.
colonial factions spark political revolt 1676 1691 pg.
68 the challenge of the chesapeake environment pg.
59 how did colonial revolts affect the political culture of virginia and new england.
what factors contributed to political unrest in the chesapeake region during this period.
feature essay anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek race and freedom in british america pg.
61 how did african american slaves preserve an independent cultural identity in the new world.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab why did england discourage free and open trade in colonial america.
law and society witches and the law a problem of evidence in 1692 chapter 3 putting down roots families in an atlantic empire the witherspoon family moved from great britain to the south carolina backcountry early in the eighteenth century.
although otherwise indistinguishable from the thousands of other ordinary families that put down roots in english america the witherspoons were made historical figures by the candid account of pioneer life produced by their son robert who was only a small child at the time of their arrival.
the witherspoons initial reaction to the new world at least that of the mother and children was utter despondence.
my mother and us children were still in expectation that we were coming to an agreeable place robert confessed but when we arrived and saw nothing but a wilderness and instead of a fine timbered house nothing but a very mean dirt house our spirits quite sunk for many years the witherspoons feared they would be killed by indians become lost in the woods or be bitten by snakes.
the witherspoons managed to survive the early difficult years on the black river.
to be sure the carolina backcountry did not look very much like the world they had left behind.
the discrepancy however apparently did not greatly discourage roberts father.
he had a vision of what the black river settlement might become.
my father robert recounted gave us all the comfort he could by telling us we would get all these trees cut down and in a short time there would be plenty of inhabitants and that we could see from house to house obert witherspoons account reminds us just how much the early history of colonial america was an intimate story of families and not as some commentators would have us believe of individuals.
neither the peopling of the atlantic frontier the cutting down of the forests nor the creation of new communities where one could see from house to house was a process that involved what we would today recognize as state policy.
men and women made significant decisions about the character of their lives within families.
it was within this primary social unit that most colonists earned their livelihoods educated their children defined gender sustained religious tradition and nursed each other in sickness.
in short the family was the source of their societal and cultural identities.
early colonial families did not exist in isolation.
they were part of larger societies.
as we have already discovered the r the mason children david joanna and abigail c 1670 an early portrait of three children from a wealthy massachusetts bay colony family.
the artist lavished attention on the details of the childrens clothing and the objects they hold marks of their social status and prosperity.
character of the first english settlements in the new world varied substantially see chapter 2.
during much of the seventeenth century these initial differences grew stronger as each region responded to different environmental conditions and developed its own traditions.
the various local societies in which families like the witherspoons put down roots reflected several critical elements supply of labor abundance of land unusual demographic patterns and commercial ties with european markets.
in the chesapeake for example an economy based almost entirely on a single staple tobacco created an insatiable demand for indentured servants and black slaves.
in massachusetts bay the extraordinary longevity of the founders generated a level of social and political stability that virginians and marylanders did not attain until the very end of the seventeenth century.
by 1660 it seemed regional differences had undermined the idea of a unified english empire in america.
during the reign of charles ii however a trend toward cultural convergence began.
although subcultures had evolved in strikingly different directions countervailing forces such as common language and religion gradually pulled english american settlers together.
parliament took advantage of this trend and began to establish a uniform set of rules for the expanding american empire.
the process was slow and uneven often sparking violent colonial resistance.
by the end of the seventeenth century however england had made significant progress toward transforming new world provinces into an empire that produced needed raw materials and purchased manufactured goods.
if a person was black and enslaved however he or she was more apt to experience oppression rather than opportunity in british america.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society sources of stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century what factors explain the remarkable social stability achieved in early new england.
seventeenth century new englanders successfully replicated in america a traditional social order they had known in england.
the transfer of a familiar way of life to the new world seemed less difficult for these puritan migrants than it did for the many english men and women who settled in the chesapeake colonies.
their contrasting experiences fundamental to an understanding of the development of both cultures can be explained at least in part by the extraordinary strength and resilience of new england families.
immigrant families and new social order early new englanders believed god ordained the family for human benefit.
it was essential to the maintenance of social order since outside the family men and women succumbed to carnal temptation.
such people had no one to sustain them or remind them of scripture.
without family care declared the reverend benjamin wadsworth the labour of magistrates and ministers for reformation and propagating religion is likely to be in great measure unsuccessful the godly family at least in theory was ruled by a patriarch father to his children husband to his wife the source of authority and object of unquestioned obedience.
the wife shared responsibility for the raising of children but in decisions of importance especially those related to property she was expected to defer to her spouse.
the new englanders concern about the character of the godly family is not surprising.
this institution played a central role in shaping their society.
in contrast to those who migrated to the colonies of virginia and maryland new englanders crossed the atlantic within nuclear families.
that is they moved within established units consisting of a father mother and their dependent children rather than as single youths and adults.
people who migrated to america within families preserved local english customs more fully than did the youths who traveled to other parts of the continent as single men and women.
the comforting presence of immediate family members reduced the shock of adjusting to a strange environment three thousand miles from home.
even in the 1630s the ratio of men to women in new england was fairly well balanced about three males for every two females.
persons who had not already married in england before coming to the new world could expect to form nuclear families of their own.
the great migration of the 1630s and early 1640s brought approximately twenty thousand persons to new england.
after 1642 the english civil war reduced the flood of people moving to massachusetts bay to a trickle.
nevertheless by the end of the century the population of new england had reached almost one hundred twenty thousand an amazing increase considering the small number of original immigrants.
the explanation for this impressive growth lies in the long lives enjoyed by early new englanders.
put simply people who under normal conditions would have died in contemporary europe lived in new england.
indeed the life expectancy of seventeenth century settlers was not very different from our own.
males who survived infancy might have expected to see their seventieth birthday.
twenty percent of the men of the first generation reached the age of eighty.
the figures for women were only slightly lower.
why the early settlers lived so long is not entirely clear.
no doubt pure drinking water a cool climate that retarded the spread of fatal contagious disease and a dispersed population promoted general good health.
longer life altered family relations.
new england males lived not only to see their own children reach adulthood but also to witness the birth of grandchildren.
one historian john murrin has suggested that new englanders invented grandparents.
in other words this society produced real patriarchs males of recognized seniority and standing.
this may have been one of the first societies in recorded history in which a person could reasonably anticipate knowing his or her grandchildren a demographic surprise that contributed to social stability.
the traditions of particular families and communities literally remained alive in the memories of the colonys oldest citizens.
commonwealth of families the life cycle of the seventeenth century new england family began with marriage.
young men and women generally initiated courtships.
if parents exercised a voice in such matters it was to discourage union with a person of unsound moral character.
in this highly religious society there was not much chance that young people would stray far from shared community values.
the overwhelming majority of the regions population married for in new england the single life was not only morally suspect but also physically difficult.
a couple without land could not support an independent and growing family in these agrarian communities.
while men generally brought farmland to the marriage prospective brides were expected to provide a dowry worth approximately one half what the bridegroom offered.
women often contributed money or household goods.
the household was primarily a place of work very demanding work.
the primary goal of course was to clear enough land to feed the family.
additional cultivation allowed the farmer to produce a surplus that could then be sold or bartered and since agrarian families required items that could not be manufactured at home metal tools for example they usually grew more than they consumed.
early american farmers were not economically self sufficient the belief that they were is a popular misconception.
during the seventeenth century men and women generally lived in the communities of their parents and grandparents.
new englanders usually managed to fall in love with a neighbor and most marriages took place between men and women living less than 13 miles apart.
moving to a more fertile region might have increased their earnings but such thoughts seldom occurred to early new englanders.
religious values a sense of common purpose and the importance of family reinforced traditional communal ties.
towns in fact were collections of families not individuals.
over time these families intermarried so the community became an elaborate kinship network.
social historians have discovered that in many new england towns the original founders dominated local politics and economic affairs for several generations.
not surprisingly newcomers who were not absorbed into the family system tended to move away from the village with greater frequency than did the sons and daughters of the established lineage groups.
sources of stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century congregational churches were also built on a family foundation.
during the earliest years of settlement the churches accepted persons who could demonstrate they were among gods elect members were drawn from a broad social spectrum.
once the excitement of establishing a new society had passed however new englanders began to focus more attention on the spiritual welfare of their own families.
this quite normal parental concern precipitated a major ecclesiastical crisis.
the problem was the status of the children within a gathered church.
sons and daughters of full church members regularly received baptism usually as infants but as these people grew to adulthood they often failed to provide testimony of their own election moreover they wanted their own children to be baptized.
a church synod a gathering of congregational ministers responded to this generational crisis by adopting the so called half way covenant 1662.
the compromise allowed the grandchildren of persons in full communion to be baptized even though their parents could not demonstrate conversion.
congregational ministers assumed that god cast the line of election in the loins of godly parents colonists regarded education as primarily a family responsibility.
parents were supposed to instruct children in the principles of christianity and so it was necessary to teach boys and girls how to read.
in 1642 the massachusetts general court reminded the bay colonists of their obligation to catechize their families.
five years later the legislature ordered towns containing at least fifteen families to open an elementary school supported by local taxes.
villages of a hundred or more families had to maintain more advanced grammar schools which taught a basic knowledge of latin.
at least eleven schools were operating in 1647 and despite their expense new schools were established throughout the century.
this family based education system worked.
a large majority of the regions adult males could read and write an accomplishment not achieved in the chesapeake colonies for another century.
the literacy rate for women was somewhat lower but by the standards of the period it was still impressive.
a printing press operated in cambridge as early as 1639.
the new england primer first published in 1690 in boston by benjamin harris taught children the alphabet as well as the lords prayer.
this primer announced women as inferior to men.
other historians however depict the colonial period as a golden age for women.
according to this interpretation wives worked alongside their husbands.
they were not divorced from meaningful productive labor.
they certainly were not transformed into the frail dependent beings allegedly much admired by middle class males of the nineteenth century.
both views provide insights into the lives of early american women but neither fully recaptures their community experiences.
womens labor and the skilled services that they provided were essential for the economic survival of colonial households.
to be sure women worked on family farms.
they did not however necessarily do the same jobs that men performed.
women usually handled separate tasks including cooking washing clothes making dairying gardening and caring for young children.
girls began to help their mothers with some of this work as early as age four beginning their domestic education so that they could one day manage their own household.
the average puritan woman in this period married in her early twenties compared to the midtwenties for puritan men and it was common for young women who were not yet married to be hired out as servants in other households.
just putting food on the table was an impressive chore in an age before modern conveniences.
women helped butcher meat harvested garden crops built and tended cooking fires and read the document prenuptial agreement 1653 he who neer learns his abc forever will a blockhead be.
but he who to his books inclined will soon a golden treasure find.
many new englanders memorized the entire poem.
after 1638 young men could attend harvard college the first institution of higher learning founded in englands mainland colonies.
the school was originally intended to train ministers and of the 465 students who graduated during the seventeenth century more than half became congregational divines.
harvard had a demanding curriculum.
the boys read logic rhetoric divinity and several ancient languages including hebrew.
yale college followed harvards lead admitting its first students in 1702.
womens lives in puritan new england the role of women in the agrarian societies north of the chesapeake is a controversial subject among colonial historians.
some scholars point out that common law as well as english custom treated puritans viewed marriage as a civil compact rather than a religious sacrament.
the families created through marriage formed both the social and economic foundation of puritan society.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society read the document one of her children anne bradstreet before the birth of was extremely difficult to obtain in any colony before the american revolution.
indeed a person married to a cruel or irresponsible spouse had little recourse but to run away or accept the unhappy situation.
yet most women were neither prosperous entrepreneurs nor abject slaves.
surviving letters indicate that men and women generally accommodated themselves to the gender roles they thought god had ordained.
one of early americas most creative poets anne bradstreet wrote movingly of the fulfillment she had found with her husband.
in a piece titled to my dear and loving husband bradstreet declared if ever two were one then surely we.
if ever man were lovd by wife then thee if ever wife was happy in a man compare with me ye woman if you can.
although puritan couples worried that the affection they felt for a husband or a wife might turn their thoughts away from gods perfect love this was a danger they were willing to risk.
social hierarchy in new england during the seventeenth century the new england colonies attracted neither noblemen nor paupers.
the absence of these social groups meant that the american social structure seemed incomplete by contemporary european standards.
anne bradstreet c 1612 1672 was a puritan wife mother and poet.
a collection of her poems entitled the tenth muse lately sprung up in america was the first work the settlers were not displeased that the poor remained in ever published in englands american colonies.
the old world.
the lack of very rich persons and in this period great wealth frequently accompanied noble title stood for long hours inside large open hearth fireplaces tending was quite another matter.
according to the prevailing hierarchical to dishes as they roasted or simmered.
this last task sometimes view of the structure of society well placed individuals were natural resulted in injury when stray sparks caught clothing on fire.
rulers people intended by god to exercise political authority over often wives and the overwhelming majority of adult the rank and file.
migration forced the colonists however to choose seventeenth century women were married raised poultry or their rulers from men of more modest status.
one minister told a performed extra sewing or spinning and thereby achieved some plymouth congregation that since its members were not furnished economic independence.
when people in one new england comwith any persons of special eminency above the rest to be chosen by munity chided a man for allowing his wife to peddle her fowl he you into office of government they would have to make due with responded i meddle not with the geese nor turkeys for they are neighbors not beholding in them the ordinariness of their persons hers in fact during this period women were often described as the colonists gradually sorted themselves out into distinct social deputy husbands a label that drew attention to their dependence on groupings.
persons who would never have been natural rulers in family patriarchs as well as to their roles as decision makers.
england became provincial gentry in the various northern colonies.
women also joined churches in greater number than men.
it helped of course if an individual possessed wealth and education within a few years of founding many new england congregations but these attributes alone could not guarantee a newcomer would contained two female members for every male a process historians be accepted into the local ruling elite at least not during the early describe as the feminization of colonial religion contemporaries decades of settlement.
in massachusetts and connecticut puritan offered different explanations for the gender shift.
cotton mather the voters expected their leaders to join congregational churches and leading congregational minister of massachusetts bay argued that defend orthodox religion.
god had created far more godly women than men.
others thought the winthrops dudleys and pynchons just to cite a few that the life threatening experience of childbirth gave women a of the more prominent families fulfilled these expectations and deeper appreciation of religion.
the quakers gave women an even in public affairs they assumed dominant roles.
they took their larger role in religious affairs which may help to explain the popularresponsibilities quite seriously and certainly did not look kindly on ity of this sect among ordinary women.
anyone who spoke of their ordinariness a colonist who jokingly in political and legal matters society sharply curtailed the called a puritan magistrate a just ass found himself in deep rights of colonial women.
according to english common law a trouble with civil authorities.
wife exercised no control over property.
she could not for examthe problem was that while most new englanders accepted ple sell land although if her husband decided to dispose of their a hierarchical view of society they disagreed over their assigned holdings he was free to do so without her permission.
divorce places.
both massachusetts bay and connecticut passed sumptuary the challenge of the chesapeake environment laws statutes that limited the wearing of fine apparel to the wealthy and prominent to curb the pretensions of those of lower status.
yet such restraints could not prevent some people from rising and others from falling within the social order.
governor john winthrop provided a marvelous description of the unplanned social mobility that occurred in early new england.
during the 1640s he recorded in his diary the story of a master who could not afford to pay a servants wages.
to meet this obligation the master sold a pair of oxen but the transaction barely covered the cost of keeping the servant.
in desperation the master asked the employee a man of lower social status how shall i do.
when all my cattle are gone the servant replied you shall then serve me so you may have your cattle again in the margin of his diary next to this account winthrop scribbled insolent most northern colonists were yeomen independent farmers who worked their own land.
while few became rich in america even fewer fell hopelessly into debt.
their daily lives especially for those who settled new england centered on scattered little communities where they participated in village meetings church related matters and militia training.
possession of land gave agrarian families a sense of independence from external authority.
as one man bragged to those who had stayed behind in england here are no hard landlords to rack us with high rents or extorting fines.
here every man may be master of his own labour and land.
and if he have nothing but his hands he may set up his trade and by industry grow rich it was not unusual for northern colonists to work as servants at some point in their lives.
this system of labor differed greatly from the pattern of servitude that developed in seventeenth century virginia and maryland.
new englanders seldom recruited servants from the old world.
the forms of agriculture practiced in this region mixed cereal and dairy farming made employment of large gangs of dependent workers uneconomic.
rather new england families placed their adolescent children in nearby homes.
these young persons contracted for four or five years and seemed more like apprentices than servants.
servitude was not simply a means by which one group exploited another.
it was a form of vocational training program in which the children of the rich as well as the poor participated.
by the end of the seventeenth century the new england puritans had developed a compelling story about their own history in the new world.
the founders had been extraordinarily godly men and women and in a heroic effort to establish a purer form of religion pious families had passed over the vast ocean into this vast and howling wilderness although the children and grandchildren of the first generation sometimes questioned their own ability to please the lord they recognized the mission to the new world had been a success they were as prosperous as ever there is peace plenty the country flourisheth the challenge of the chesapeake environment what factors contributed to political unrest in the chesapeake region during this period.
an entirely different regional society developed in englands chesapeake colonies virginia and maryland.
this contrast with new england seems puzzling.
after all the two areas were founded at roughly the same time by men and women from the same mother country.
in both regions settlers spoke english accepted protestantism and gave allegiance to one crown.
and yet to cite an obvious example seventeenth century virginia looked nothing like massachusetts bay.
in an effort to explain the difference colonial historians have studied environmental conditions labor systems and agrarian economies.
the most important reason for the distinctiveness of these early southern plantation societies however turned out to be the chesapeakes death rate a frighteningly high mortality that tore at the very fabric of traditional family life.
family life at risk unlike new englands settlers the men and women who emigrated to the chesapeake region did not move in family units.
they traveled to the new world as young unmarried servants youths cut off from the security of traditional kin relations.
although these immigrants came from a cross section of english society most had been poor to middling farmers.
it is now estimated that 70 to 85 percent of the white colonists who went to virginia and maryland during the seventeenth century were not free that is they owed four or five years labor in exchange for the cost of passage to america.
if the servant was under age 15 he or she had to serve a full seven years.
the overwhelming majority of these laborers were males between the ages of 18 and 22.
in fact before 1640 the ratio of males to females stood at 6 to 1.
this figure dropped to about 2 to 1 by the end of the century but the sex ratio in the chesapeake was never as favorable as it had been in early massachusetts.
most immigrants to the chesapeake region died soon after arriving.
it is difficult to ascertain the exact cause of death in most cases but malaria and other diseases took a frightful toll.
recent studies also indicate that drinking water contaminated with salt killed many colonists living in low lying areas.
throughout the entire seventeenth century high mortality rates had a profound effect on this society.
life expectancy for chesapeake males was about 43 some ten to twenty years less than for men born in new england.
for women life was even shorter.
a full 25 percent of all children died in infancy another 25 percent did not see their twentieth birthdays.
the survivors were often weak or ill unable to perform hard physical labor.
these demographic conditions retarded normal population increase.
young women who might have become wives and mothers could not do so until they had completed their terms of servitude.
they thus lost several reproductive years and in a society in which so many children died in infancy late marriage greatly restricted family size.
moreover because of the unbalanced sex ratio many adult males simply could not find wives.
migration not only cut them off from their english families but also deprived them of an opportunity to form new ones.
without a constant flow of immigrants the population of virginia and maryland would have actually declined.
high mortality compressed the family life cycle into a few short years.
one partner in a marriage usually died within seven years.
only one in three chesapeake marriages survived as long as a decade.
not only did children not meet grandparents they often did not even know their own parents.
widows and widowers quickly remarried bringing children by former unions into their new homes and it was not uncommon for a child to grow chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society up with persons to whom he or she bore no blood relation.
the psychological effects of such experiences on chesapeake settlers cannot be measured.
people probably learned to cope with a high degree of personal insecurity.
however they adjusted it is clear family life in this region was vastly more impermanent than it was in the new england colonies during the same period.
womens lives in chesapeake society women were obviously in great demand in the early southern colonies.
possibly as a result women married much younger in the south than in new england with most married by their late teens.
chesapeake men on the other hand often married for the first time in their late twenties if they married at all.
some historians have argued that scarcity heightened the womans bargaining power in the marriage market.
if she was an immigrant she did not have to worry about obtaining parental consent.
she was on her own in the new world and free to select whomever she pleased.
if a woman lacked beauty or strength if she were a person of low moral standards she could still be confident of finding an american husband.
such negotiations may have provided chesapeake women with a means of improving their social status.
nevertheless liberation from some traditional restraints on seventeenth century women must not be exaggerated.
most women came to the colonies as indentured servants.
masters often frowned on romantic relationships for fear it would distract from work.
if a man and woman wished to marry and the would be brides term of indenture was not up the prospective groom would have to come up with the money to purchase his intendeds contract.
as servants women were also vulnerable to sexual exploitation by their masters.
once married a woman in the south took on the same duties as her counterparts in new england though field work likely took up more of her time as households tried to make a go of it in the tobacco economy.
because of the high mortality rate in the chesapeake young women often found themselves caring for children that her husband brought to the family from his first marriage.
moreover in this unhealthy environment childbearing was extremely dangerous and women in the chesapeake usually died twenty years earlier than their new england counterparts.
the structure of planter society colonists who managed somehow to survive grew tobacco as much tobacco as they possibly could.
this crop became the chesapeake staple and since it was relatively easy to cultivate anyone with a few acres of cleared land could harvest leaves for export.
cultivation of tobacco did not however produce a society roughly equal in wealth and status.
to the contrary tobacco generated inequality.
some planters amassed large fortunes others barely subsisted.
labor made the difference for to succeed in this staple economy one had to control the labor of other men and women.
more workers in the fields meant larger harvests and of course larger profits.
since free persons showed no interest in growing another mans tobacco not even for wages wealthy planters relied on white laborers who were not free as well as on slaves.
the social structure that developed in the seventeenth century chesapeake reflected a wild often unscrupulous scramble to bring men and women of three races black white and indian into various degrees of dependence.
great planters dominated chesapeake society.
the group was small only a trifling portion of the population of virginia and maryland.
these ambitious men arrived in america with capital.
they invested immediately in laborers and one way or another they obtained huge tracts of the best tobacco growing land.
the members of this gentry were not technically aristocrats for they did not possess titles that could be passed from generation to generation.
they gave themselves military titles sat as justices of the peace on the county courts and directed local anglican church affairs as members of the vestry.
over time these gentry families intermarried so frequently that they created a vast network of cousins.
during the eighteenth century it was not uncommon to find a half dozen men with the same surname sitting simultaneously in the virginia house of burgesses.
freemen formed the largest class in chesapeake society.
their origins were strikingly different from those of the gentry or for that matter from those of new englands yeomen farmers.
chesapeake freemen traveled to the new world as indentured servants and by sheer good fortune managed to remain alive to the end of their contracts.
if they had dreamed of becoming great planters they were gravely disappointed.
most seventeenth century freemen lived on the edge of poverty.
some freemen of course did better in america than they would have in contemporary england but in both virginia and maryland historians have found a sharp economic division separating the gentry from the rest of white society.
below the freemen came indentured servants.
membership in this group was not demeaning after all servitude was a temporary status.
but servitude in the chesapeake colonies was not the benign institution it was in new england.
great planters purchased servants to grow tobacco.
no one seemed overly concerned whether these laborers received decent food and clothes much less whether they acquired trade skills.
young people thousands of them cut off from family ties sick often to the point of death unable to obtain normal sexual release regarded their servitude as a form of slavery.
not surprisingly the gentry worried that unhappy servants and impoverished freemen what the planters called the giddy multitude would rebel at the slightest provocation a fear that turned out to be fully justified.
sometime after the 1680s the precise date is impossible to establish a dramatic demographic shift occurred.
although infant mortality remained high life expectancy rates for those who survived childhood in the chesapeake improved significantly and for the first time in the history of virginia and maryland important leadership positions went to men who had actually been born in america.
this transition has been described by one political historian as the emergence of a creole majority in other words as the rise of an indigenous ruling elite.
before this time immigrant leaders had died without heirs or had returned as quickly as possible to england.
the members of the new creole class took a greater interest in local government.
their activities helped give the tobacco colonies the kind of political and cultural stability that had eluded earlier generations of planter adventurers.
not surprisingly it was during this period of demographic transition that creole leaders founded the college of william and mary 1693 and authorized the construction of an impressive new capital called williamsburg.
these were changes that in the words of one creole virginian provided the colony with a sense of permanence and legitimacy.
it had never before possessed race and freedom in british america the key to success in this creole society was ownership of slaves.
those planters who held more blacks could grow more tobacco and thus could acquire fresh capital needed to purchase additional laborers.
over time the rich not only became richer they also formed a distinct ruling elite that newcomers found increasingly difficult to enter.
opportunities for advancement also decreased for freemen in the region.
studies of mid seventeenth century maryland reveal that some servants managed to become moderately prosperous farmers and small officeholders.
but as the gentry consolidated its hold on political and economic institutions ordinary people discovered it was much harder to rise in chesapeake society.
those men and women with more ambitious dreams headed for pennsylvania north carolina or western virginia.
social institutions that figured importantly in the daily experience of new englanders were either weak or nonexistent in the chesapeake colonies.
in part the sluggish development resulted from the continuation of high infant mortality rates.
there was little incentive to build elementary schools for example if half the children would die before reaching adulthood.
the great planters sent their sons to england or scotland for their education and even after the founding of the college of william and mary in virginia the gentry continued to patronize english schools.
as a result of this practice higher education in the south languished for much of the colonial period.
tobacco influenced the spread of other institutions in the region.
planters were scattered along the rivers often separated from their nearest neighbors by miles of poor roads.
since the major tobacco growers traded directly with english merchants they had no need for towns.
whatever items they required were either made on the plantation or imported from europe.
other than the centers of colonial government jamestown and later williamsburg and st marys city and later annapolis there were no villages capable of sustaining a rich community life before the late eighteenth century.
seventeenth century virginia did not even possess a printing press.
in fact governor sir william berkeley bragged in 1671 there are no free schools nor printing in virginia for learning has brought disobedience and heresy.
into the world and printing had divulged them.
god keep us from both race and freedom in british america how did african american slaves preserve an independent cultural identity in the new world.
many people who landed in the colonies had no desire to come to the new world.
they were africans taken as slaves to cultivate rice sugar and tobacco.
as the native americans were exterminated and the supply of white indentured servants dried up european planters demanded ever more african laborers.
roots of slavery a great deal is known about the transfer of african peoples across the atlantic.
during the entire history of this human commerce between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries slave traders carried almost eleven million blacks to the americas.
most of these men and women were sold in brazil or in the caribbean.
a relatively small number of africans reached british north america and of this group the majority arrived after 1700.
slavery existed in each of the thirteen colonies but the vast majority of slaves lived in the southern colonies where masters put them to work on plantations that grew staple crops for export.
because slaves performed hard physical labor planters preferred purchasing young males.
in many early slave communities men outnumbered women by a ratio of two to one.
english colonists did not hesitate to enslave black people or for that matter native americans.
while the institution of slavery had long before died out in the mother country new world settlers quickly discovered how well this particular labor system operated in the spanish and portuguese colonies.
the decision to bring african slaves to the colonies therefore was based primarily on economic considerations.
english masters however seldom justified the practice purely in terms of planter profits.
indeed they adopted a quite different pattern of rhetoric.
english writers associated blacks in africa with heathen religion barbarous behavior sexual promiscuity in fact with evil itself.
from such a racist perspective the enslavement of africans seemed unobjectionable.
the planters maintained that if black slaves converted to christianity shedding their supposedly savage ways they would benefit from their loss of freedom.
africans first landed in virginia in 1619 as a cargo of slaves stolen by a dutch trader from a spanish merchant ship in the caribbean.
for the next fifty years the status of the colonys black people remained unclear.
english settlers classified some black laborers as slaves for life as chattel to be bought and sold at the masters will.
but other africans became servants presumably for stated periods of time and it was even possible for a few blacks to purchase their freedom.
several seventeenth century africans became successful virginia planters.
these rare exceptions in a long history of oppression remind modern americans that once long ago it was possible to imagine a more open less racially defined society.
see the feature essay anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek pp.
one reason virginia lawmakers tolerated such confusion was that the black population remained very small.
by 1660 fewer than fifteen hundred people of african origin lived in the entire colony compared to a white population of approximately twenty six thousand and it hardly seemed necessary for the legislature to draw up an elaborate slave code to control so few men and women.
if the planters could have obtained more black laborers they certainly would have done so.
there is no evidence that the great planters preferred white indentured servants to black slaves.
the problem was supply.
during this period slave traders sold their cargoes on barbados or the other sugar islands of the west indies where they fetched higher prices than virginians could afford.
in fact before 1680 most blacks who reached englands colonies on the north american mainland came from barbados or through new netherland rather than directly from africa.
by the end of the seventeenth century the legal status of virginias black people was no longer in doubt.
they were slaves for life and so were their children after them.
this transformation reflected changes in the supply of africans to british north america.
after 1672 the royal african company was chartered to meet the colonial planters demands for black laborers.
historian k g davies terms this organization the strongest and most effective of all european companies formed exclusively for the african chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society view the closer look african slave trade 1451 1870 europe 2 north america at l a n t i c o c e a n british north america 4 2 mexico and central america 42 west indies 6 spanish south america west africa 6 guianas africa central africa equator 38 brazil pa c i f i c ocean southeast africa south america main source of slaves percentage of slaves brought to various transatlantic destinations origins and destinations of african slaves 1619 1760 although many african slaves were carried to britains north american colonies far more slaves were sold in the caribbean sugar colonies and brazil where because of horrific health conditions the death rate far exceeded that of the british mainland colonies.
trade between 1695 and 1709 more than eleven thousand africans were sold in virginia alone many others went to maryland and the carolinas.
although american merchants most of them based in rhode island entered the trade during the eighteenth century the british continued to supply the bulk of the slaves to the mainland market for the entire colonial period.
the expanding black population apparently frightened white colonists for as the number of africans increased lawmakers drew up ever stricter slave codes.
it was during this period that racism always a latent element in new world societies was fully revealed.
by 1700 slavery was unequivocally based on the color of a persons skin.
blacks fell into this status simply because they were black.
a vicious pattern of discrimination had been set in motion.
even conversion to christianity did not free the african from bondage.
the white planter could deal with his black property as he alone saw fit and one revolting virginia statute excused masters who killed slaves on the grounds that no rational person would purposely destroy his own estate black women constantly had to fear sexual violation by a master or his sons.
children born to a slave woman became slaves regardless of the fathers race.
unlike the spanish colonies where persons of lighter color enjoyed greater privileges in society the english colonies tolerated no mixing of the races.
mulattoes and pure africans received the same treatment.
constructing african american identities the slave experience varied substantially from colony to colony.
the daily life of a black person in south carolina for example was quite different from that of an african american who happened to live in pennsylvania or massachusetts bay.
the size and density of the slave population determined in large measure how successfully blacks could maintain a separate cultural identity.
in the lowlands of south carolina during the eighteenth century 60 percent of the population was black.
the men and women were placed on large isolated rice plantations and their contact with whites was limited.
in these areas blacks developed creole languages which mixed the basic vocabulary of english with words borrowed from various african tongues.
until the end of the nineteenth century one creole language gullah was spoken on some of the sea islands along the georgia south carolina coast.
slaves on the large rice plantations also were able to establish elaborate and enduring kinship networks that may have helped reduce the more dehumanizing aspects of bondage.
in the new england and middle colonies and even in virginia african americans made up a smaller percentage of the population 40 percent in virginia 8 percent in pennsylvania and 3 percent in massachusetts.
in such environments contact between race and freedom in british america outlandish negroes as they were called were forced by blacks as well as whites to accept elements of english culture.
it was especially important for newcomers to speak english.
consider for example the pain of young olaudah equiano an african sold in virginia in 1757.
this 12 year old slave declared i was now exceedingly miserable and thought myself worse off than any.
of my companions for they could talk to each other in english but i had no person to speak to that i could understand.
in this state i was constantly grieving and pining and wishing for death despite such wrenching experiences black slaves creatively preserved elements of an african heritage.
the process of establishing african american traditions involved an imaginative reshaping of african and european customs into something that was neither african nor european.
it was african american.
the slaves accepted christianity but they did so on their own terms terms their masters seldom fully understood.
blacks transformed christianity into an expression of religious feeling in which an african element remained vibrant.
in music and folk art they gave voice to a cultural identity that even the most degrading conditions could not eradicate.
a major turning point in the history of african american people occurred during the early decades of the eighteenth century.
at this time blacks living in englands mainland colonies began to reproduce successfully.
the number of live births exceeded deaths and from that date the expansion of the african american population owed more to natural increase than to the importation of new slaves.
even though thousands of new africans arrived each year the creole population was always much larger than that of the immigrant blacks.
not that white masters allowed african american family life to interfere with the work routines of the plantation.
husbands and wives often belonged except for brief excursions on deck for forced exercise slaves remained below decks where the air to different masters and found it hard to find grew foul from the vomit blood and excrement in which the terrified victims lay.
some slaves went insane others refused to eat.
on many voyages between 5 and 20 percent of slaves perished from time to visit one another.
difficulties in formdisease and other causes which was another reason for captains to pack their ships tightly.
ing stable families meant that slave women often did not bear children until relatively late in life.
slave women usually worked in the fields alongside men.
blacks and whites was more frequent than in south carolina and elderly female slaves often no longer physically fit for field labor georgia.
these population patterns had a profound effect on northern were assigned to watch children while their parents toiled durand chesapeake blacks for while they escaped the physical drudging the long work day.
despite these hardships north american ery of rice cultivation they found the preservation of an indepenblacks enjoyed a healthier climate and better diet than did other dent african identity difficult.
in northern cities slaves working as new world slaves resulting in a demographic shift that did not take domestics and living in the houses of their masters saw other blacks place in the caribbean or south american colonies until a much but had little opportunity to develop creole languages or reaffirm a later date.
common african past.
although mainland blacks lived longer than the blacks of in eighteenth century virginia native born or creole blacks jamaica or barbados they were after all still slaves.
they propeople who had learned to cope with whites on a daily basis looked tested their debasement in many ways some in individual acts of with contempt on slaves who had just arrived from africa.
these view the closer look plan and sections of a slave ship and an illustration of a slave camp complete the assignment anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek on myhistorylab feature essay anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek a few months after anthony johnson died in 1670 a virginia court ruled that because he was a negro and by consequence an alien the 250 acres of land that he had owned should revert to england.
shown here is a portion of the court document with that decree.
d uring the first decades of settlement a larger proportion of virginias black population achieved freedom than at any time until the civil war ended slavery.
despite considerable obstacles these free black men and women their number in these early years was quite small formed families acquired property earned community respect and helped establish a distinctive african american culture.
one member of this group was anthony johnson an immigrant who rose from slavery to prominence on virginias eastern shore.
johnson came to virginia aboard the english vessel james in 1621 just two years after the first blacks had arrived in the colony.
as a slave known simply as antonio a negro johnson found life a constant struggle for survival.
working in the tobacco fields of the bennett plantation located on the south side of the james river he endured long hours poor rations fearful epidemics and haunting loneliness conditions that more often than not brought an early death to slaves as well as indentured servants.
johnson however was a tough intelligent and lucky man.
exactly how johnson achieved freedom is not known.
early records reveal that while still living at the bennett plantation he took a wife mary a negro woman anthony was fortunate to find her.
because of an exceedingly unequal sex ratio in early virginia few males regardless of color had an opportunity to form families.
anthony and mary reared at least four children.
even more remarkable in a society in which most unions were broken by death within a decade their marriage lasted more than forty years.
sometime during the 1630s anthony and mary gained their freedom perhaps with the help of someone named johnson.
their bondage probably ended through self purchase an arrangement that allowed enterprising slaves to buy their liberty through labor.
later again under unknown circumstances the johnsons migrated to northampton county on the eastern shore of virginia.
during the 1640s they acquired an estate of 250 acres on pungoteague creek where they raised cattle horses and hogs and cultivated tobacco.
to work these holdings anthony johnson apparently relied on the labor of indentured servants and at least one black slave named casor.
as the patriarch of pungoteague creek johnson participated as fully as most whites in northampton society.
he traded with wealthy white landowners and apparently shared their assumptions about the sanctity of property and the legitimacy of slavery.
when two white neighbors attempted to steal casor johnson hauled them into court and forced them to return his laborer.
on another occasion johnson appealed to the court for tax relief after an unfortunate fire destroyed much of his plantation.
the johnsons also maintained close ties with other free blacks such as anthony payne and emmanuel driggus who had similarly attained freedom and prosperity through their own efforts.
johnsons strongest links were with his family.
although his children lived in separate homes after reaching adulthood his two sons laid out holdings in the 1650s adjacent to their fathers plantation and in times of crisis parents and children participated in family conferences.
these close bonds persisted even after the johnson clan moved to somerset county maryland in the 1660s and anthony johnsons subsequent death.
when he purchased land in somerset in 1677 johnsons grandson a third generation free black colonist named his plantation angola perhaps in memory of his grandfathers african homeland.
interpreting johnsons remarkable life has proved surprisingly difficult.
an earlier generation of historians considered johnson a curiosity a sort of black englishman who did not fit neatly into familiar racial categories.
even some recent writers concerned about tracing the roots of slavery and prejudice in the united states have paid scant attention to johnson and the other free blacks on the eastern shore.
most historians would now agree that johnsons life illustrated the complexity of race relations in early virginia.
his surprising progression from slave to slaveholder and his easy participation in the world of the white gentry and in a network of black friendships and family ties demonstrated that relations among blacks and whites conformed to no single pattern in the fluid society of mid seventeenth century virginia.
rather they took a variety of forms conflict cooperation exploitation accommodation depending on the goals status experience and environment of the participants.
race was only a single factor and by no means the decisive one shaping relations among colonists.
the opportunities that had been available to anthony johnson and other virginia blacks however disappeared during the last quarter of the seventeenth century.
a growing reliance on slave labor rather than white indentured servitude brought about a rapid increase in the black population of virginia and an accompanying curtailment of civil liberties on racial grounds.
the rise of a group of great planters who dominated the colonial economy soon drove free black farmers into poverty.
no longer did they enjoy the security as had one black farmer in the 1640s of having myne owne ground and i will work when i please and play when i please it is not surprising that after 1706 a time when virginias experiment in a genuinely multiracial free society was all but over the johnson family disappeared from the colonial records.
when modern americans discuss the history of race relations in the united states they might consider the factors that allowed some of the first blacks who settled in america to achieve economic and social success.
questions for discussion 1.
how does the life of anthony johnson illustrate the complexity of race relations in early virginia.
why did the opportunities that free blacks like anthony johnson enjoyed disappear in virginia in the late seventeenth century.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society violence others in organized revolt.
the most serious slave rebellion of the colonial period was the stono uprising which took place in september 1739.
one hundred fifty south carolina blacks rose up and seizing guns and ammunition murdered several white planters.
with colours displayed and two drums beating they marched toward spanish florida where they had been promised freedom.
the local militia soon overtook the rebellious slaves and killed most of them.
although the uprising was short lived such incidents helped persuade whites everywhere that their own blacks might secretly be planning bloody revolt.
when a white servant woman in new york city announced in 1741 that blacks intended to burn the town authorities executed 34 suspected arsonists 30 blacks and 4 whites and dispatched 72 others either to the west indies or to madeira off the north coast of africa.
while the level of interracial violence in colonial society was quite low everyone recognized that the blacks in the words of one virginia governor longed to shake off the fetters of slavery even within the constraints of slavery african americans sometimes found opportunities that afforded a degree of personal freedom.
recent scholarship has discovered for example that during the eighteenth century a large number of black men became mariners.
it is now estimated that by 1803 african americans held at least 18 percent of all jobs open to american seamen and although the number of positions may have been fewer before the revolution read the document olaudah equiano the middle passage 1788 read the document james oglethorpe the stono rebellion 1739 slave masters often claimed that their slaves loved them and were happy to live in bondage.
but events like the stono uprising or rebellion of 1739 proved this reassuring fiction to be untrue.
southern whites lived in constant fear that their slaves might one day rise up and repay violence with violence.
black colonial sailors many of them slaves sought work on sailing vessels to escape the drudgery of life on rice or tobacco plantations.
these african american seamen connected black communities scattered throughout the caribbean and along the mainland coast bringing news about distant rebellions and spreading radical political ideologies to slaves who might otherwise not have known much about the transforming events of the eighteenth century.
rise of a commercial empire why did england discourage free and open trade in colonial america.
as a young boy olaudah equiano c 1745 1797 was kidnapped from his home in what is now nigeria and sold into slavery in america.
equiano eventually earned his freedom by working as a sailor.
british abolitionists pointed to the narrative of his extraordinary life to highlight the evils of the slave trade.
until the middle of the seventeenth century english political leaders largely ignored the american colonists.
private companies and aristocratic proprietors had created these societies some for profit others for religious sanctuary but in no case did the crown provide financial or military assistance.
after the restoration of charles ii in 1660 intervention replaced indifference.
englishmen of various sorts courtiers merchants parliamentarians concluded that the colonists should be brought more tightly under the control of the mother country.
the newly restored stuart monarchy began to establish rules for the entire empire and the planters of the chesapeake as well as the puritans of new england soon discovered they were not as independent as they had imagined.
the regulatory policies that evolved during this period formed a framework for an empire that survived with only minor adjustment until 1765.
rise of a commercial empire response to economic competition england.
since the americans had to pay import duties in england for this purpose colonists did not count as englishmen on such items as sugar and tobacco the legislation also provided the crown with another source of income.
in 1663 parliament passed a second navigation act known as the staple act which stated that with a few noted exceptions nothing could be imported into america unless it had first been transshipped through england a process that greatly added to the price ultimately paid by colonial consumers.
the navigation acts attempted to eliminate the dutch against whom the english fought three wars in this period 1652 1654 1664 1667 and 1672 1674 as the intermediaries of american commerce.
just as english merchants were celebrating their victory however an unanticipated rival appeared on the scene new england merchant ships sailed out of boston salem and newport to become formidable world competitors in maritime commerce.
view the map maine lumber skins lake o lak n h ntario beef cattle n y sheep hogs rie ee beef cattle conn n j pa ine of 1763 am ati on l regulating colonial trade p cl ro skins lumber md.
whales newport new york philadelphia wheat del.
skins cod boston r i.
skins beef cattle after some legislation in that direction during the commonwealth parliament passed a navigation act in 1660.
the statute was the most important piece of imperial legislation drafted before the american revolution.
colonists from new hampshire to south carolina paid close attention to the details of this statute which stated 1 that no ship could trade in the colonies unless it had been constructed in either england or america and carried a crew that was at least 75 percent english for these purposes colonists counted as englishmen and 2 that certain enumerated goods of great value that were not produced in england tobacco sugar cotton indigo dyewoods ginger could be transported from the colonies only to an english or another colonial port.
in 1704 parliament added rice and molasses to the enumerated list in 1705 rosins tars and turpentines needed for shipbuilding were included.
the act of 1660 was masterfully conceived.
it encouraged the development of domestic shipbuilding and prohibited european rivals from obtaining enumerated goods anywhere except in colonial products part of mass.
n lake huro by the 1660s the dominant commercial powers of europe adopted economic principles that later critics would term mercantilism.
proponents of this position argued that since trading nations were engaged in a fierce competition for the worlds resources mostly for raw materials transported from dependent colonies one nations commercial success translated directly into a loss for its rivals.
it seemed logical therefore that england would want to protect its own markets from france or holland.
for seventeenth century planners free markets made no sense.
they argued that trade tightly regulated by the central government represented the only way to increase the nations wealth at the expense of competitors.
many discussions of mercantilism suggested that english policy makers during the reign of charles ii had developed a wellintegrated set of ideas about the nature of international commerce and a carefully planned set of mercantilist government policies to implement them.
they did nothing of the sort.
administrators responded to particular problems usually on an individual basis.
in 1668 charles informed his sister the thing which is nearest the heart of the nation is trade and all that belongs to it national interest alone however did not shape public policy.
instead the needs of several powerful interest groups led to the rise of english commercial regulation.
each group looked to colonial commerce to solve a different problem.
for his part the king wanted money.
for their part english merchants were eager to exclude dutch rivals from lucrative american markets and needed government assistance to compete successfully with the dutch even in virginia or massachusetts bay.
from the perspective of the landed gentry who sat in parliament england needed a stronger navy and that in turn meant expansion of the domestic shipbuilding industry.
and almost everyone agreed england should establish a more favorable balance of trade that is increase exports decrease imports and grow richer at the expense of other european states.
none of these ideas was particularly innovative but taken together they provided a blueprint for englands first empire.
atlantic ocean corn hemp hogs norfolk wheat beef cattle naval stores beef cattle lumber n c hogs lumber naval stores wheat and corn beef cattle naval s c stores beef cattle tobacco rice and indigo fishing charles town ga ironworks savannah corn 200 miles 200 kilometers shipbuilding rum distilleries colonial products the above interactive map of colonial products demonstrates the economic reliance of the colonies on exports of certain raw materials food and agricultural products.
chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society during the 1660s the colonists showed little enthusiasm for the new imperial regulations.
reaction to the navigation acts varied from region to region.
virginians bitterly protested them.
the collection of english customs on tobacco greatly reduced the colonial planters profits.
moreover the exclusion of the dutch from the trade meant that growers often had to sell their crops at artificially low prices.
the navigation acts hit the small planters especially hard for they were least able to absorb increased production costs.
even though the governor of virginia lobbied on the planters behalf the crown turned a deaf ear.
by 1670 import duties on tobacco accounted for almost 100 000 a sum the king could scarcely do without.
at first new englanders simply ignored the commercial regulations.
indeed one massachusetts merchant reported in 1664 that boston entertained near one hundred sail of ships this year of ours and strangers the strangers of course were the dutch who had no intention of obeying the navigation acts so long as they could reach colonial ports.
some new england merchants found clever ways to circumvent the navigation acts.
these crafty traders picked up cargoes of enumerated goods such as sugar or tobacco sailed to another colonial port thereby technically fulfilling the letter of the law and then made directly for holland or france.
along the way they paid no customs.
to plug the loophole parliament passed the navigation act of 1673.
this statute established a plantation duty a sum of money equal to normal english customs duties to be collected on enumerated products at the various colonial ports.
new englanders could now sail wherever they pleased within the empire but they could not escape paying customs.
despite these legal reforms serious obstacles impeded the execution of imperial policy.
the customs service did not have enough effective agents in american ports to enforce the navigation acts fully and some men sent from the mother country did more harm than good.
edward randolph head of the imperial customs service in new england was such a person.
he was dispatched to boston in 1676 to gather information about the conduct of colonial trade.
his behavior was so obnoxious his reports about new englanders so condescending that he became the most hated man in late seventeenth century massachusetts.
parliament passed the last major piece of imperial legislation in 1696.
among other things the statute tightened enforcement procedures putting pressure specifically on the colonial governors to keep englands competitors out of american ports.
the act of 1696 also expanded the american customs service and for the first time set up vice admiralty courts in the colonies.
this decision eventually rankled the colonists.
established to settle disputes that occurred at sea viceadmiralty courts required neither juries nor oral cross examination both traditional elements of the common law.
but they were effective and sometimes even popular for resolving maritime questions quickly enough to send the ships to sea again with little delay.
the members of parliament believed these reforms would belatedly compel the colonists to accept the navigation acts and in large measure they were correct.
by 1700 american goods transshipped through the mother country accounted for a quarter of all english exports an indication the colonists found it profitable to obey the commercial regulations.
in fact during the eighteenth century smuggling from europe to america dried up almost completely.
colonial factions spark political revolt 1676 1691 how did colonial revolts affect the political culture of virginia and new england.
the navigation acts created an illusion of unity.
english administrators superimposed a system of commercial regulation on a number of different often unstable american colonies and called it an empire.
but these statutes did not remove long standing differences.
within each society men and women struggled to bring order out of disorder to establish stable ruling elites to diffuse ethnic and racial tensions and to cope with population pressures that imperial planners only dimly understood.
during the final decades of the seventeenth century these efforts sometimes sparked revolt.
first the virginians rebelled and then a few years later political violence swept through maryland new york and massachusetts bay englands most populous mainland colonies.
these events were not in any modern sense of the word ideological.
in each colony the local gentry split into factions usually the outs versus the ins and each side proclaimed its political legitimacy.
civil war in virginia bacons rebellion after 1660 the virginia economy suffered a prolonged depression.
returns from tobacco had not been good for some time and the navigation acts reduced profits even further.
into this unhappy environment came thousands of indentured servants people drawn to virginia as the governor explained in hope of bettering their condition in a growing country the reality bore little relation to their dreams.
a hurricane destroyed one entire tobacco crop and in 1667 dutch warships captured the tobacco fleet just as it was about to sail for england.
indentured servants complained about lack of food and clothing.
no wonder that virginias governor sir william berkeley despaired of ever ruling a people where six parts of seven at least are poor endebted discontented and armed in 1670 he and the house of burgesses disfranchised all landless freemen persons they regarded as troublemakers but the threat of social violence remained.
enter nathaniel bacon.
this ambitious young man arrived in virginia in 1674.
he came from a respectable english family and set himself up immediately as a substantial planter.
but he wanted more.
bacon envied the government patronage monopolized by berkeleys cronies a group known locally as the green spring faction.
when bacon attempted to obtain a license to engage in the fur trade he was rebuffed.
this lucrative commerce was reserved for the governors friends.
if bacon had been willing to wait he probably would have been accepted into the ruling clique but as subsequent events would demonstrate bacon was not a man of patience.
events beyond bacons control thrust him suddenly into the center of virginia politics.
in 1675 indians reacting to white encroachment attacked several outlying plantations killing a few colonists and virginians expected the governor to send an army to retaliate.
instead early in 1676 berkeley called for the construction of a line of defensive forts a plan that seemed to the settlers both expensive and ineffective.
indeed the strategy raised embarrassing questions.
was berkeley protecting his own fur monopoly.
was he planning to reward his friends with contracts to build useless forts.
colonial factions spark political revolt 1676 1691 read the document later refused to grant her a pardon.
another outspoken rebel lydia chiesman defended her husband before governor berkeley noting that the man would not have joined bacons forces had she not persuaded him to do so.
therefore lydia chiesman concluded.
since what her husband had done was by her meanes and so by consequence she most guilty that she might be hanged and he pardoned when charles ii learned of the fighting in virginia he dispatched a thousand regular soldiers to jamestown.
by the time they arrived berkeley had regained full control over the colonys government.
in october 1676 bacon died after a brief illness and within a few months his band of rebel followers had dispersed.
berkeley now an old and embittered man was recalled to england in 1677.
his successors especially lord culpeper 1680 1683 and lord howard of effingham 1683 1689 seemed interested primarily in enriching themselves at the expense of the virginia planters.
their self serving policies coupled with the memory of near anarchy helped heal divisions within the virginia ruling class.
for almost a century in fact the local gentry formed a united front against greedy royal appointees.
nathaniel bacons declaration july 30 1676 in 1676 nathaniel bacon and about 500 men from the virginia frontier marched on the colonial capital of jamestown to demand access to indian lands.
when the house of burgesses took too long in responding the rebels set fire to the capital.
while people speculated about such matters bacon stepped forward.
he boldly offered to lead a volunteer army against the indians at no cost to the hard pressed virginia taxpayers.
all he demanded was an official commission from berkeley giving him military command and the right to attack other indians not just the hostile susquehannocks.
the governor steadfastly refused.
with some justification berkeley regarded his upstart rival as a fanatic on the subject of indians.
the governor saw no reason to exterminate peaceful tribes simply to avenge the death of a few white settlers.
what followed would have been comic had not so many people died.
bacon thundered against the governors treachery berkeley labeled bacon a traitor.
both men appealed to the populace for support.
on several occasions bacon marched his followers to the frontier but they either failed to find the enemy or worse massacred friendly indians.
at one point bacon burned jamestown to the ground forcing the governor to flee to the colonys eastern shore.
bacons bumbling lieutenants chased berkeley across chesapeake bay only to be captured themselves.
thereupon the governor mounted a new campaign.
as bacons rebellion dragged on it became increasingly apparent that bacon and his gentry supporters had only the vaguest notion of what they were trying to achieve.
the members of the planter elite never seemed fully to appreciate that the rank and file soldiers often black slaves and poor white servants had serious legitimate grievances against berkeleys corrupt government and were demanding substantial reforms not just a share in the governors fur monopoly.
although women had not been allowed to vote in colony elections they made their political views clear enough during the rebellion.
some were apparently more violent than others.
sarah glendon for example agitated so aggressively in support of bacon that berkeley the glorious revolution in the bay colony during john winthrops lifetime massachusetts settlers developed an inflated sense of their independence from the mother country.
after 1660 however it became difficult even to pretend that the puritan colony was a separate state.
royal officials such as edward randolph demanded full compliance with the navigation acts.
moreover the growth of commerce attracted new merchants to the bay colony men who were anglicans rather than congregationalists and who maintained close business contacts in london.
these persons complained loudly of puritan intolerance.
the anglican faction was never large but its presence coupled with randolphs unceasing demands divided bay leaders.
a few puritan ministers and magistrates regarded compromise with england as treason a breaking of the lords covenant.
other spokesmen recognizing the changing political realities within the empire urged a more moderate course.
in 1675 in the midst of this ongoing political crisis the indians dealt the new englanders a terrible setback.
metacomet a wampanoag chief the whites called king philip declared war against the colonists.
the powerful narragansett indians whose lands the settlers had long coveted joined metacomet and in little more than a year of fighting the indians destroyed scores of frontier villages killed hundreds of colonists and disrupted the entire regional economy.
more than one thousand indians and new englanders died in the conflict.
the war left the people of massachusetts deeply in debt and more than ever uncertain of their future.
as in other parts of colonial america the defeated indians were forced off their lands compelled by events to become either refugees or economically marginal figures in white society.
in 1684 the debate over the bay colonys relation to the mother country ended abruptly.
the court of chancery sitting in london and acting on a petition from the king annulled the charter of the massachusetts bay company.
in one stroke of a pen the patent that chapt er 3 putting down roots opportunity and oppression in colonial society winthrop had so lovingly carried to america in 1630 the foundation for a city on a hill was gone.
the decision forced the most stubborn puritans to recognize they were part of an empire run by people who did not share their particular religious vision.
james ii a monarch who disliked representative institutions after all parliament a representative assembly had executed his father charles i decided to restructure the government of the entire region in the dominion of new england.
in various stages from 1686 to 1689 the dominion incorporated massachusetts connecticut rhode island plymouth new york new jersey and new hampshire under a single appointed royal governor.
for this demanding position james selected sir edmund andros pronounced andrews a military veteran of tyrannical temperament.
andros arrived in boston in 1686 and within a matter of months he had alienated everyone puritans moderates and even anglican merchants.
not only did andros abolish elective assemblies but he also enforced the navigation acts with such rigor that he brought about commercial depression.
andros declared normal town meetings illegal collected taxes the people never approved and packed the courts with supporters who detested the local population.
eighteenthcentury historian and royal governor thomas hutchinson compared andros unfavorably with the roman tyrant nero.
early in 1689 news of the glorious revolution reached boston.
the previous fall the ruling class of england had deposed james ii an admitted catholic and placed his protestant daughter mary and her husband william of orange on the throne as joint monarchs see the chart of the stuart monarchs on p 31.
as part of the settlement william and mary accepted a bill of rights a document stipulating the constitutional rights of all englishmen.
almost immediately the bay colonists overthrew the hated andros regime.
the new england version of the glorious revolution april 18 1689 was so popular that no one came to the governors defense.
andros was jailed without a single shot having been fired.
according to cotton mather a leading congregational minister the colonists were united by the most unanimous resolution perhaps that was ever known to have inspird any people however united as they may have been the bay colonists could not take the crowns support for granted.
william iii could have declared the new englanders rebels and summarily reinstated andros.
but thanks largely to the tireless lobbying of increase mather cottons father who pleaded the colonists case in london william abandoned the dominion of new england and in 1691 massachusetts received a new royal charter.
this document differed substantially from the company patent of 1629.
the freemen no longer selected their governor.
the choice now belonged to the king.
membership in the general court was determined by annual election and these representatives in turn chose the men who sat in the council or upper house subject always to the governor veto.
moreover the franchise restricted here as in other colonies to adult males was determined on the basis of personal property rather than church membership a change that brought massachusetts into conformity with general english practice.
on the local level town government remained much as it had been in winthrops time.
contagion of witchcraft the instability of the massachusetts government following andross arrest what reverend samuel willard described as the short anarchy accompanying our late revolution allowed what under normal political conditions would have been an isolated though ugly local incident to expand into a major colonial crisis.
excessively fearful men and women living in salem village a small unprosperous farming community nearly overwhelmed the new rulers of massachusetts bay.
accusations of witchcraft were not uncommon in seventeenth century new england.
puritans believed that an individual might make a compact with the devil but during the first decades of settlement authorities executed only about fifteen alleged witches.
sometimes villagers simply left suspected witches alone.
never before had fears of witchcraft plunged an entire community into panic.
the terror in salem village began in early 1692 when several adolescent girls began to behave in strange ways.
they cried out for no apparent reason they twitched on the ground.
when concerned neighbors asked what caused their suffering the girls announced they were victims of witches seemingly innocent persons who lived in the community.
the arrest of several alleged witches did not relieve the girls fits nor did prayer solve the problem.
additional accusations were made and at least one person confessed providing a frightening description of the devil as a thing all over hairy all the face hairy and a long nose in june 1692 a special court convened and began to send men and women to the gallows.
by the end of the summer the court had hanged nineteen people another was pressed to death.
several more suspects died in jail awaiting trial.
then suddenly the storm was over.
led by increase mather a group of prominent congregational ministers belatedly urged leniency and restraint.
especially troubling to the clergymen was the courts decision to accept spectral evidence that is reports of dreams and visions in which the accused appeared as the devils agent.
worried about convicting people on such dubious testimony mather declared it were better that ten suspected witches should escape than that one innocent person should be condemned the colonial government accepted the ministers advice and convened a new court which promptly acquitted pardoned or released the remaining suspects.
after the salem nightmare witchcraft ceased to be a capital offense.
no one knows exactly what sparked the terror in salem village.
the community had a history of religious discord and during the 1680s the people split into angry factions over the choice of a minister.
economic tensions played a part as well.
poorer more traditional farmers accused members of prosperous commercially oriented families of being witches.
the underlying misogyny of the entire culture meant the victims were more often women than men.
terror of attack by native americans may also have played a part in this ugly affair.
indians in league with the french in canada had recently raided nearby communities killing people related to the families of the bewitched salem girls and significantly during the trials some victims described the devil as a tawny man for further discussion of the salem witchcraft trials see witches and the law pp.
the glorious revolution in new york and maryland the glorious revolution in new york was more violent than it had been in massachusetts bay.
divisions within new yorks ruling class ran deep and involved ethnic as well as religious differences.
english newcomers and powerful anglo dutch families who conclusion local aspirations within an atlantic empire had recently risen to commercial prominence in new york city opposed the older dutch elite.
much like nathaniel bacon jacob leisler was a man entangled in events beyond his control.
leisler the son of a german minister emigrated to new york in 1660 and through marriage aligned himself with the dutch elite.
while he achieved moderate prosperity as a merchant leisler resented the success of the anglo dutch.
when news of the glorious revolution reached new york city in may 1689 leisler raised a group of militiamen and seized the local fort in the name of william and mary.
as leader of leislers rebellion he apparently expected an outpouring of popular support but it was not forthcoming.
his rivals waited watching while leisler desperately attempted to legitimize his actions.
through bluff and badgering leisler managed to hold the colony together especially after french forces burned schenectady february 1690 but he never established a secure political base.
in march 1691 a new royal governor henry sloughter reached new york.
he ordered leisler to surrender his authority but when sloughter refused to prove he had been sent by william read the document cotton mather memorable providences relating to witchcraft rather than by the deposed james leisler hesitated.
the pause cost leisler his life.
sloughter declared leisler a rebel and in a hasty trial a court sentenced him and his chief lieutenant jacob milbourne to be hanged by the neck and being alive their bodyes be cutt downe to earth and their bowells to be taken out and they being alive burnt before their faces.
in 1695 parliament officially pardoned leisler but he not being alive the decision arrived a bit late.
long after his death political factions calling themselves leislerians and anti leislerians struggled to dominate new york government.
indeed in no other eighteenth century colony was the level of bitter political rivalry so high.
during the last third of the seventeenth century the colony of maryland stumbled from one political crisis to another.
protestants in the colonys lower house resisted lord baltimores catholic friends in the upper house or council.
when news of jamess overthrow reached maryland early in 1689 pent up antiproprietary and anti catholic sentiment exploded.
john coode a member of the assembly and an outspoken protestant formed a group called the protestant association which in august forced baltimore governor william joseph to resign.
coode avoided leislers fatal mistakes.
the protestant association citing many wrongs suffered at the hands of local catholics petitioned the crown to transform maryland into a royal colony.
after reviewing the case william accepted coodes explanation and in 1691 the king dispatched a royal governor to maryland.
a new assembly dominated by protestants declared anglicanism the established religion.
catholics were excluded from public office on the grounds that they might be in league with french catholics in canada.
lord baltimore lost control of the colonys government but he and his family did retain title to marylands undistributed lands.
in 1715 the crown restored to full proprietorship the fourth lord baltimore who had been raised a member of the church of england and maryland remained in the hands of the calvert family until 1776.
conclusion local aspirations within an atlantic empire the publication of cotton mathers memorable providences relating to witchcrafts and possessions 1689 contributed to the hysteria that resulted in the salem witchcraft trials of the 1690s but he did not take part in the trials.
he is shown here surrounded by some of the forms a demon assumed in the documented case of an english family besieged by witches.
it is no little blessing of god cotton mather announced proudly in 1700 that we are part of the english nation a half century earlier john winthrop would not have spoken these words at least not with such enthusiasm.
the two men were of course products of different political cultures.
it was not so much that the character of massachusetts society had changed.
in fact the puritan families of 1700 were much like those of the founding generation.
rather the difference was in englands attitude toward the colonies.
rulers living more than three thousand miles away now made political and economic demands that mathers contemporaries could not ignore.
the creation of a new imperial system did not however erase profound sectional differences.
by 1700 for example the chesapeake colonies were more not less committed to the cultivation of tobacco and slave labor.
although the separate regions were being pulled slowly into englands commercial orbit they did not have much to do with each other.
the elements that sparked a powerful sense of nationalism among colonists dispersed over a huge territory would not be evident for a very long time.
it would be a mistake therefore to anticipate the coming of the american revolution.
complete the assignment witches and the law a problem of evidence in 1692 on myhistorylab law and society witches and the law a problem of evidence in 1692 this seventeenth century house is the former home of jonathan corwin one of the magistrates who presided over the salem witch trials.
despite having received the nickname of the witch house no accused witches actually resided here nor were trials ever held within its walls.
t he events that occurred at salem village in 1692 haunt modern memory.
in popular american culture the incident has come to represent our worst nightmare a communitysanctioned witch hunt that ferrets out deviants in the name of law.
what seems most unsettling about the incident is the failure of allegedly good men and women to bear witness against judicial terror.
the ordeal of salem village links a distant colonial past with the infamous mccarthy hearings of the 1950s as well as other more recent witch hunts.
the story of this deeply troubled town challenges us to confront the possibility that we too might allow law and authority to become instruments of injustice.
the challenge in exploring law and society is how best to interpret the salem trials.
it would be easy to insist that puritan magistrates were gross hypocrites figures who consciously manipulated the law for their own hateful purposes.
but such conclusions are simplistic they fail to place the salem nightmare in proper historical context.
the participants in this intense social drama acted on a complex set of seventeenth century assumptions legal religious and scientific and if judges and jurors wronged innocent people they did so by the standards of a society very different from our own.
few new englanders doubted the existence of witches.
for centuries european communities had identified certain persons as agents of the devil and when the puritans migrated to america they carried these beliefs with them.
they recognized no conflict between rational religion and the possible existence of a satanic world populated by witches.
ordinary farmers regarded unusual events the strange death of a farm animal for example as evidence of witchcraft.
new englands intellectual leaders sustained popular superstition in impressive scientific publications.
in his memorable providences relating to witchcrafts and possessions 1689 the reverend cotton mather declared i am resolvd.
never to use.
one grain of patience with any man that shall.
impose upon me a denial of devils or of witches.
count him down right impudent if he assert the non existence of things which we have had such palpable convictions of colonial new englanders did more than talk and write about witches as early as 1647 they executed several.
before the salem outbreak ninety one people had been tried for witchcraft in massachusetts and connecticut and sixteen of them were hanged not burned as some historians have claimed.
in addition hundreds of people had accused neighbors of witchcraft but for many reasons usually lack of convincing evidence they stopped short of taking such disputes before the court.
these were isolated incidents.
before 1692 fear of witches had not sparked mass hysteria.
salem village was different.
in this instance charges of witchcraft shattered a community already deeply divided against itself.
the predominantly agricultural salem village lay a few miles up the ipswich road from the bustling commercial port of salem town.
the farmers of the village envied their neighbors prosperity.
even more they resented the control that town authorities exerted over the village church and government.
this tension found expression in numerous personal and family rivalries.
in 1689 the congregation at salem village ordained the reverend samuel parris a troubled figure who provoked disquietness and restlessness and who fanned the factionalism that had long plagued the community.
the witchcraft crisis began suddenly in mid january 1692 when two girls in the parris household experienced violent convulsions and frightening visions.
a local physician examined the afflicted children but found no natural cause for their condition.
soon anxious families raised the possibility of witchcraft a move which set off a storm of accusations that did not abate until october.
by that time 20 people had died and more than 150 prisoners still awaited trial.
although the witch hysteria affected everyone men and women rich and poor farmers and merchants the accusers and their targets were not evenly distributed among the population of salem village.
twenty of the thirty four persons who claimed to have been bewitched were girls between the ages of 11 and 20.
women a full generation older than the accusers were most likely to be identified as witches more than 40 percent of the accused fell into this category.
although men and women from many different backgrounds were accused one widely shared characteristic was a history of socially unacceptable behavior.
sarah good for example smoked a pipe and was known for cursing her enemies.
john aldins accusers described him as a bold fellow.
who lies with indian squaws.
and stands with his hat on before the judges bridget bishop ran a scandalous tavern and dressed in a particularly flashy immodest manner.
those who testified against the supposed witches came from all classes both genders and every age group.
indeed virtually the entire community was drawn into the ugly business of charge and countercharge fear and betrayal.
new englands intellectual leaders most of them harvard educated clergymen tried to make sense out of reports coming out of salem.
since the colonies did not yet have a newspaper the reflections of these prominent figures significantly shaped how the entire society interpreted the frightening events of 1692.
during the spring of that year accusations of witchcraft mounted while magistrates interrogated everyone touched by the contagion.
arriving from england in mid may at the height of the witch hunt the new royal governor of massachusetts bay william phips appointed a special court of law a court of oyer and terminer to try the cases at salem village.
the seven judges he appointed all had previous experience in the colonys law courts.
phips wanted the trials to be as fair as possible and procedurally correct.
a proper jury was impaneled.
despite precautions however the court itself soon succumbed to the frenzy.
chief judge and deputy governor william stoughton for example staunchly believed the girls had been bewitched and he had little doubt that real witches were responsible for the trouble at salem village.
by contrast nathaniel saltonstall was highly skeptical of the witchcraft charges.
after witnessing the first round of executions saltonstall resigned from the court and turned to alcohol to persuade himself the court had not made a terrible mistake.
although the judges and jury may have felt ambivalent about what was happening the law stated that persons convicted as witches must die.
everything turned on evidence.
confession offered the most reliable proof of witchcraft and it occurred surprisingly often.
we will never know what compelled people to confess.
some may have actually believed they had cast spells on their neighbors or had foretold the future.
many women though believing themselves innocent may have confessed because of guilt for impure thoughts that they had privately entertained.
perhaps the psychological strain of imprisonment coupled with intense social scrutiny convinced them they might have unwittingly entered into a contract with the devil.
regardless the stories they told undoubtedly mortified those who heard them and fueled the growing frenzy.
imagine the reaction to ann fosters july 18 confession ann foster.
confessed that the devill in the shape of a black man appeared to her with martha carrier about six yeare since when they made her a witch and that she promised to serve the devill two years upon which the devill promised her prosperity and many things but never performed it that she and martha carrier did both ride on a stick or pole when they went to the witch meeting at salem village and that the stick broak as they were carried in the air above the tops of the trees and they fell but she did hang fast about the neck of martha carrier and were presently at the village.
she further saith that she heard some of the witches say that there was three hundred and five in the whole country and that they would ruin that place the village.
most of the accused did not confess however forcing the judges to produce tangible evidence of witchcraft.
the charge was difficult because the crime of bewitchment was by nature an invisible act.
earthly laws and magistrates had difficulty dealing with crimes that occurred in the spiritual world.
in this situation the beleaguered judges used a few customary tests.
all witches supposedly had a witchs teat usually a flap of skin located anywhere on the body from which they gave suck to the devil.
the judges subjected almost every defendant to a humiliating physical examination in order to find such biological abnormalities.
witches could also be discovered by having them touch a girl in the midst of her torments.
if the girls fits ceased then the person who touched her was assumed responsible for her agony.
since this form of evidence was immediately observable judges relied on it heavily oftentimes parading accused witches before the possessed girls waiting to see whose touch would calm them.
had the terrible ordeal turned solely on unsightly warts the trials might have ended without further note.
but that did not happen.
the judges allowed the jury to entertain a different sort of evidence spectral evidence and it was this material that hanged people at salem village.
new englanders believed that witches worked by dispatching a specter a phantom spirit to torment their victims.
this meant that witches had power over great distances they were invisible.
they entered peoples dreams and dozens of good new englanders complained of having been bitten pinched or even choked by specters that looked a lot like their neighbors.
the judges regularly accepted spectral testimony of the sort offered by 18 year old john cook.
one morning about sun rising as i was in bed.
i saw bridget bishop.
standing in the chamber by the window and she looked on me.
presently struck me on the side of the head wch did very much hurt me then i saw her goe out under the end window at a little creviss about so bigg as i could thrust my hand into.
i saw her again the same day.
walke cross the roome having at the time an apple in my hand it flew out of my hand into my mothers lapp who stood six or eight foot distance from me then she disappeared though my mother severall others were in the same room yet they affirmed they saw her not.
as far as the witch hunters were concerned bridget bishop had been caught in the act.
to the modern observer however the problems with this kind of evidence seem obvious.
first how could one tell whether cook was lying.
the power of his story lay in its inability to be corroborated for one could never check the authenticity of an intensely private dream or vision.
the second problem was that persons accused of being witches had no defense against spectral testimony.
when captain john aldin stood before his accusers for example they immediately fell to the ground writhing in pain.
when asked why he tormented the girls aldin firmly denied any wrongdoing inquiring why the judges suppose d he had no better things to do than to come to salem to afflict these persons that i never knew or saw before aldins defense did not carry much weight when set against the testimony of the suffering girls and rather than conclude the accusers manifested a lying spirit the judges admitted all spectral evidence as incontestable proof of witchcraft.
very early in the trials a few people expressed doubts about the reliability of this particular form of evidence.
cotton mather and other ministers for example issued a statement urging the judges to use spectral evidence with a very critical and exquisite caution some feared the devil could assume the shape of innocent people.
if this was the case then the visions of the afflicted proved nothing but the devils ability to deceive humans.
in the absence of spectral evidence the cases against most of the witches boiled down to little more than longstanding complaints against obnoxious neighbors.
the fury of prosecution silenced the skeptical voices however and chief judge william stoughton continued to accept dreams and visions as proof of witchcraft.
fantastic testimony about flying witches and pinching specters lent an almost circuslike air to the proceedings at salem.
before the judges and the members of the jury the afflicted girls would fall to the ground convulsing and screaming claiming to see witches that remained invisible to the court.
hundreds of spectators sat horrified as satan caused suffering before their own eyes.
for seventeenth century new englanders who felt the presence of the spiritual world in their everyday lives the courtroom at salem offered the opportunity to witness the struggle between the forces of darkness and light.
because of the gravity of the situation no one expected the judges to deal lightly with those who had sworn allegiance to the devil.
indeed in the interest of obtaining a confession the judges conducted harsh interrogations usually assuming the guilt of the defendant.
the intense psychological pressure inflicted on the defendants is revealed in the questioning of sarah good a woman subsequently hanged as a witch judge sarah good what evil spirit have you familiarity with.
judge why do you hurt these children.
good i do not hurt them.
i scorn it.
judge who do you employ then to do it.
good i employ nobody.
judge have you made a contract with the devil.
judge sarah good.
why do you not tell us the truth.
why do you thus torment these poor children.
good i do not torment them.
even the ministers who advised caution applauded the judges assiduous endeavors and encouraged the vigorous prosecution of the witches.
as the witch hysteria gained momentum few people dared to defend the witches for fear of being accused themselves.
the humble pleas of those who genuinely thought themselves innocent fell on the deaf ears of a community convinced of its own righteousness.
by late september with twenty people already executed the emotional intensity that had sustained the witch hunt in its early stages began to ebb.
for one thing the accusations spun wildly out of control as the afflicted girls began naming unlikely candidates as witches prominent ministers a judges mother in law and even the governors wife.
such accusations discredited the entire procedure by which the witches had been discovered.
also although the jails could barely hold the 150 people still awaiting trial the accusations kept coming.
the terror was feeding on itself.
in mid october governor phips dismissed the original court and appointed a new one this time barring spectral evidence.
all remaining defendants were quickly acquitted although curiously enough three women still confessed to having practiced witchcraft.
in a letter to the king phips explained his decision to end the trials claiming that the people had become dissatisfied and disturbed men and women who had been so eager to purify the community of evil to murder neighbors in the name of a higher good now spoke of their fear of divine retribution.
perhaps the dying words of sarah good uttered in response to the assistant minister of salem town echoed in their ears i am no more a witch than you are a wizard and if you take away my life god will give you blood to drink soon after the trials ended the witch hunters quickly turned confessors.
in 1706 ann putnam one of the most prolific accusers publicly asked for forgiveness i desire to be humbled before god.
it was a great delusion of satan that deceived me in that time nine years earlier the salem jurors had issued a similar statement asking the community to understand the particular pressures that compelled them to convict so many people we confess that we.
were not capable to understand nor able to withstand the mysterious delusions of the powers of darkness.
but were for want of knowledge in our selves and better information from others prevailed with to take up with such evidence against the accused as on further consideration and better information we justly fear was insufficient for the touching the lives of any.
whereby we fear we have been instrumental with others tho ignorantly and unwittingly to bring upon our selves and this people of the lord the guilt of innocent blood.
the state never again executed citizens for witchcraft.
the experience at salem had taught new englanders that although witches may have existed no human court could identify a witch beyond a reasonable doubt.
the reverend increase mather summed up the attitude of a post salem new england it were better that ten suspected witches should escape than that one innocent person should be condemned what triggered the tragic events of 1692 remains a mystery.
some historians view the witch hunt as a manifestation of salem villages socioeconomic troubles.
this interpretation helps explain why the primary accusers came from the agrarian village while the alleged witches either resided in or were somehow connected to the market oriented town.
perhaps the charge of witchcraft masked a deep resentment for their neighbors monetary success and the new set of values that accompanied the market economy.
other historians believe the witch hunt reflected a deep ambivalence about gender roles in new england society.
young girls lashed out at older nonconforming women because they symbolized a freedom that was achievable within new england society yet vehemently criticized.
facing the choice between becoming their husbands servants or being free the accusers may have expressed this cultural frustration in lethal ways.
terror of indian attack may have exacerbated community fear.
some accusers described the devil as a tawney man a clear reference to native americans.
these and many other factors contributed to the witch phenomenon.
regardless of which interpretation one favors one must acknowledge that salem village had indeed been possessed.
the blame rests on the community as a whole not just on a few vindictive judges.
in 1697 another repentant witch hunter the reverend john hale tried to explain how well meaning people had caused such harm i am abundantly satisfyed that those who were most concerned to act and judge in those matters did not willingly depart from the rules of righteousness.
but such was the darkness of that day.
that we walked in the clouds and could not see our way.
hales words ring hollow.
they came too late to do much good.
as other communities have learned throughout the long history of this nation it is easier to apologize after the fact than to stand up courageously against the first injustice.
questions for discussion 1.
do historians interpretations of the salem witch hunt seem adequate to explain the events of 1692.
why or why not.
how does your judgment of the ministers and magistrates in charge change if you judge them by modern standards versus the scientific and theological standards of their own time.
should the magistrates who sat in judgment at salem have been tried later for incompetence or malfeasance.
what can modern americans learn from the events of 1692.
chapt er 3 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 3 putting down roots on myhistorylab time line 1619 first blacks arrive in virginia 1660 charles ii is restored to the english throne first navigation act passed by parliament second navigation staple act passed plantation duty imposed to close loopholes in commercial regulations king philips metacomets war devastates new england bacons rebellion threatens governor berkeleys government in virginia william penn receives charter for pennsylvania charter of the massachusetts bay company revoked duke of york becomes james ii dominion of new england established james ii driven into exile during glorious revolution rebellions break out in massachusetts new york and maryland jacob leisler executed salem village wracked by witch trials parliament establishes board of trade stono uprising of south carolina slaves terrifies white planters chapter review sources of stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century what factors explain the remarkable social stability achieved in early new england.
seventeenth century new englanders migrated to america in family groups ensuring that the ratio of men to women remained roughly even making it easier for young people to marry and start families.
stable marriage together with new englands healthy climate led to rapid population growth.
while many young new englanders served as servants most seventeenth century colonists eventually acquired property.
p 56 they established enduring kinship networks that helped mitigate the hardships of slavery.
enslaved africans also developed new forms of music and folk art that drew upon african roots and adapted the christianity taught them by their masters to include african religious elements.
p 61 rise of a commercial empire n y hogs beef cattle sheep conn r i skins n j pa b n why did england discourage free and open trade in colonial america.
new york during the seventeenth century parliament passed mercantilist laws declaring that colonial raw materials and commerce would benefit only the mother country and not a european rival.
these commercial regulations represented englands new blueprint for the empire.
p 66 lumber md.
philadelphia wheat del.
atl oc corn a the challenge of the chesapeake environment beef cattle lumber md.
philade wheat del.
what factors contributed to political unrest in the chesapeake region during this period.
corn skins colonial factions spark political revolt 1676 1691 hemp most immigrants to the early chesapeake colonies were single young male indentured servants.
disease killed many of them shortly after arriving.
men outnumbered women making it difficult for freemen to marry.
because of the short life expectancy marriages did not last long.
economic inequality and family instability contributed to political unrest.
p 59 va hemp hogs wheat beef cattle naval stores norfolk race and freedom in british america how did african american slaves preserve an independent cultural identity in the new world.
42 west indies 6 spanish south america 6 guianas slaves especially those in the south developed new creole languages that blended english with african languages.
how did colonial revolts affect the political culture of virginia and new england.
during bacons rebellion landless freemen rose up against the governor and demanded indian lands.
although the rebellion failed it unified virginias ruling elite.
in 1684 james ii restructured the northern colonies to increase crown authority.
new englanders threw off the dominion of new england in 1689 and negotiated for government charters that allowed significant local autonomy.
p 68 study resources key terms and definitions indentured servant persons who agreed to serve a master for a set number of years in exchange for the cost of transport to america.
indentured servitude was the dominant form of labor in the chesapeake colonies before slavery.
p 55 yeomen southern small landholders who owned no slaves and who lived primarily in the foothills of the appalachian and ozark mountains.
p 59 royal african company slaving company created to meet colonial planters demands for black laborers.
p 61 mercantilism mercantilism assumed that the supply of wealth was fixed.
to increase its wealth a nation needed to export more goods than it imported.
favorable trade and protective economic policies and colonial possessions rich in raw materials were important in achieving this balance.
p 67 enumerated goods raw materials such as tobacco sugar and rice that were produced in the british colonies and under the navigation acts had to be shipped only to england or its colonies.
p 67 navigation acts commercial restrictions that regulated colonial commerce to favor englands accumulation of wealth.
p 67 bacons rebellion an armed rebellion in virginia 1675 1676 led by nathaniel bacon against the colonys royal governor sir william berkeley.
p 69 dominion of new england incorporation of the new england colonies under a single appointed royal governor that lasted from 1686 1689.
p 70 glorious revolution replacement of james ii by william iii and mary ii as english monarchs in 1688 marking the beginning of constitutional monarchy in britain.
p 70 spectral evidence in the salem witch trials the court allowed reports of dreams and visions in which the accused appeared as the devils agent to be introduced as testimony.
the accused had no defense against this kind of evidence when the judges later disallowed this testimony the executions for witchcraft ended.
p 70 critical thinking questions 1.
what factors would have drawn ambitious young english people in the first half of the seventeenth century to the chesapeake region rather than to new england.
since living with large numbers of unfree africans frightened whites 3.
did the mercantilist system best serve the interests of the english or of the american colonists.
why did colonial rebellions of the seventeenth century not lead to demands for political independence.
why did colonists continue to import so many slaves.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 3 on myhistorylab social stability new england colonies of the seventeenth century read the document james oglethorpe the stono rebellion 1739 p 66 read the document prenuptial agreement 1653 p 57 rise of a commercial empire read the document anne bradstreet before the birth of one of her children p 58 view the map colonial products p 67 race and freedom in british america colonial factions spark political revolt view the closer look african slave trade 1451 1870 p 62 read the document nathaniel bacons declaration july 30 1676 p 69 view the closer look plan and sections of a slave ship and an illustration of a slave camp p 63 complete the assignment anthony johnson a free black planter on pungoteague creek p 64 read the document passage 1788 p 66 olaudah equiano the middle read the document cotton mather memorable providences relating to witchcraft p 71 complete the assignment witches and the law a problem of evidence in 1692 p 72 indicates study plan media assignment experience of empire eighteenth century america contents and learning objectives growth and diversity pg.
80 what difficulties did native americans face in maintaining their cultural independence on the frontier.
spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century pg.
83 religious revivals in provincial societies pg.
90 how did the great awakening transform the religious culture of colonial america.
clash of political cultures pg.
92 why was the spanish empire unable to control its northern frontier.
why were eighteenth century colonial assemblies not fully democratic.
the impact of european ideas on american culture pg.
87 century of imperial war pg.
95 why did colonial americans support great britains wars against france.
how did european ideas affect eighteenth century american life.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab feature essay conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase 36 chapter 2 the english come to the americas jamestown was the first english settlement in the americas.
supported by the london company it was established in 1607.
peter newark pictures bridgeman art library local streams.
without what they learned from the natives the early settlers would not have survived.
despite this help the settlers often expressed hostilities toward the natives believing that english civilization was superior to that of these savages jamestown remained a tiny colony for more than a decade.
the natives were far more powerful than the english for years.
coastal virginia had numerous tribes the algonquins sioux and iroquois which were all part of the powhatan confederacy named after the great chief who controlled a large area near the coasts.
what the english called virginia the natives called tsenacommacah.
within a few months of settling in virginia only 38 men of the original 144 were alive the rest killed by disease and famine.
these men owed their survival to the help provided by the indians and to the leadership of captain john smith who at age 27 was already a famous world traveler.
smith imposed work and order on the settlement and created a shaky relationship with the natives sometimes negotiating for food and at other times stealing it.
reorganization ano expansion as jamestown struggled to survive the london company now renamed the virginia company was already dreaming of bigger things.
in 1609 it obtained a new charter from the king which increased its power and enlarged its territory.
it offered stock in the company to planters who were willing to migrate at their own expense.
and it provided free passage to virginia for poorer people who would agree to serve the company for seven years.
in the spring of 1609 two years after the first arrival of the english a fleet of nine vessels was dispatched to jamestown with approximately 600 people including some women and children.
the starving time nevertheless disaster followed.
one of the virginia bound ships was lost at sea in a hurricane.
another ran aground in the bermuda islands and was unable to sail again for months.
many of the new settlers succumbed to fevers before winter came.
the winter of 1609 1610 was especially severe a period known as the starving time by then the natives realized that the colonists were a threat to their civilization and stopped them from moving farther inland into indian lands.
barricaded within a small palisade and unable to hunt or cultivate food the colonists lived on what they could find dogs cats rats snakes toadstools horsehides and even the corpses of dead men as one survivor recalled.
when the migrants who had run aground in bermuda finally arrived in jamestown the following may they found only 60 emaciated people still alive.
the new arrivals took the survivors onto their ship and sailed for england.
but as the refugees proceeded down the james they met an english ship coming up the river part of a fleet bringing supplies and the colonies first governor lord de la warr.
the departing settlers agreed to return to jamestown.
new relief expeditions soon began to arrive and the fort began to thrive.
new settlements began lining the river above and below jamestown.
there settlers discovered tobacco which was tor them a new crop that was already popular among the spanish colonies to the south.
in 1612 the jamestown planter john rolfe began cultivating the crop in virginia.
soon other planters in the area followed.
tobacco was the first profitable crop in the new colony for the settlers and it encouraged tobacco planters to move farther inland deeper into the natives farmlands.
de la warr and his successors sir thomas dale and sir thomas gates imposed a harsh and rigid discipline on the colony they organized settlers into work de la warrs harsh discipline transplantations and borderlands 37 v pennsylvania boundary claimed byword baltimor l 632 boundary settlement 1750 virginia colony fairfax proprietary to lord baltimore 1632 granville proprietary 1682 date settlement founded 50jnr elizabeth city 1793 north caroon tobacco plant this 1622 woodcut later hand colored represents the tobacco plant cultivated by english settlers in virginia in the early seventeenth century after john rolfe introduced it to the colonists.
on the right is an image of a man smoking the plant through a very large pipe.
getty images the growth of the chesapeake 1607 1750 this map shows the political forms of european settlement in the region of the chesapeake bay in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
note the several different kinds of colonial enterprises the royal colony of virginia controlled directly by the english crown after the failure of the early commercial enterprises there and the proprietary regions of maryland northern virginia and north carolina which were under the control of powerful english aristocrats.
did these political differences have any significant effect on the economic activities of the various chesapeake colonies.
gangs and they sentenced offenders to be flogged hanged or broken on the wheel.
but this communal system of labor did not function effectively for long.
settlers often evaded work.
governor dale soon concluded that the colony would fare better if the colonists had personal incentives to work.
he began to permit the private ownership and cultivation of land.
landowners would repay the company with part time work and contributions of grain to its storehouses.
under the leadership of these first harsh governors virginia was not always a happy place.
but it survived and even expanded.
new settlements began lining the river above and below jamestown.
the expansion was partly a result of the order and discipline the governors at times managed to impose.
it was partly a product of increased military assaults on the local indian tribes which provided protection for the new settlements.
but it also occurred because the colonists had at last discovered a marketable crop tobacco.
tobacco europeans had become aware of tobacco soon after columbus s first return from the west indies where he had seen the cuban natives smoking small cigars tabacos which they inserted in the nostril.
by the early seventeenth century tobacco from the spanish colonies was already in wide use in europe.
some critics denounced it as a poisonous weed the cause of many diseases.
king james i himself led the attack with a counterblaste to tobacco 1604 in which he urged his people not to imitate the barbarous and beastly manners of the wild godless and slavish indians especially in so vile and stinking a custom other critics were concerned because englands tobacco purchases from the spanish colonies meant a drain of english gold to the spanish importers.
still the demand for tobacco soared.
then in 1612 the jamestown planter john rolfe began to experiment in virginia with a harsh strain of tobacco that local indians had been growing for years.
he produced crops of high emergence of quality and found ready buyers in england.
tobacco cultivation quickly spread up and down the james.
the character of this tobacco economy its profitability its uncertainty its land and labor demands transformed chesapeake society in fundamental ways.
the tobacco economy 38 chapter 2 of most immediate importance was that tobacco cultivation required territorial expansion.
tobacco growers needed large areas of farmland to grow their crops and because tobacco exhausted the soil after only a few years the demand for land increased even more.
english farmers began establishing plantations deeper and deeper in the interior moving from the center of european settlement at jamestown into the territory the natives considered their own.
expansion the headright system even the discovery of tobacco cultivation was not enough to help the virginia company.
by 1616 there were still no profits only land and debts.
nevertheless the promoters continued to hope that the tobacco trade would allow them finally to turn the corner.
in 1618 they launched a last great campaign to attract settlers and make the colony profitable.
part of that campaign was an effort to recruit new settlers and workers to the colony.
the company called it the headright system.
headrights were fifty acre grants of land which new settlers could acquire in a variety of ways.
those who already lived in the colony received 100 acres apiece.
each new settler received a single headright for himself or herself.
this system encouraged family groups to migrate together since the more family members traveled to america the larger the landholding the family would receive.
in addition anyone new settler or old who paid for the passage of other immigrants to virginia would receive an additional headright for each new arrival thus the company hoped inducing the prosperous to import new laborers to america.
some colonists were able to assemble sizable plantations with the combined headrights they received for their families and their servants.
in return they contributed a small quitrent one shilling a year for each headright to the company.
the company added other incentives as well.
to diversify the colonial economy it transported ironworkers and other skilled craftsmen to virginia.
in 1619 it sent 100 englishwomen to the colony which was still overwhelmingly male to become the wives of male colonists.
the women were purchased for 120 pounds of tobacco.
their status was somewhere between indentured servants and free people depending on the good will or lack of it of their husbands.
the company promised the colonists the full rights of englishmen as provided in the original charter of 1606 an end to the strict and arbitrary rule of the communal years and even a share in self government.
on july 30 1619 in the jamestown church delegates from the various communities met as the house of burgesses.
it was the first meeting of an elected legislature within what was to become the united states.
a month later another event in virginia established a very different but no less momentous precedent.
as john rolfe recorded about the latter end of august a dutch ship brought in 20 and odd negroes the status and fate of these first africans in the english colonies remains obscure.
there is some reason to suppression of the powhatan indians believe that the colonists did not consider them slaves that they thought of them as servants to be held for a term of years and then freed like the white servants with whom the planters were already familiar.
for a time moreover the use of black labor remained limited.
although africans continued to trickle steadily into the colony planters continued to prefer european indentured servants until at least the 1670s when white servants began to become scarce and expensive.
but whether or not anyone realized it at the time the small group of black people who arrived in 1619 marked a first step toward the enslavement of africans within what was to be the american republic.
the expansion of the colony was able to proceed only because of effective suppression of local indians who resisted the expanding english presence.
for two years sir thomas dale led unrelenting assaults against the powhatan indians and in the process kidnapped the great chief powhatans daughter pocahontas.
when powhatan refused to ransom her she converted to christianity and in 1614 married john rolfe.
pocahontas accompanied her husband back to england where as a christian convert and a gracious woman she stirred interest in projects to civilize the indians.
she died while abroad.
at that point powhatan ceased his attacks on the english in the face of overwhelming odds.
but after his death several years later his brother opechancanough became head of the native confederacy.
recognizing that the position of his tribe was rapidly deteriorating he resumed the effort to defend tribal lands from european encroachments.
on a march morning in 1622 tribesmen called on the white settlements as if to offer goods for sale then suddenly attacked.
not until 347 whites of both sexes and all ages lay dead or dying were the indian warriors finally forced to retreat.
the surviving english struck back mercilessly at the indians and turned back the threat for a time.
only after opechancanough failed in another uprising in 1644 did the powhatans finally cease to challenge the eastern regions of the colony.
by then the virginia company in london was defunct.
the company had poured all its funds into its profitless jamestown demise of the venture and in the aftermath of the 1622 virginia indian uprising faced imminent bank company ruptcy.
in 1624 james i revoked the companys charter and the colony came under the control of the crown.
it would remain so until 1776.
exchanges of agricultural technology the hostility of the early english settlers toward their indian neighbors was in part a result of their conviction that their own civilization was greatly superior to that of the natives and above all that they were more technologically advanced.
the english after all had great oceangoing vessels muskets and other a vanced implements of weaponry and many other tools that t e indians had not developed.
indeed when ohn smith and ot er early jamestown residents grew frustrated at their inabil y to find gold and other precious commodities they often ame t eir failure on the backwardness of the natives.
transplantations and borderlands 39 population thousands 87 5 1607 1620 1630 1640 1650 1660 1670 1680 1690 1700 year the non indian population of the chesapeake 1607 1700 this graph shows the rapid growth of the population of the chesapeake during its first century of european settlement.
note the dramatic increases in the first half of the century and the somewhat slower increase in the later decades.
if the forcibly imported slave population were not counted in the last two decades of the century the non indian population would not have grown at all.
what impact did the growth of african slavery have on the rate of immigration by europeans.
yet the survival of jamestown was in the end largely a result of agricultural technologies developed by indians and indian borrowed from them by the english.
agricultural native agriculture was far better adapted techniques to the soil and climate of virginia than were the agricultural traditions the english settlers brought with them.
the indians of virginia had built successful farms with neatly ordered fields in which grew a variety of crops some previously unknown to the english.
some of the indian farmlands stretched over hundreds of acres and supported substantial populations.
the english settlers did not adopt all the indian agricultural techniques.
natives cleared fields not as the english did by cutting down and uprooting all the trees.
instead they killed trees in place by girdling them that is making deep incisions around the base in the areas in which they planted or by setting fire to their roots and they planted crops not in long straight rows but in curving patterns around the dead tree trunks.
but in other respects the english learned a great deal from the indians about how to grow food in north america.
in particular they quickly recognized the great value of corn which proved to be easier to cultivate and to produce much greater yields than any of the european grains the english had known at home.
corn was also attractive to the settlers because its stalks could be a source of sugar and because it spoiled less easily than other grains.
the english also learned the advantages of growing beans alongside corn to enrich the soil.
maryland and the calverts maryland was founded under circumstances very different from those of virginia but it nonetheless developed in ways markedly similar to those of its neighbor to the south.
the new colony was the dream of george calvert the first lord baltimore a recent convert to catholicism and a shrewd businessman.
calvert envisioned establishing a colony both as a great speculative venture in real estate and as a retreat for english catholics many of whom felt oppressed by the anglican establishment at home.
he died before he could receive a charter from the king.
but in 1632 his son cecilius the second lord baltimore received a charter remarkable not only for the extent of the territory it granted him an area that encompassed parts of what are now pennsylvania delaware and virginia in addition to present day maryland but also for the powers it bestowed on proprietary.
an a 1s hmrs were to hold their province as true and absolute lords and proprietaries and were to acknowledge the sovereignty of the king only by paying an annual fee to the crown.
lord baltimore named one of his brothers leonard calvert governor and sent him with another brother to oversee the settlement of the province.
in march 1634 two ships the ark and the dope bearing 200 to 300 passengers entered the potomac river and turned into one of its eastern tributaries.
on a high and dry bluff these first arrivals laid out the village of st mary s named diplomatically for the queen.
the neighboring indians who were more worried about rival tribes in the region than they were about the new arrivals befriended the settlers provided them with temporary shelter sold them land and supplied them with corn.
unlike the virginians the early marylanders experienced no indian assaults no plagues no starving time.
the calverts had invested heavily in their american possessions and they needed to attract many settlers to make the effort profitable.
as a result they had to encourage the immigration of protestants as well as their fellow english catholics who were both relatively few in number about 2 percent of religious population of england and generally toleration reluctant to emigrate.
the protestant settlers mostly anglicans outnumbered the catholics from the start and the calverts quickly realized that catholics would always be a minority in the colony.
they prudently adopted a policy of religious toleration.
to appease the non catholic majority calvert appointed a protestant as governor in 1648.
a year later he sent from england the draft of an act concerning religion or the toleration act which assured freedom of worship to all christians.
40 chapter 2 the maryland proprietor c 1670 in a detail of a portrait by the court painter to king charles ii the young cecilius calvert reaches for a map of maryland.
his grandfather and namesake the second lord baltimore 1606 1675 holds it out to him.
george calvert the father of the elder cecilius began negotiations to win a royal charter for maryland his son completed them in 1632 and became the first proprietor of the colony.
he published the map shown here in 1635 as part of an effort to attract settlers to the colony.
by the time this portrait was painted lord baltimore s son charles was governor of maryland.
the boy cecilius the heir apparent died in 1681 before he could assume his title.
peter newark pictures bridgeman art library nevertheless politics in maryland remained plagued for years by tensions between the catholic minority which included the proprietor and the protestant majority.
zealous jesuits and crusading puritans frightened and antagonized their opponents with their efforts to establish the dominance of their own religion.
at one point the protestant majority barred catholics from voting and repealed the toleration act.
there was frequent violence and in 1655 a civil war temporarily unseated the proprietary government and replaced it with one dominated by protestants.
by 1640 a severe labor shortage in the colony had forced a change in the land grant procedure and maryland like virginia adopted a headright system a grant of 100 acres to each male settler another 100 for his wife and each servant and 50 for each of his children.
like virginia maryland became a center of tobacco cultivation and as in virginia planters worked their land with the aid first of indentured servants imported from england and then beginning late in the seventeenth century with slaves imported from africa.
virginias westward expansion turbulent virginia by the mid seventeenth century the virginia colony had survived its early disasters.
both its population and the complexity and profitability of its economy were increasing.
it was also grow ing more politically contentious as emerging factions within the province began to compete for the favor of the government.
perhaps the most important dispute involved policy toward the natives.
as settlement moved west farther into indian lands border conflicts grew increasingly frequent.
much of the tension within english virginia in the late seventeenth century revolved around how to respond to those conflicts.
sir william berkeley arrived in virginia in 1642 at the age of thirty six having been appointed governor by king charles 1.
with but one interruption he remained in control of the govern ment until the 1670s.
berkeley was a popular governor at first as he sent explorers across the blue ridge mountains to open up the western interior of virginia.
he organized the force that put down the 1644 indian uprising.
the defeated indians ceded a large area of land to the english.
in return berkeley agreed to prohibit white settlement west of a line he negotiated with the tribes.
this attempt to protect indian territory like many such attempts later in american history was a failure from the start largely because of the rapid growth of the virginia population.
oliver cromwells victory in 1649 in the english civil war see p 49 and the flight of many of his defeated opponents to the colony contributed to what was already a substantial population increase.
between 1640 and 1650 virginias population doubled from 8 000 to 16 000.
by 1660 it had more than doubled again to 40 000.
as the choice lands along the tidewater became scarce new arrivals and indentured servants completing their terms or escaping from their masters pressed westward into the piedmont.
by 1652 english settlers had established three counties in the territory promised to the indians.
unsurprisingly there were frequent clashes between natives and whites.
by the 1660s berkeley had gradually become an autocrat in the colony.
when the first burgesses were elected in 1619 all men aged seventeen or older were entitled to vote.
by 1670 the vote was restricted to landowners and elections were rare.
the same burgesses loyal and subservient to the governor remained in office year after year.
each county continued to have only two representatives even though some of the new counties of the interior contained many more people than the older ones of the tidewater area.
thus the more recent settlers in the backcountry were underrepresented or if living in areas not yet formally organized as counties not represented.
representation in the backcountry was not the only source of turbulence in virginia.
the system of indentured servants also played a role.
the system of indentured servants also played a role.
by the 1670s many young men had finished their term as indentures and found themselves without a home or money.
many of them moved around the colony working begging or stealing.
they would soon become a factor in what became known as bacons rebellion.
berkeleys autocratic rule transplantations and borderlands 41 bacon s rebellion in 1676 backcountry unrest and political rivalries combined to create a major conflict.
nathaniel bacon a wealthy young graduate of cambridge university arrived in virginia in 1673.
he purchased a substantial farm in the west and won a seat on the governors council.
he established himself in other words as a member of the backcountry gentry.
but the new and influential western landowners were soon squabbling with the leaders of the tidewater region in the east.
they disagreed on many issues but above backcountry n 1 grievances a on pollcies toward the natives.
the backcountry settlements were in constant danger of attack from indians because many of them had been established on lands reserved for the tribes by treaty.
white settlers in western virginia had long resented the governors attempts to hold the line of settlement steady so as to avoid antagonizing the natives.
bacon an aristocratic man with great political ambitions had additional reasons for unhappiness with berkeley.
he resented his exclusion from the inner circle of the governors council the so called green spring group whose members enjoyed special access to patronage.
bacon also fumed about berkeleys refusal to allow him a piece of the indian fur trade.
he was developing grievances that made him a natural leader of an opposing faction.
bloody events thrust him into that role.
in 1675 some doeg indians angry about the european intrusions into their lands raided a western plantation and killed a white servant.
bands of local whites struck back angrily and haphazardly attacking not only the small doeg tribe but the powerful susquehannock as well.
the indians responded with more raids on plantations and killed many more white settlers.
as the fighting escalated bacon and other concerned landhold ers unhappy with the governors cautious response to their demand for help defied berkeley and struck out on their own against the indians.
berkeley proclaimed him and his men rebels.
at that point what had started as an unauthorized assault on the indians became a military challenge to the colonial government a conflict known as bacons rebellion.
it was the largest and most powerful insurrection against established authority in the history of the colonies one that would not be surpassed until the revolution.
twice bacon led his army east to jamestown.
the first time he won a temporary pardon from the governor the second time after the governor reneged on the agreement he burned the city and drove the governor into exile.
in the midst of widespread social turmoil throughout the colony bacon stood on the verge of taking command of virginia.
instead he died suddenly of dysentery and berkeley his position bolstered by the arrival of british troops soon managed to regain control.
in 1677 the indians aware of their inability to defeat the white forces militarily reluctantly signed a new treaty that opened additional lands to white settlement.
bacons rebellion was significant for several reasons.
it was part of the continuing struggle to define the boundary significance of bacons rebellion between eastern between indian and white lands in virginia it showed how unwilling the english settlers were to abide by earlier agreements with the natives and how unwilling the indians were to tolerate further white movement into their territory.
it revealed the bitterness of the competition and western landowners.
but it also re vealed something that bacon himself had never intended to unleash the potential for instability in the colonys large population of free landless men.
these men most of them former indentured servants propertyless unemployed with no real prospects had formed the bulk of bacons constituency during the rebellion.
they had become a large unstable floating population eager above all for access to land.
bacon had for a time maintained his popularity among them by exploiting their hatred of indians.
gradually however he found himself unintentionally leading a movement that reflected the animosity of these landless men toward the landed gentry of which bacon himself was a part.
one result was that landed people in both eastern and western virginia began to recognize a common interest in preventing social unrest from the former indentures.
that was one of several reasons that they turned increasingly to the african slave trade to fulfill their need for labor.
enslaved blacks might pose dangers too but the events of 1676 persuaded many colonists that the perils of importing a large white subordinate class were even greater.
the growth of new england the first enduring settlement in new england the second in english america resulted from the discontent of a congregation of puritan separatists in england.
for years separatists had been periodically imprisoned and even executed for defying religious e 8overnment ard the church of england repression some of them as a result began to contemplate leaving england permanently in search of freedom to worship as they wished even though puritans did not believe in religious freedom for all others.
plymouth plantation it was illegal to leave england without the consent of the king.
in 1608 however a congregation of separatists from the hamlet of scrooby began emigrating quietly a few at a time to leyden holland where they could worship without interference.
they were however barred from the dutch craft guilds and had to work at unskilled and poorly paid jobs.
they were also troubled by the effects of the tolerant atmosphere of dutch society which threatened their dream of a close knit christian community.
as a result some of the separatists decided to move again this time across the atlantic where they hoped to create the kind of community they wanted and where they could spread the gospel of the kingdom of christ in those remote parts of the world 42 chapter 2 leaders of the scrooby group obtained permission from the virginia company to settle in british america.
from the king they received informal assurances that he would not molest them provided they carried themselves peaceably this was a historic concession by the crown for it opened british america to settlement not only by the scrooby group but by other dissenting protestants as well.
several english merchants agreed to advance the necessary funds in exchange for a share in the profits of the settlement at the end of seven years.
the migrating puritans knew they were pilgrims even before they left holland their leader and historian william bradford later wrote.
in september 1620 they left the port of plymouth on the english coast in the mayflower with thirty five saints puritan separatists and sixty seven strangers people who were not full members of the puritan church aboard.
by the time they sighted land in november it was too late in the year to go on.
their original destination was probably the mouth of the hudson river in what is now new york.
but they found themselves instead on cape cod.
after exploring the region for a while they chose a site for their settlement just north of the cape an area captain john smith had named plymouth after the english port from which the puritans had sailed during an exploratory journey some years before.
plymouth lay outside the london company s territory and the settlers realized they had no legal basis for settling there.
as a jhe result forty one male passengers signed a mayflower document the mayflower compact which compact established a civil government and proclaimed their allegiance to the king.
then on december 21 1620 the immigrants called pilgrims stepped ashore at plymouth rock.
they settled on cleared land that had once been an indian village until three years earlier a mysterious epidemic known as the plague and probably brought by earlier european explorers had swept through the region and substantially depopulated it.
the pilgrims first winter was a difficult one half the colonists perished from malnutrition disease and exposure.
still the colony survived.
bradford became the governor at plymouth an office he would hold for more than twenty years.
despite the death of his wife and many other losses he managed his plantation for many years.
like the spanish and portuguese colonists in the southern regions of the americas the pilgrims and other future english colonists brought more to the new world than people and ideas.
they also made profound changes in the natural landscape of new england.
a smallpox epidemic caused by english carriers almost eliminated the indian population in the areas around plymouth in the early 1630s.
the english demand for furs animal skins and meat greatly depleted the number of wild animals in the areas around plymouth one reason colonists worked so hard to develop stocks of domestic animals such as horses cattle sheep and hogs.
the pilgrims and later english settlers also introduced new crops wheat barley oats and others while incorporating many native foods among them corn potatoes and peas into their own diets and eventually exporting them back to england and the rest of europe.
gradually colonial society imposed a european pattern onto the american landscape as the settlers fenced in pastures meadows orchards and fields for cultivation.
the pilgrims experience with the indians was for a time very different from the experiences of the early english settlers farther south.
that was in part because the remaining natives in the region their numbers thinned by disease were significantly weaker than their southern neighbors and realized they had to get along with the europeans.
in the end the survival and growth of the colony depended crucially on the assistance they received from natives.
important indian friends squanto and samoset among others showed them how to gather seafood cultivate corn and hunt local animals.
relations squanto a pawtuxet who earlier in his life with the indians had been captured by an english explorer and taken to europe spoke english and was particularly helpful to the settlers in forming an alliance with the local wampanoags under chief massasoit.
after the first harvest in 1621 the settlers marked the alliance by inviting the indians to join them in an october festival the first thanksgiving.
but the good relationship between the settlers and the local indians did not last.
thirteen years after the pilgrims arrival a devastating smallpox epidemic a result of contact with english settlers wiped out much of the indian population around plymouth.
the pilgrims could not hope to create rich farms on the sandy marshy soil and their early fishing efforts produced no profits.
in 1622 the military officer miles standish one of the leaders of the colony established a semi military regime to impose discipline on the settlers.
eventually the pilgrims began to grow enough corn and other crops to provide them with a modest trading surplus.
they also developed a small fur trade with the abenaki indians of maine.
from time to time new colonists arrived from england and in a decade the population reached 300.
the people of plymouth plantation as they called their settlement chose william bradford again and again to be their william governor.
as early as 1621 he persuaded bradford the council for new england the successor to the old plymouth company which had charter rights to the territory to give them legal permission to live there.
he ended the communal labor plan standish had helped create distributed land among the families and thus as he explained it made all hands very industrious he and a group of fellow undertakers took over the colonys debt to its original financiers in england and with earnings from the fur trade finally paid it off even though the financiers had repeatedly cheated them and had failed to send them promised supplies.
the pilgrims were always a poor community.
as late as the 1640s they had only one plow among them.
but they clung to the belief that god had put them in the new world to live a truly christian community and they were content to live t etr lives in what they considered godly ways.
transplantations and borderlands 43 at times they spoke of serving as a model for other christians.
governor bradford wrote in retrospect as one small candle may light a thousand so the light here kindled hath shone to many yea in some sort to our whole nation but the pilgrims were less committed to grand designs less concerned about how they were viewed by others than were the puritans who settled the larger and more ambitious english colonies to their north.
the puritan experiment massachusetts bay company turbulent events in england in the 1620s combined with the example of the plymouth colony created strong interest in colonization among other groups of puritans.
king james i had been creating serious tensions for years between himself and parliament through his effort to claim the divine right of kings and by his harsh repressive policies toward the puritans.
the situation worsened after his death in 1625 when he was succeeded by his son charles i.
by favoring roman catholicism and trying to destroy religious nonconformity charles i started the nation down the road that in the 1640s would lead to civil war.
the puritans were particular targets of charless policies.
some were imprisoned for their beliefs and many began to consider the climate of england intolerable.
the kings disbanding of parliament in 1629 it was not to be recalled until 1640 ensured that there would be no political solution to the puritans problems.
in the midst of this political and social turmoil a group of puritan merchants began organizing a new enterprise designed to take advantage of opportunities in america.
at first their interest was largely an economic one.
they obtained a grant of land in new england for most of the area now comprising massachusetts and new hampshire they acquired a charter from charles i who was evidently unaware that they were puritans allowing them to create the massachusetts bay company and to establish a colony in the new world and they bought equipment and supplies from a defunct fishing and trading company that had attempted and failed to establish a profitable enterprise in north america earlier.
in 1629 they were ready to dispatch a substantial group of settlers to new england.
among the members of the massachusetts bay company however were a number of puritans who saw the enterprise as something more than a business venture.
they began to consider emigrating themselves and creating a haven for puritans in new england.
members of this faction met secretly in cambridge in the summer of 1629 and agreed to buy out the other investors and move en masse to america.
as governor the new owners of the company chose john winthrop an affluent university educated gentleman with a deep piety and a forceful character.
winthrop winthrop had been instrumental in orga nizing the migration and he commanded the expedition that sailed for new england in 1630 seventeen ships and 1 000 people who were unlike the earlier migrants to virginia mostly family groups.
it was the largest single migration of its kind in the seventeenth century.
winthrop carried with him the charter of the massachusetts bay company which meant that the colonists would be responsible to no company officials in england only to themselves.
the massachusetts migration quickly produced several different new settlements.
the port of boston at the mouth of the charles river became the companys headquarters and the colonys capital.
but in the course of the next decade colonists moved into a number of other new towns in eastern massachusetts charlestown newtown later renamed cambridge roxbury dorchester watertown ipswich concord sudbury and others.
the massachusetts bay company soon transformed itself into a colonial government.
according to the original company charter the eight stockholders or freemen were to meet as a general court to choose officers and adopt rules for the corporation.
but eventually the definition of freemen changed to include all male citizens not just the stockholders.
john winthrop dominated colonial politics just as he had dominated the original corporation but after 1634 he and most other officers of the colony had to face election each year.
colonial currency this seal was created in 1690 by the massachusetts bay company to validate the paper bills of credit with which colonists conducted many financial transactions.
paper money met considerable resistance at first.
many people doubted its value and would not accept it preferring instead the spanish silver coins that were in wide circulation.
gradually however a shortage of silver required increasing reliance on this and other paper devices.
the seal shows an indian saying come over and help us which represents the english belief in the superiority of white european society.
bettmann corbis 44 chapter 2 portrait of a boston woman anne pollard a member of the original winthrop expedition to boston was 100 years old when this portrait was painted in 1721.
in 1643 thirteen years after her arrival in massachusetts she married a boston innkeeper with whom she had 13 children.
after her husband s death in 1679 she continued to manage the tavern on her own.
when she died in 1725 at the age of 104 she left 130 direct descendants.
the artist who painted this early portrait is unknown but is assumed to be an american working in the primitive style common in new england before the arrival in 1729 of the first academically trained portraitists from england.
massachusetts historical society boston ma usa the bridgeman art library the congregational church unlike the separatist founders of plymouth the founders of massachusetts had no intention of breaking from the church of england.
yet if they continued to feel any real attachment to the anglican establishment they gave little sign of it.
in every town the community church had in the words of the prominent minister john cotton complete liberty to stand alone unlike churches in the highly centralized anglican structure in england.
each congregation chose its own minister and regulated its own affairs.
in both plymouth and massachusetts this form of parish organization eventually became known as the congregational church.
the puritans although nominally members of the anglican church were in fact worshipers of a very different faith.
they did not accept the authority of either the roman catholic hierarchy or the church of england.
they did not follow traditional ceremonial worship and did not receive sacraments from priests.
they learned instead from reading the bible and from listening to ministers who spoke from their own knowledge and belief not from the orthodoxies of traditional institutional faith.
they accepted the doctrines of john calvins vision that everyone was destined at birth for either salvation or damnation that nothing in peoples earthly life could change their fate after death.
but living a good and productive life might be a sign of salvation.
puritans not only sought salvation.
they also sought freedom not the kind of freedom americans understand today but the right to worship without interference from england or from established churches.
that did not mean that they were free to behave as they liked the community expected obedience to authority.
but authority was based largely within the community itself and monitored by its members.
it did not come from england or from centralized institutions in america.
the massachusetts puritans were not grim or joyless as many observers would later portray them.
they were however serious and pious.
they strove to lead useful conscientious lives of thrift and hard work and they honored material success as evidence of gods favor.
we here enjoy god and jesus christ winthrop wrote to his wife soon after his arrival is this not enough he and the other massachusetts founders believed they were founding a holy common wealth a city upon a hill that could serve as a model for the rest of the new world.
if massachusetts was to become a beacon to other emigrants it had first to maintain its own holiness ministers.
had no formal political power but they society exerted great influence on church mem bers who were the only people who could vote or hold office.
the government in turn protected the ministers taxed the people members and nonmembers alike to support the church and enforced the law requiring attendance at services.
dissidents had no more freedom ot worship in america than the puritans themselves had had in england.
colonial massachusetts was in many ways a theocracy a society in which the line between the church and the state was hard to see.
like other new settlements the massachusetts bay colony had early difficulties.
during their first winter an unusually severe one nearly a third of the colonists died others left in the spring.
but more rapidly than jamestown or plymouth the colony grew and prospered.
the pilgrims and neighboring indians helped with food and advice.
affluent incoming settlers brought needed tools and other goods which they exchanged for the cattle corn and other produce of the established colonists and the natives.
the large number of fam ily groups in the colony in sharp contrast to the early years at jamestown helped ensure a feeling of commitment to the community and a sense of order among the settlers.
it also a owed the population to reproduce itself more rapidly.
the strong religious and political hierarchy ensured a measure of social stability.
transplantations and borderlands 45 the expansion of new england as the population grew more and more people arrived in massachusetts who were not puritan saints and hence could growing not vote newcomers had a choice of con religious forming to the religious practices of the dissent colony or leaving.
many left helping to begin a process that would spread settlement throughout present day new england and beyond.
the connecticut valley about 100 miles west of the edge of european settlement around boston began attracting english families as early as the 1630s.
the valley appealed in particular to thomas hooker a minister of newtown cambridge who defied the massachusetts government in 1635 and led his congregation through the wilds to establish the town of hartford.
four years later the people of hartford and of two other towns established a colonial government of their own and adopted a constitution known as the fundamental orders of connecticut.
another connecticut colony the project of a puritan minister and a wealthy merchant from england grew up around new haven on the connecticut coast.
it reflected impatience with what its founders considered increasing religious laxity in massachusetts.
the fundamental articles of new haven 1639 established a religious government even stricter than that in boston.
new haven remained independent until 1662 when a royal charter combined it with hartford to create the colony of connecticut.
rhode island had its origins in the religious and political dissent of roger williams an engaging but controversial young minister who lived for a time in salem massachusetts.
even john winthrop who considered williams a heretic called him roger a sweet and amiable man and william williams bradford described him as a man godly and zealous but he was bradford added very unsettled in judgment williams a confirmed separatist argued that the massachusetts church should abandon all allegiance to the church of england.
more disturbing to the clergy he called for a complete separation of church and state to protect the church from the corruption of the secular world.
the colonial government alarmed at this challenge to its spiritual authority banished him.
during the bitter winter of 1635 1636 williams took refuge with narragansett tribesmen the following spring he bought a tract of land from them and with a few followers created the town of providence on it.
other communities of dissidents followed him to what became rhode island and in 1644 williams obtained a charter from parliament permitting him to establish a government.
rhode islands government gave no support to the church and allowed liberty in religious concernments for a time it was the only colony in which members of all faiths including jews could worship without interference.
an even greater challenge to the established order in massachusetts bay emerged in the person of anne hutchinson an intelligent and charismatic woman from a substantial boston family.
hutchinson had come to massachusetts with her husband in 1634.
she antagonized the leaders of the colony by arguing vehemently that the members of the massachusetts clergy who were not among the elect that is had not undergone a conversion experience had no right to spiritual office.
over time she claimed that many clergy among them her own uninspiring minister were among the non elect and had no right to exercise authority over their congregations.
she eventually charged that all the ministers in massachusetts save community leader john cotton and her own bother in law were not among the elect.
alongside such teachings which her critics called antinomianism from the anne greek word meaning hostile to the law hutchinson hutchinson also created alarm by affronting prevailing assumptions about the proper role of women in puritan society.
she was not a retiring deferential wife and mother but a powerful religious figure in her own right.
hutchinson developed a large following among women to whom she offered an active role in religious affairs.
she also attracted support from merchants young men and dissidents of many sorts who resented the oppressive character of the colonial government.
as her influence grew the massachusetts leadership mobilized to stop her.
hutchinsons followers were numerous and influential enough to prevent winthrops reelection as governor in 1636 but the next year he returned to office and put her on trial for heresy.
hutchinson embarrassed her accusers by displaying a remarkable knowledge of theology but because she continued to defy clerical authority and because she claimed she had herself communicated directly with the holy spirit a violation of the puritan belief that the age of such revelations had passed she was convicted of sedition and banished as a woman not fit for our society her unorthodox views had challenged both religious belief and social order in puritan massachusetts.
with her family and some of her followers she moved to rhode island and then into new netherland later new york where in 1643 she died during an indian uprising.
alarmed by hutchinsons heresy male clergy began to restrict further the already limited public activities of women within congregations.
as a result many of hutchinsons followers began to migrate out of massachusetts bay especially to new hampshire and maine.
colonies had been established there in 1629 when two english proprietors captain john mason and sir ferdinando gorges had received a grant from the council for new new england and divided it along the hampshire piscataqua river to create two separate and maine provinces.
but despite their lavish promotional efforts few settlers had moved into these northern regions until the religious disruptions in massachusetts bay.
in 1639 john wheelwright a disciple of anne hutchinson led some of his fellow dissenters to exeter new hampshire.
other groups of both dissenting and orthodox puritans soon followed.
new hampshire became a separate colony in 1679.
maine remained a part of massachusetts until 1820.
46 chapter 2 the growth of new england 1620 1750 the european settlement of new england as this map reveals traces its origins primarily to two small settlements on the atlantic coast.
the first was the pilgrim settlement at plymouth which began in 1620 and spread out through cape cod southern massachusetts and the islands of martha s vineyard and nantucket.
the second much larger settlement began in boston in 1630 and spread rapidly through western massachusetts north into new hampshire and maine and south into connecticut.
why did the settlers of massachusetts bay expand more rapidly and expansively than those of plymouth.
new hampshire maine mass.
portland dover.
a ii a n iic ociw portsmouth newbury z salem new york deerfield northampton mass.
marblehead oston hartford conn worcester1 springfield plymoi i providence plymoi 5 r i i s 5a newport danbury nevy haven greenwich long island southampton settlers and natives by the mid 1630s the native population small to begin with had been almost extinguished by the european epidemics.
the surviving indians sold much of their land to the english a great boost to settlement since much of it had already been cleared.
some natives known as praying indians even converted to christianity and joined puritan communities.
indians provided crucial assistance to the early settlers as they tried to adapt to the new land.
whites learned from the natives about vital local food crops importance.
of indian corn beans pumpkins and potatoes.
assistance they also learned such crucial agricul tural techniques as annual burning for fertilization and planting beans to replenish exhausted soil.
natives also served as important trading partners to european immigrants particularly in the creation of the thriving north american fur trade.
they were an important market for such manufactured goods as iron pots blankets metal tipped arrows eventually guns and rifles and often tragically alcohol.
indeed commerce with the indians was responsible for the creation of some of the first great fortunes in british north america and for the emergence of wealthy families who would exercise influence in the colonies and later the nation for many generations.
but as in other areas of white settlement there were also conflicts and the early peaceful relations between whites and indians did not last.
tensions soon developed as a result of the white colonists continuing appetite for land.
the expanding white demand for land was also a result of a change in the colonists agrarian economy.
as wild animals began to disappear from overhunting colonists began to concentrate more and more on raising domesticated animals cattle sheep hogs horses and others.
as the herds expanded so did the colonists need for new land.
as a result the colonists moved steadily into territories such as the connecticut transplantations and borderlands 47 valley where they came into conflict with natives who were more numerous and more powerful than those along the massachusetts coast.
the character of those conflicts and the brutality with shifting which whites assaulted their indian foes attitudes changed puritan attitudes toward the natives.
at first many white new englanders had looked at the indians with a slightly condescending admiration.
before long however they came to view them primarily as heathens and savages and hence as a constant threat to the existence of a godly community in the new world.
some puritans believed the solution to the indian problem was to civilize the natives by converting them to christianity and european ways and some english missionaries had modest success in producing converts.
one such missionary john eliot even translated the bible into an algonquian language.
other puritans however envisioned a harsher solution displacing or if that failed exterminating the natives.
to the natives the threat from the english was very direct.
european settlers were penetrating deeper and deeper into the interior seizing land clearing forests driving away much of the wild game on which the tribes depended for food.
english farmers often let their livestock run wild and the animals frequently destroyed natives crops.
land and food shortages exacerbated the drastic indian population decline that had begun as a result of epidemic diseases.
there had been more than 100 000 indians in new england at the beginning of the seventeenth century by 1675 only 10 000 remained.
this decline created despair among new england natives.
it drove some indians to alcoholism and others to conversion to christianity.
but it drove others to war.
the pequot war king philip s war and the technology of battle the first major conflict came in 1637 when hostilities broke out the pequot between english settlers in the connecticut war valley and the pequot indians of the region as a result of competition over trade with the dutch in new netherland and friction over land.
in what became known as the pequot war english settlers allied with the mohegan and narragansett indians rivals of the pequots.
the greatest savagery in the conflict was the work of the english.
in the bloodiest act of the war white raiders under captain john mason marched against a palisaded pequot stronghold and set it afire.
hundreds of indians either burned to death in the flaming population thousands 93 0 1620 1630 1640 1650 1660 1670 1680 1690 1700 year the non indian population of new england 1620 1700 as in the chesapeake colonies the european population of new england grew very rapidly after settlement began in 1620.
the most rapid rate of growth unsurprisingly came in the first thirty ears when even a modest wave of immigraton could double or triple the small existing aopulation.
but the largest numbers of new immigrants arrived between 1650 and 1680.
anne hutchinson preaching in her house in boston anne hutchinson was alarming to many of bostons religious leaders not only because she openly challenged the authority of the clergy but also because she implicitly challenged norms of female behavior in puritan society.
bettmann corbis what events in england in those years might have led to increased emigration to america in that period.
48 chapter 2 king philips war stockade or were killed as they attempted to escape.
those who survived were hunted down captured and sold as slaves.
the pequot tribe was almost wiped out.
the most prolonged and deadly encounter between whites and indians in the seventeenth century began in 1675 a conflict that the english would remember for generations as king philips war.
as in the earlier pequot war in connecticut an indian tribe in this case the wampanoags under the leadership of a chieftain known to the white settlers as king philip and among his own people as metacomet rose up to resist the english.
the wampanoags had not always been hostile to the settlers indeed metacomets grandfather had once forged an alliance with the english and metacomet himself was well acquainted with the colonists.
but by the 1670s he had become convinced that only armed resistance could protect the wampanoags from english incursions into their lands and more immediately from the efforts by the colonial governments to impose english law on them.
a court in plymouth had recently tried and hanged several wampanoags for murdering a member of their own tribe.
for three years the natives well organized and armed with guns terrorized a string of massachusetts towns destroying twenty of them and causing the deaths of as many as a thousand people including at least one sixteenth of the white males in the colony.
the war greatly weakened both the society and economy of massachusetts.
but in 1676 the white settlers fought back and gradually prevailed.
they received critical aid from the mohawks longtime rivals of the wampanoags and guides spies and soldiers recruited from among the so called praying indians christian converts of the region.
while white militiamen attacked indian villages and destroyed native food supplies a group of mohawks ambushed shot and killed metacomet then bore his severed head to boston to present to the colonial leaders.
after that the fragile alliance that metacomet had managed to forge among local tribes collapsed.
europeans were soon able to crush the uprising.
some wampanoag leaders were executed others were sold into slavery in the west indies.
the wampanoags and their allies their populations depleted and their natural resources reduced were now powerless to resist the english.
yet these victories by the white colonists did not end the danger to their settlements.
other indians in other tribes survived and were still capable of attacking english settlements.
the new england settlers also faced competition from the natives and also from the dutch and the french who claimed the territory on which some of the outlying settlements were established.
the french in particular a pequot village destroyed an english artist drew this view of a fortified pequot village in connecticut surrounded by english soldiers and their allies from other tribes during the pequot war in 1637.
the invaders massacred more than 600 residents of the settlement.
the library of congress lc usz62 320jj posed a constant threat to the english through their alliance with the algonquins.
in later years the french would join forces with indians in their attacks on the new england frontier.
the character of the pequot war king philips war and many other conflicts between natives and settlers in the years that followed was crucially affected by earlier exchanges of technology between the english and the tribes.
in particular the indians made effective use of a new flintlock weapon introduced to new england by musket miles standish and others the flintlock rifle.
it replaced the earlier staple of colonial musketry the matchlock rifle which proved too heavy cumbersome and inaccurate to be useful in the kind of combat characteristic of anglo indian struggles.
the match lock had to be steadied on a fixed object and ignited with a match before firing the flintlock could be held up with out support and fired without a match.
indians using bows and arrows often outmatched settlers using the clumsy matchlocks.
many english settlers were slow to give up their cumber some matchlocks for the lighter flintlocks.
but the indians recognized the advantages of the newer rifles right away and began purchasing them in large quantities as part of their regular trade with the colonists.
despite rules forbidding colonists to instruct natives on how to use and repair the weapons the natives learned to handle the rifles and even to repair them very effectively on their own.
they even built a substantial orge for shaping and repairing rifle parts.
in king philips war r e yery casualties on both sides were a result of the use ot these more advanced rifles.
transplantations and borderlands 49 indians also used more traditional military technologies in their conflicts with the english especially the construction of forts.
the narragansetts allies of the wampanoags in king philips war built an enormous fort in the great swamp of rhode island in 1675 which became the site of one of the bloodiest battles of the war before english attackers burned it down.
after that a band of narragansetts set out to build a large stone fort with the help of a member of the tribe who had learned masonry while working with the english.
when english soldiers discovered the stone fort in 1676 after the end of king philips war they killed most of its occupants and destroyed it.
in the end the technological skills of the indians both those they borrowed from the english and those they drew from their own traditions proved no match for the overwhelming advantages of the english settlers in both numbers and firepower.
the restoration colonies by the end of the 1630s english settlers had established six significant colonies in the new world virginia massachusetts maryland connecticut rhode island and new hampshire.
maine remained officially part of massachusetts until after the american revolution.
but for nearly thirty years after lord baltimore received the charter for maryland in 1632 the english government launched no additional colonial ventures.
it was preoccupied with troubles of its own at home.
the english civil war englands problems had begun during the rule of james i who origins attracted widespread opposition before he died in 1625.
james however did not openly challenge parliament.
his son charles i was not so prudent.
he dissolved parliament in 1629 and began ruling as an absolute monarch steadily alienating a growing number of his subjects especially the members of the powerful puritan community.
finally desperately in need of money charles called parliament back into session and asked it to levy new taxes.
but he antagonized the members by dismissing them again twice in two years.
in 1642 some of them organized a military challenge to the king thus launching the english civil war.
the conflict between the cavaliers the supporters of the king and the roundheads the forces of parliament who were mostly puritans lasted seven years.
finally in 1649 the roundheads defeated the kings forces captured charles himself and in an action that horrified not only much of continental europe at the time but also future generations of english men and women beheaded the monarch.
to replace him they elevated the stern roundhead leader oliver cromwell to the position of protector from which he ruled for the next nine years.
when cromwell died in 1658 his son and heir proved unable to maintain his authority.
two years later king charles ii son of the beheaded monarch returned from exile and claimed the throne.
charles ii faced some of the same problems as his father mostly because of the belief held by many that secretly he was a roman catholic.
the king supported religious toleration which to the dismay of many protestants allowed catholicism in england once again.
the parliament refused to agree and prudently charles did not fight them for the right of catholics to worship openly.
he did however make a private agreement with louis xiv of france that he would become catholic which he did only on his deathbed.
his son james ii continued to face many of the same difficulties.
among the many results of the stuart restoration the return of charles ii a member of the stuart proprietary royal family was the resumption of coloni colonies zation in america.
charles ii quickly began to reward faithful courtiers with grants of land in the new world and in the twenty five years of his reign he issued charters for four additional colonies carolina new york new jersey and pennsylvania.
the new colonies were all proprietary ventures modeled on maryland rather than on virginia and massachusetts thus exposing an important change in the nature of american settlement.
no longer were private companies interested in launching colonies realizing at last that there were no quick profits to be had in the new world.
the goal of the new colonies was not so much quick commercial success as permanent settlements that would provide proprietors with land and power.
the carolinas carolina a name derived from the latinate form of charles was like maryland carved in part from the original virginia grant.
charles ii awarded the territory to a group of eight court favorites all prominent politicians already active in colonial affairs.
in successive charters issued in 1663 and 1665 the eight proprietors received joint title to a vast territory stretching south to the florida peninsula and west to the pacific ocean.
like lord baltimore they received almost kingly powers over their grant.
also like lord baltimore they expected to profit as landlords and land speculators.
they reserved large estates for themselves and they proposed to sell or give away the rest in smaller tracts using a headright system similar to those in virginia and maryland and to collect annual payments quit rents from the settlers.
although committed anglicans themselves they welcomed any settlers they could get.
the charter of the colony guaranteed religious freedom to everyone who would worship as a christian.
the proprietors also promised a incentives for measure of political freedom laws were to settlement be made by a representative assembly.
with these incentives they hoped to attract settlers from the existing american colonies and thus to avoid the expense of financing expeditions from england.
their initial efforts failed dismally and some of the original proprietors gave up.
but one man anthony ashley cooper soon to become the earl of shaftesbury persisted.
cooper convinced his partners to finance migrations to carolina from i 50 chapter 2 charles town south carolina this map drawn on deerskin by an indian chief around 1730 illustrates the close juxtaposition of the ordered english settlement in charles town south carolina seen on the left and the more fluid indian settlements near the town on the right.
it also illustrates the way in which southeastern indians understood political relations as a series of linked circles.
getty images england.
in the spring of 1670 the first of these expeditions a party of 300 set out from england.
only 100 people survived the difficult voyage those who did established a settlement in the port royal area of the carolina coast.
ten years later they founded a city at the junction of the ashley and cooper rivers which in 1690 became the colonial capital.
they called it charles town.
it was later renamed charleston.
the earl of shaftesbury troubled by the instability in england wanted a planned and well ordered community.
with fundamental tbe aid of the english philosopher john constitution locke he drew up the fundamental for carolina constitution for carolina in 1669 which created an elaborate system of land distribution and an elaborately designed social order.
in fact however carolina developed along lines quite different from the utopian vision of shaftesbury and locke.
for one thing the colony was never united in anything more than name.
the northern and southern regions remained socially and economically distinct from one another.
the northern settlers were mainly backwoods farmers isolated from the outside world scratching out a meager existence through subsistence agriculture.
they developed no important aristocracy and for many years imported virtually no african slaves.
in the south fertile lands and the good harbor at charles town promoted a prosperous economy and an aristocratic society.
settlements grew up rapidly along the ashley and cooper rivers and colonists established a flourishing trade in corn lumber cattle pork and beginning in the 1690s rice which was to become the colonys principal commercial crop.
traders from the interior used charles town to market furs and hides they had acquired from indian trading partners some also marketed indian slaves generally natives captured by rival tribes and sold to the white traders.
southern carolina very early developed close ties to the large and now overpopulated english colony on the island of barbados.
for many years barbados was carolinas most important trading partner.
during the first ten years of settlement most of the new settlers in carolina were barbadians some of whom arrived with large groups of african workers transplantations and borderlands 51 and established themselves quickly as substantial landlords.
african slavery had taken root on barbados earlier than in any of the mainland colonies see pp.
54 56 and the white caribbean migrants tough uncompromising profit seekers established a similar slave based plantation society in carolina.
the proprietors four of whom had a financial interest in the african slave trade also encouraged the importation of africans.
for several decades carolina remained one of the most unstable english colonies in america.
there were tensions between the small farmers of the albemarle region in the north and the wealthy planters in the south.
there were conflicts between the rich barbadians in southern carolina and the north and smaller landowners around them.
after south lord shaftesburys death the proprietors carolina proved unable to establish order and in 1719 the colonists seized control of the colony from them.
ten years later the king divided the region into two royal colonies north and south carolina.
new netherland new york and new jersey in 1664 one year after he issued the carolina charter charles ii granted to his brother james the duke of york all the territory lying between the connecticut and delaware rivers.
but much of the territory included in the grant was already claimed by the dutch who had established substantial settlements at new amsterdam and other strategic points beginning in 1624.
the growing conflict between the english and the dutch in america was part of a larger commercial rivalry between the two nations throughout the world.
but the english particularly resented the dutch presence in america because it served as a wedge between the northern and southern english colonies and because it provided bases for dutch smugglers evading english customs laws.
and so in 1664 an english fleet under the command of richard nicolls sailed into the lightly defended port of new amsterdam and extracted a surrender from its unpopular dutch governor capture peter stuyvesant who had failed to mobi of new lize resistance to the invasion.
under the amsterdam articles of capitulation the dutch colony surrendered to the british in return for assurances that the dutch settlers would not be displaced.
in 1673 the dutch briefly reconquered new amsterdam.
but they lost it for good in 1674.
james the duke of york his title to new netherland now clear renamed the colony new york and prepared to govern new amsterdam the small dutch settlement on manhattan island known before 1664 as new amsterdam fell to the english in 1664.
this painting shows buildings clustered at the southern tip of the island which remained the center of what would become new york city until the nineteenth century.
bettmann corb sl 52 chapter 2 a colony of extraordinary diversity.
new york contained not only dutch and english but scandinavians germans french africans imported as slaves by the dutch west india company and members of several different indian tribes.
there were of course many different religious faiths among these groups.
james made no effort to impose his own roman catholicism on the colony.
like other proprietors before him he remained in england and delegated powers to a governor and a council.
but he provided for no representative assembly in new york perhaps because a parliament had executed his own father charles i.
the laws did however establish local governments and guarantee religious toleration.
nevertheless there were immediate tensions over the distribution of power in the colony.
the great dutch patroons large landowners survived with their economic and political power largely intact.
james granted large estates as well to some of his own political supporters in an effort to create a class of influential land owners loyal to him.
power in the colony thus remained widely and unequally dispersed among wealthy english landlords dutch patroons fur traders who forged important alliances with the iroquois and the duke of yorks political appointees.
like carolina new york would for many years be a highly fractious society.
it was also a growing and generally prosperous colony.
by 1685 when the duke of york ascended the english throne as james ii new york contained approximately 30 000 people about four times as many as when james had received his grant twenty years before.
most of them still lived within the hudson valley close to the river itself with the largest settlement at its mouth in the town of new york formerly new amsterdam.
originally jamess claims in america extended south of the hudson to the delaware establishment valley and beyond.
but of new jersey shortly after receiving his charter james gave a large portion of that land to a pair of political allies sir john berkeley and sir george carteret both of whom were also carolina proprietors.
carteret named the territory new jersey after the island in the english channel on which he had been born.
in 1702 after nearly a decade of political squabbling and economic profitlessness the proprietors ceded control of the territory back to the crown and new jersey became a royal colony.
like new york from which much of the population had come new jersey was a place of enormous ethnic and religious diversity.
but unlike new york new jersey developed no important class of large landowners most of its residents remained small farmers.
nor did new jersey which unlike new york had no natural harbor produce any single major city.
the quaker colonies pennsylvania like massachusetts was born out of the efforts of dissenting english protestants to find a home for their own religion and their own distinctive social or the society society of friends also known as of friends x.
quakers originated in mid seventeenth century england and grew into an important force as a result of the preachings of george fox a nottingham shoemaker and margaret fell.
their followers came to be known as quakers because fox urged them to tremble at the name of the lord unlike the puritans quakers rejected the concepts of predestination and original sin.
all people had divinity within themselves an inner light which could guide them along the path of righteousness and all who cultivated that divinity could attain salvation.
also unlike the puritans quakers granted women a position within the church generally equal to that of men.
women and men alike could become preachers and define church doctrine an equality symbolized by the longtime partnership between fox and fell.
of all the protestant sectarians of the time the quakers were the most anarchistic and democratic.
they had no church government only periodic meetings of representatives from congregations.
they had no paid clergy and in their worship they spoke up one by one as the spirit moved them.
disregarding distinctions of gender and class they addressed one another with the terms thee and thou words then i the a quaker meeting egbert van heemskerck the elder fc netherlands who worked in england from about 1673 until his death h h pa ner haarlem to english viewers of his timp fpat.
his subject matter familiar to the dutch but new heemskerck shows a gathering oflakers tcatefthestet tt h s a 1 p in9 a believed that all people were equal in thp pvpq f p j m y friends as the quakers were formally known their religious services.
private collection 6 abximpsed a iridgeman art library transplantations and borderlands 53 commonly used in other parts of english society only in speaking to servants and social inferiors.
and as confirmed pacifists they refused to fight in wars.
the quakers were unpopular enough in england as a result of these beliefs and practices.
they increased their unpopularity by occasionally breaking up other religious groups at worship.
many were jailed.
as a result like the puritans before them the quakers looked to america for asylum.
a few went to new england.
but except in rhode island they were greeted there with fines whippings and banishment three men and a woman who refused to leave were put to death.
others migrated to northern carolina where they became the fastest growing religious community in the region.
they were soon influential in colonial politics.
but many quakers wanted a colony of their own.
as a despised sect they had little chance of getting the necessary royal grant without the aid of someone influential at william penn court but fortunately for fox and his followers a number of wealthy and prominent men had become attracted to the faith.
one of them was william penn the son of an admiral in the royal navy who was a landlord of valuable irish estates.
he had received the gentlemans education expected of a person of his standing but he resisted his father in moving to untraditional religions.
converted to the doctrine of the inner light the younger penn became an evangelist for quakerism.
with george fox he visited the european continent and found quakers there who like quakers in england longed to emigrate to the new world.
he set out to find a place for them to go.
penn turned his attention first to new jersey and soon became an owner and proprietor of part of the colony.
but in 1681 after the death of his father penn inherited his fathers irish lands and also his fathers claim to a large debt from the king.
charles ii short of cash paid the debt with a grant of territory between new york and marylandan area larger than england and wales combined and which unknown to him contained more valuable soil and minerals than any other province of english america.
penn would have virtually total authority within the province.
at the kings insistence the territory was named pennsylvania after penns late father.
like most proprietors penn wanted pennsylvania to be profitable for him and his family.
and so he set out to attract settlers from throughout europe through informative and honest advertising in several languages.
pennsylvania soon became the best known of all the colonies among ordinary people in england and on the european continent and also the most cosmopolitan.
settlers flocked to the province from throughout europe joining several hundred swedes and finns who had been living in a small trading colony new sweden established in 1638 at the mouth of the delaware river.
but the colony was never profitable for penn and his descendants.
indeed penn himself near the end of his life was imprisoned in england for debt and died in poverty in 1718.
penn was more than a mere real estate promoter however and he sought to create in pennsylvania what he called a holy experiment.
in 1682 he sailed to america and supervised the laying out of a city between the delaware and schuylkill rivers which he named philadelphia brotherly love.
with its rectangular streets like those of charles town philadelphia helped set the pattern for most later cities in america.
penn believed as had roger williams that the land be pennsylvania founded longed to the indians and he was careful to see that they were reimbursed for it as well as to see that they were not debauched by the fur traders alcohol.
indians respected penn as an honest white man and during his lifetime the colony had no major conflicts with the natives.
more than any other english colony pennsylvania prospered from the outset even if its proprietor did not because of penns successful recruitment of emigrants his thoughtful planning and the regions mild climate and fertile soil.
penn maintained good relations with the indians owing to his religious beliefs.
quakerism was against participation in war or violence of any kind and held that all people whatever their background were capable of becoming christian.
penn worked to respect the natives and their culture.
he recognized indians claims to the land in the province and was usually scrupulous in reimbursing them for their land.
in later years however the relationships between the english residents of pennsylvania and the natives were not always peaceful.
by the late 1690s some residents of pennsylvania were beginning to resist the nearly absolute power of the proprietor.
southern residents in particular complained that the government in philadelphia was unresponsive to their needs.
as a result a substantial opposition emerged to challenge penn.
pressure from these groups grew to the point that in 1701 shortly before he departed for england for the last time penn agreed to a charter of liberties for the colony.
the charter established a representative assembly consisting alone among the english colonies of only one house which greatly limited the authority of the proprietor.
the charter also permitted the charter of lower counties of the colony to establish liberties their own representative assembly.
the three counties did so in 1703 and as a result became a separate colony delaware although until the american revolution it had the same governor as pennsylvania.
borderlands and middle grounds the english colonies along the atlantic seaboard of north america eventually united expanded and became the beginnings of a great nation.
but in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries they were small frail settlements surrounded by other competing societies.
the british empire in north america was in fact much smaller and weaker than the great spanish empire to the south and not clearly stronger than the enormous french empire to the north.
the continuing contest for control of north america and the complex interactions among the diverse peoples populating the continent were most clearly visible in areas 54 chapter 2 making molasses in barbados african slaves who constituted the vast majority of the population of the flourishing sugar producing island of barbados work here in a sugar mill grinding sugarcane and then boiling it to produce refined sugar molasses and after a later distillation process not pictured here rum.
giraudon bridgeman art library around the borders of english settlement the caribbean and along the northern southern and western borders of the coastal colonies.
the caribbean islands throughout the first half of the seventeenth century the most important destination for english immigrants was not the main land but rather the islands of the caribbean the english.
caribbean anc t ie northern way station of bermuda.
more than half the english migrants to the new world in those years settled on these islands.
the island societies had close ties to english north america from the beginning and influenced the development of the mainland colonies in several ways.
but they were also surrounded by and sometimes imperiled by outposts of the spanish empire.
before the arrival of europeans most of the caribbean islands had substantial native populations the arawaks the caribs and imperial r e cibney but beginning with christopher conflict columbus s first visit in 1492 and accelerating after the spanish established their first colony on hispaniola in 1496 the native population was all but wiped out by european epidemics.
indians were never a significant factor in european settlement of the caribbean.
indeed by the time significant european settlement of the islands began many were almost entirely deserted.
the spanish empire claimed title to all the islands in the caribbean but there was substantial spanish settlement only on the largest of them cuba hispaniola and puerto rico.
english french and dutch traders began settling on some of the smaller islands early in the sixteenth century although these weak colonies were always vulnerable to spanish attack.
after spain and the netherlands went to war in 1621 distracting the spanish navy and leaving the english in the caribbean relatively unmolested the pace of english colonization increased.
by midcentury there were several substantial english settlements on the islands the most important of them on antigua st kitts jamaica and barbados.
even so through the seventeenth century the english settlements in the caribbean were the targets of almost constant attacks and invasions by the spanish the portuguese the french the dutch and the remaining indians of the region.
the world of the caribbean was a violent and turbulent place.
the caribbean colonies built their economies on raising crops for export.
in the early years english settlers experimented unsuccessfully with tobacco and cotton.
but they soon discovered that the most lucrative crop was sugar for which there was a substantial and growing market in europe.
sugarcane could also be distilled into rum for which there was a booming market abroad.
within a decade of the introduction of sugar cultivation to the west indies planters were devoting almost all of their land to sugarcane.
in their appetite for more transplantations and borderlands 55 spanis j s gulf of mexico atlantic ocean havana sancti virgin islands tortuga a x domingue 47v iis jomin o st croix s paniola.
puert0 domingo rico st eustatius b anguilla antigua sf x nevis dominka martinique jamaica caribbean sea umds4 v q curasao arbfl i bonflire new spain the seventeenth century caribbean at the same time that european powers were expanding their colonial presence on the mainland of the american continents they were also establishing colonies in the islands of the caribbean.
in some cases these islands were even more important to the atlantic economy than many of the mainland possessions particularly the large heavily populated sugar growing islands among them jamaica and barbados in which the majority of the population consisted of african slaves.
what role did the caribbean islands play in the spread of slavery in north america.
1essr l bar antilles st.
vincent qgrenada caracas territorial and political changes in the caribbean 1600 1700 english held areas dutch settlements french settlements spanish settlements land for sugarcane they cut down forests and destroyed the natural habitats of many animals which greatly reduced the amount of land available for growing food.
because sugar was a labor intensive crop and because the remnant of the native population was too small to provide a sugar and workforce english planters soon found it slavery necessary to import laborers.
as in the chesapeake they began by bringing indentured servants from england.
but the arduous work discouraged white laborers many found it impossible to adapt to the harsh tropical climate so different from that of england.
by midcentury therefore the english planters in the caribbean like the spanish colonists who preceded them were relying more and more on an enslaved african workforce which soon substantially outnumbered them.
on barbados and other islands where a flourishing sugar economy developed the english planters were a tough aggressive and ambitious breed.
some of them grew enormously wealthy and since their livelihoods depended on their workforces they expanded and solidified the system of african slavery there remarkably quickly.
by the late seventeenth century there were four times as many african slaves as there were white settlers.
by then the west indies had ceased to be an attractive destination for ordinary english immigrants most now went to the colonies on the north american mainland instead.
masters and slaves in the caribbean a small mostly wealthy white population and a large african population held in bondage made for a potentially explosive combination.
as in other english colonies in the new world in which africans came to outnumber europeans whites in the caribbean grew fearful of slave revolts.
they had good slave revolts reason fr rhere were at least seven major slave revolts in the islands more than the english colonies of north america experienced in their entire history as slave societies.
as a result white planters monitored 56 chapter 2 their labor forces closely and often harshly.
beginning in the 1660s all the islands enacted legal codes to regulate relations between masters and slaves and to give white people absolute authority over africans.
a master could even murder a slave with virtual impunity.
there was little either in the law or in the character of the economy to compel planters to pay much attention to the welfare of their workers.
many white slaveowners concluded that it was cheaper to buy new slaves periodically than to protect the well being of those they already owned and it was not uncommon for masters to work their slaves to death.
few african workers survived more than a decade in the brutal caribbean working environment they either were sold to planters in north america or died.
even whites who worked far less hard than did the slaves often succumbed to the harsh climate most died before the age of forty often from tropical diseases to which they had no immunity.
establishing a stable society and culture was extremely difficult for people living in such harsh and even deadly conditions.
many of the whites were principally interested in getting rich and had no long term commitment to the is unstable lands.
those who could returned to societies england with their fortunes and left their estates in the hands of overseers.
a large proportion of the european settlers were single men many of whom either died or left the islands at a young age.
those who remained many of them common white farmers and laborers living in extreme poverty were too poor to contribute to the development of the society.
with few white women on the islands and little intermarriage between blacks and whites europeans in the caribbean lacked many of the institutions that gave stability to the north american settle ments church family community.
africans in the caribbean faced even greater difficulties of course but they managed to create a world of their own despite the hardships.
they started families although many of them were broken up by death or the slave trade they sustained african religious and social traditions and showed little interest in christianity and within the rigidly controlled world of the sugar plantations they established patterns of resistance.
the caribbean settlements were connected to the north american colonies in many ways.
they were an important part connection to of the atlantic trading world in which many americans became involved a source of sugar and rum and a market for goods made in the mainland colonies and in england.
they were the principal source of african slaves for the mainland colonies well over half the slaves in north america came from the islands not directly from africa.
and because caribbean planters established an elaborate plantation system earlier than planters in north america they provided models that many mainland people consciously or unconsciously copied.
in the american south too planters grew wealthy at the expense of poor whites and above all of african slaves.
british north america the southwestern borderlands by the end of the seventeenth century the spanish empire had established only a small presence in the regions that became the united states.
in mexico and regions farther south however the spanish had established a sophisticated and impressive empire.
their capital mexico city was the most dazzling metropolis in the americas.
the spanish residents numbering well over a million enjoyed much greater prosperity than all but a few english settlers in north america.
the principal spanish colonies north of mexico florida texas new mexico arizona and california attracted religious minorities catholic missionaries indepen northern dent ranchers fleeing the heavy hand of colonies imperial authority and spanish troops defending the northern flank of the empire.
these colonies remained weak and peripheral parts of the great empire to their south.
new mexico was the most prosperous and populous of these spanish outposts.
once the spanish quelled the pueblo revolt there in 1680 see p 17 they worked effectively with the natives of the region to develop a flourishing agriculture.
by the early nineteenth century new mexico had a non indian population of over 10 000 the largest european settlement west of the mississippi and north of mexico and it was steadily expanding through the region.
but new mexico was prosperous only when compared to other borderlands.
its residents were far less successful than the spanish in mexico and other more densely settled regions.
the spanish began to colonize california once they realized that other europeans among them english merchants and french and russian trappers were beginning to estab california lish a presence in the region.
formal spanish settlement of california began in the 1760s when the governor of baja california was ordered to create outposts of the empire farther north.
soon a string of missions forts or presidios and trading communities were springing up along the pacific coast beginning with san diego and monterey in 1769 and eventually san francisco 1776 los angeles 1781 and santa barbara 1786.
as in other areas of european settlement the arrival of the spanish in california and the diseases they imported had a devastating effect on the native population.
approximately 65 000 at the time of the first spanish settlements by 1820 it had declined by two thirds.
as the new settlements spread however the spanish insisted that the remaining natives convert to catholicism.
that explains the centrality of missions in almost all the major spanish outposts in california.
but the spanish colonists were also intent on creating a prosperous agricultural economy and they enlisted indian laborers to help them do so.
californias indians had no choice but to accede to the demands of the spanish although there were frequent revolts by natives against the harsh conditions imposed upon them.
already decimated by disease the tribes now declined further as a result of malnutrition and over work at the hands of the spanish missions.
transplantations and borderlands 57 importance of the spanish borderlands in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries the spanish considered the greatest threat to the northern borders of their empire to be the growing ambitions of the french.
in the 1680s french explorers traveled down the mississippi valley to the mouth of the river and claimed the lands they had traversed for their king louis xiv.
they called the territory louisiana.
fearful of french incursions farther west and unsettled by the nomadic indians driven into the territory by the french the spanish began to fortify their claim to texas by establishing new forts missions and settlements there including san fernando later san antonio in 1731.
the region that is now arizona was also becoming increasingly tied to the spanish empire.
northern arizona was a part of the new mexico colony and was governed from santa fe.
the rest of arizona from phoenix south was controlled by the mexican region of sonora.
as in california much of the impetus for these settlements came from catholic missionaries in this case jesuits eager to convert the natives to catholicism.
but the missionary project met with little success.
unlike the sedentary pueblos around santa fe the arizona natives were nomadic peoples unlikely to settle down or to christianize frequently at war with rival tribes and like natives elsewhere tragically vulnerable to smallpox measles and other imported diseases.
as in california epidemics reduced the native population of arizona by two thirds in the early eighteenth century.
although peripheral to the great spanish empire to the south the spanish colonies in the southwest nevertheless helped create enduring societies very unlike those being established by the english along the atlantic seaboard.
the spanish colonies were committed not to displacing the native populations but rather to enlisting them.
they sought to convert them to catholicism to recruit them sometimes forcibly as agricultural workers and to cultivate them as trading partners.
the spanish did not consider the natives to be their equals certainly and they did not treat them very well.
but neither did they consider them merely as obstacles to their own designs as many english settlers along the atlantic seaboard did.
the southeastern borderlands a more direct challenge to english ambitions in north america was the spanish presence in the southeastern areas of what is now the united states.
after the establishment of the spanish claim to florida in the 1560s see p 17 missionaries and traders began moving northward into georgia and westward into what is now known as the panhandle.
some ambitious spaniards began to dream of expanding their empire still farther north into what became the carolinas and perhaps beyond.
the founding of jamestown in 1607 replaced those dreams with fears.
the english colonies they believed could threaten their existing settlements in florida and georgia.
as a result the spanish built forts in both regions to defend themselves against the slowly increasing english presence there.
throughout the eighteenth century the area between the carolinas and florida was the site of continuing tension and frequent conflict between the spanish and the english and to a lesser degree between the spanish and the french who were threatening their northwestern borders with settlements in louisiana and in what is now alabama.
there was no formal war between england and spain in these years but that did not dampen the hostilities in the southeast.
english pirates continually harassed the spanish settlements and in 1668 sacked st augustine.
both sides in this hostilities in conflict sought to make use of the native the southeast tribes.
the english encouraged indians in florida to rise up against the spanish missions.
the spanish for their part offered freedom to african slaves owned by carolina settlers if they agreed to convert to catholicism.
about 100 africans accepted the offer and the spanish later organized some of them into a military regiment to defend the northern border of new spain.
the english correctly viewed the spanish recruitment of their slaves as an effort to undermine their economy.
by the early eighteenth century the constant fighting in the region had driven almost all the spanish settlers out of florida.
the dwindling spanish presence became almost entirely confined to st augustine on the atlantic coast to pensacola on the gulf coast and to the modest colonies that surrounded the forts there.
because they were so few and so weak they came to rely far more than most british did on natives and africans and intermarried fre quently with them.
eventually after more than a century of conflict in the southeastern borderlands the english prevailed acquiring florida in the aftermath of the seven years war known in america as the french and indian war see pp.
103 107 and rapidly populating it with settlers from their colonies to the north.
before that point however protecting the southern boundary of the british empire in north america was a continual concern to the english and contributed in crucial ways to the founding of the colony of georgia.
the founding of georgia georgia was unique in its origins.
its founders were a group of unpaid trustees led by general james oglethorpe a member of parliament and military hero.
they were interested in economic success but they were driven pri oglethorpes marily by military and philanthropic vision motives.
they wanted to erect a military barrier against the spanish lands on the southern border of english america and they wanted to provide a refuge for the impoverished a place where english men and women without prospects at home could begin anew.
the need for a military buffer between south carolina and the spanish settlements in florida was particularly urgent in the first years of the eighteenth century.
in a 1676 treaty spain had recognized englands title to lands already occupied by english settlers.
but conflict between the two colonizing powers had continued.
in 1686 a force of indians and creoles from florida directed by spanish agents attacked and native americans and the middle ground c n in many generations historians chronicling the westward movement of european settlement a u jrt.
in north america incorporated native americans into the story largely as weak and inconvenient obstacles swept aside by the inevitable progress of civilization.
indians were presented either as murderous savages or as relatively docile allies of white people but rarely as important actors of their own.
francis parkman the great nineteenth century american historian described indians as a civilization crushed and scorned by the march of european powers in the new world.
many subsequent historians departed little from his assessment.
challenges to this traditional view have come from many more recent historians among them gary nash in red white and black 1974 and ramon gutierrez in when jesus came the corn mothers went away 1991.
they and other scholars rejected the optimistic progressive view of white triumph over adversity and presented instead a picture of conquest that affected both the conqueror and the conquered and did not bring to an end their influence on one another.
a new more recent view of the relationship between the peoples of the old and new worlds sees native americans and euro americans as uneasy partners in the shaping of a new society in which for a time at least both were a vital part.
in the middle ground 1991 richard white examined the culture of the great lakes region in the eighteenth century in which algonquin indians created complex trading and political relationships with french english and american settlers and travelers in the region.
in this borderland between the growing european settlements in the east and the still largely intact indian civilizations farther west a new kind of hybrid society emerged in which many cultures intermingled.
in into the american woods 1999 james merrell examined the world of negotiators and go betweens along the western pennsylvania frontier in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
like white he emphasized the complicated blend of european and native american diplomatic rituals that allowed both groups to conduct business make treaties and keep the peace.
daniel richter extended the idea of a middle ground further in the ordeal of the longhouse 1992 and facing east from indian country 2001.
richter demonstrates that the iroquois confederacy was an active participant in the power relationships in the hudson river basin.
in his later book he tells the story of european colonization from the native american perspective revealing how western myths of first contact such as the story of john smith and pocahontas look entirely different when seen through the eyes of native americans who remained in many ways the more powerful of the two societies in the seventeenth century.
how did these important collaborations collapse.
what happened to the middle ground.
over time the delicate partnerships along the frontiers of white settlement gave way to the sheer numbers of europeans and in some places africans who moved westward joyce chaplin in subject matter 2001 argued as well that old world americans at first admired the natives as a kind of natural nobility until european diseases ravaged the tribes helping strengthen the europeans sense of superiority that had been a part of their view of indians from the beginning.
in the name of war 1998 jill lepore described how the violence of king philip s war in seventeenth century new england helped transform english views of the tribes both because of the white victory over the indians and because of their success in turning this victory into a rationale destroyed an outlying south carolina settlement south of the treaty line.
and when hostilities broke out again between spain and england in 1701 known in england as queen annes war and on the continent as the war of the spanish succession the fighting renewed in america as well.
oglethorpe a veteran of queen annes war was keenly aware of the military advantages of an english colony south of the carolinas.
yet his interest in settlement rested even more on his philanthropic commitments.
as head of a parliamentary committee investigating english prisons he had grown appalled by the plight of honest debtors dying in confinement.
such prisoners and other poor people in danger of succumbing to a similar fate could he believed become the farmer soldiers of the new colony in america.
in 1732 king george ii granted oglethorpe and his fellow trustees control of the land between the savannah and general james oglethorpe oglethorpe was one of the founders of the english colony of georgia.
he and his followers established the colony to stand as a military buffer between south carolina and the spanish settlements in florida.
they also wanted a refuge for british men and women without economic prospects in england.
stock montage getty images 58 trading partners ralph hamor visits powhatan with a proposal is an etching by theodor de bry 1528 1598 showing how europeans and native americans sometimes made economic deals for mutual gain.
virginia historical society richmond virginia usa the bridgeman art library increasingly unequal the cultural middle ground that for many decades characterized much of the contact between the old and new worlds gradually disappeared.
by the time historians began seriously chronicling this story in the late nineteenth century the indian tribes had indeed become the defeated helpless obstacles that they portrayed.
but for generations before the relationship between white americans and native americans was a much less unequal one than it would later become.
understand analyze and evaluate 1.
how have historians views of native americans and their role in the european colonization of north america changed over time.
why did the middle ground between native americans and european settlers disappear.
is there a middle ground in the united states today.
if so where.
how is this middle ground similar to and different from the middle ground between native americans and euro american settlers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
for the moral superiority of europeans by portraying the indians as brutal uncivilized people.
in reality the europeans had used as much savagery against the natives as the natives had used against them.
as the pressures of white settlement grew as the indian populations weakened as a result of disease and war and as the relationship between the tribes and the european settlers grew altamaha rivers.
their colonization policies reflected the vital military purposes of the colony.
they limited the size of land holdings to make the settlement compact military ard easier to defend against spanish and rationale indian attacks.
they excluded africans free or slave oglethorpe feared slave labor would produce internal revolts and that disaffected slaves might turn to the spanish as allies.
the trustees prohibited rum both because oglethorpe disapproved of it on moral grounds and because the trustees feared its effects on the natives.
they strictly regulated trade with the indians again to limit the possibility of wartime insurrection.
they also excluded catholics for fear they might collude with their coreli gionists in the spanish colonies to the south.
oglethorpe himself led the first colonial expedition to georgia which built a fortified town at the mouth of the savannah river in 1733 and later constructed additional forts south of the altamaha.
in the end only a few debtors were released from jail and sent to georgia.
instead the trustees brought hundreds of impoverished tradesmen and artisans from england and scotland and many religious refugees from switzerland and germany.
among the immigrants was a small group of jews.
english settlers made up a lower proportion of the european population of georgia than of any other english colony.
the strict rules governing life in the new colony stifled its early development and ensured the failure of oglethorpe s vision.
settlers in georgia many of whom were engaged in labor intensive agriculture needed a workforce as much as those in other southern colonies.
almost from the start they began demanding the right to buy slaves.
some opposed the restrictions on the size of individual property holdings.
many resented the nearly absolute political power of oglethorpe and the trustees.
as a result newcomers to the region generally preferred to settle in south carolina where there were fewer restrictive laws.
oglethorpe whom some residents of georgia began calling our perpetual dictator at first bitterly resisted the demands of the settlers for social and political reform.
over time however he wearied of the conflict in the colony and grew frustrated at its failure to grow.
he also suffered military disappointments such as a 1740 assault on the spanish outpost at st augustine florida which ended in failure.
oglethorpe now disillusioned 59 60 chapter 2 with his american venture began to loosen his grip.
even before the 1740 defeat the trustees had removed the limitation on individual landholdings.
in 1750 they re transformation movej the han on slavery.
a year later of georgia i.
c a they ended the prohibition ol rum and returned control of the colony to the king who immediately permitted the summoning of a representative assembly.
georgia continued to grow more slowly than the other southern colonies but in other ways it now developed along lines roughly similar to those of south carolina.
by 1770 there were over 20 000 non indian residents of the colony nearly half of them african slaves.
middle grounds the struggle for the north american continent was of course not just one among competing european empires.
it was also a contest between the new european immigrants and the native populations.
in some parts of the british empire virginia and new england for example english settlers quickly established their dominance subjugating and displacing most natives until they had established societies that were dominated almost entirely by europeans.
but elsewhere the balance of conflict and power remained far more precarious.
accommodation along the western borders of english settlement in particular europeans and indians lived together in regions in which neither side was able to establish clear dominance.
in these middle grounds as they have been called the two populations de spite frequent conflicts carved out ways of living together with each side making concessions to the other.
here the europeans found themselves obliged to adapt to tribal expectations at least as much as the indians had to adapt to european ones.
to the indians the european migrants were both menacing and appealing.
the indians feared the power of these strange people their guns their rifles their forts.
but they also wanted the french and british settlers to behave like fathers to help them mediate their own internal disputes to offer them gifts to help them moderate their conflicts.
europeans came from a world in which the formal institutional and military power of a nation or empire governed relationships between societies.
but the natives had no understanding of the modern notion of a nation and thought much more in terms of ceremony and kinship.
gradually europeans learned to fulfill at least some of their expectations.
in the seventeenth century before many english settlers had entered the interior of the continent the french were particularly adept at creating mutually beneficial relationships with the tribes.
they welcomed the chance to form close relationships mutually with even to marry within the tribes.
beneficial they also recognized the importance of relations treating tribal chiefs with respect and channeling gifts and tributes through them.
but by the mid eighteenth century french influence in the interior was in decline and british settlers gradually became the dominant european group in the middle grounds it took the british a considerable time to learn the lessons the french had long ago absorbed that simple commands and raw force were much less effective in creating a workable relationship with the tribes than were gifts and ceremonies and mediation.
eventually they did so and in large western regions especially those around the great lakes they established a precarious peace with the tribes that lasted for several decades.
but as the british and after 1776 american presence in the region grew the balance of power between europeans and natives shifted.
newer settlers had difficulty adapting to the complex rituals of gift giving and mediation that the earlier migrants had developed.
the stability of the relationship between the indians and whites deteriorated.
by the early nine the shifting teenth century the middle grounds had balance collapsed replaced by a european world in which indians were ruthlessly subjugated and eventually removed.
nevertheless it is important to recognize that for a considerable period of early american history the story of the relationship between whites and indians was not simply a story of conquest and subjugation but also in some regions a story of a difficult but stable accommodation and mutual adaptation.
the indians were not simply victims in the story of the growth of european settlement in north america.
they were also important actors sometimes obstructing and sometimes facilitating the development of the new societies.
the evolution of the british empire the english colonies in america had originated as separate projects and for the most part they grew up independent of one another.
but by the mid seventeenth century the growing commercial success of the colonial ventures was producing pressure in england for a more rational uniform structure to the empire.
the drive for reorganization imperial reorganization many people in england claimed would increase the profitability of the colonies and the power of the english government to supervise them.
above all it would contribute to the success of the mercantile system the foundation of the english economy.
colonies would provide a market for england s manufactured goods and a source for raw materials it could not produce at home thus increasing the total wealth of the nation.
but for the new possessions truly to promote mercantilist goals england would have to exclude foreigners as spain had done from its colonial trade.
according to mercantil mercantilism ist theory any wealth flowing to another nation could come only at the expense of england itself.
hence the british government sought to monopolize trade relations with its colonies.
transplantations and borderlands 61 savannah in 1734 this early view of the english settlement at savannah by an english artist shows the intensely orderly character of georgia in the early moments of european settlement there.
as the colony grew its residents gradually abandoned the rigid plan created by georgia s founders.
historic map works getty images in theory the mercantile system offered benefits to the colonies as well by providing them with a ready market for the raw materials they produced and a source for the manufactured goods they did not.
but some colonial goods were not suitable for export to england which produced wheat flour and fish and had no interest in obtaining them from america.
colonists also found it more profitable at times to trade with the spanish french or dutch even in goods that england did import.
thus a considerable trade soon developed between the english colonies and non english markets.
for a time the english government made no serious efforts to restrict this challenge to the principles of mercantilism.
but gradually london began passing laws to regulate colonial trade.
during oliver cromwells protectorate in 1650 and 1651 parliament passed laws to keep navigation dutch ships ut of the english colomes acts after the restoration the government of charles ii adopted three navigation acts designed to regulate colonial commerce even more strictly.
the first of them in 1660 closed the colonies to all trade except that carried in english ships.
this law also required the colonists to export certain items among them tobacco only to england or english possessions.
the second act in 1663 provided that all goods being shipped from europe to the colonies had to pass through england on the way that would make it possible for england to tax them.
the third act in 1673 was a response to the widespread evasion of the first two laws by the colonial shippers who frequently left port claiming to be heading for another english colony but then sailed to a foreign port.
it imposed duties on the coastal trade among the english colonies and it provided for the appointment of customs officials to enforce the navigation acts.
these acts formed the legal basis of englands mercantile system in america for a century.
the system created by the navigation acts had obvious advantages for england.
but it had some advantages for the 62 chapter 2 colonists as well.
by restricting all trade to british ships the laws encouraged the colonists who were themselves legally british subjects to create an important shipbuilding industry of their own.
and because the english wanted to import as many goods as possible from their own colonies as opposed to importing them from rival nations they encouraged and at times subsidized the development of american production of goods they needed among them iron silk and lumber.
despite the bitter complaints the laws provoked in america in the late seventeenth century and the bitter conflicts they would help to provoke decades later the system of the navigation acts served the interests of the british and the americans alike reasonably well through most of the eighteenth century.
the dominion of new england enforcement of the navigation acts required not only the stationing of customs officials in america but also the establishment of an agency in england to oversee colonial affairs.
in 1679 charles ii attempted to increase his control over massachusetts which behaved at times as if its leaders considered it an independent nation by stripping the colony of its authority over new hampshire and chartering a separate royal colony there whose governor he would himself appoint.
five years later after the massachusetts general court defied instructions from parliament to enforce the navigation acts charles revoked the massachusetts corporate charter and made it a royal colony.
charles ips brother and successor james ii who came to the throne in 1685 went much further.
in 1686 he created a single dominion of new england which combined the government of massachusetts with the governments of the rest of the new england colonies and in 1688 with those of new york and new jersey as well.
he eliminated the existing assemblies within the new dominion and appointed a single governor sir edmund andros to supervise the entire sir edmund region from boston.
andros was an able andros administrator but a stern and tactless man his rigid enforcement of the navigation acts his brusque dismissal of the colonists claims to the rights of englishmen and his crude and arbitrary tactics made him highly unpopular.
he was particularly despised in massachusetts where he tried to strengthen the anglican church.
the glorious revolution0 james ii unlike his father was openly catholic.
not only that he made powerful enemies as he appointed his fellow catholics to high offices.
the restoration of catholicism led to fears among protestants that the pope would soon overtake england and that the king would defer to him.
at the same time james ii tried to control parliament and the courts to make himself an absolute monarch.
by 1688 the opposition to the king was so great that the parliament voted to force james ii from the throne.
james didnt resist giving up the crown remembering his grandfathers execution.
he eventually left the country and spent the rest of his life in france.
his daughter mary ii and her husband william of orange of the netherlandsboth protestants replaced james ii to reign jointly.
no catholic monarch has reigned since.
this bloodless coup came to be known as the glorious revolution when bostonians heard of the overthrow of james ii they moved quickly to unseat his unpopular viceroy in new england.
andros managed to escape an angry mob but he was arrested and imprisoned as he sought to flee the city dressed as a woman.
the new sovereigns in england chose not to con end of the test the topplin8 of andros and quickly ac dominion quiesced in what the colonists had in effect already done abolishing the dominion of new england and restoring separate colonial governments.
they did not however accede to all the colonists desires.
in 1691 they combined massachusetts with plymouth and made it a royal colony.
the new charter restored the general court massachusettss legislature but it gave the crown the right to appoint the governor.
it also replaced church membership with property ownership as the basis for voting and officeholding and required the puritan leaders of the colony to tolerate anglican worship.
andros had been governing new york through a lieutenant governor captain francis nicholson who enjoyed the support of the wealthy merchants and fur traders of the prov ince the same groups who had dominated the colony for years.
other less favored colonists farmers mechanics small traders and shopkeepers had a long accumulation of grievances against both nicholson and his allies.
the leader of the new york dissidents was jacob leisler a german immigrant and a prosperous merchant who had married into a prominent dutch family but had never won acceptance as one of the colonys ruling class.
much like nathaniel bacon in virginia the ambitious leisler resented his exclusion and eagerly grasped the opportunity to challenge the colonial elite.
in may 1689 when news of the glorious revolution in england and the fall of andros in boston reached new york leisler raised a militia captured the city fort drove nicholson into exile and proclaimed himself the new head of government in new york.
for two years he tried in vain to stabilize his power in the colony amid fierce factional rivalry.
in 169l when william and mary appointed a new governor leisler briefly resisted this challenge to his authority.
although he soon yielded his hesitation allowed his many political enemies to charge him with treason.
he and one of his sons in law were hanged drawn and quartered.
fierce rivalry between what became known as the leislerians and the anti leislerians dominated the politics of new york for many years thereafter.
in maryland many people erroneously assumed when they heard news of the glorious revolution that their proprietor transplantations and borderlands 63 john coodes cat ic lorc baltimore who was liv rebellion england had sided with the catholic james ii and opposed william and mary.
so in 1689 an old opponent of the proprietor s government john coode started a new revolt which drove out lord baltimores officials in the name of protestantism.
through an elected convention his supporters chose a committee to run the government and petitioned the crown for a charter as a royal colony.
in 1691 william and mary complied stripping the proprietor of his authority.
the colonial assembly established the church of england as the colonys official religion and forbade catholics to hold public office to vote or even to practice their religion in public.
maryland became a proprietary colony again in 1715 but only after the fifth lord baltimore joined the anglican church.
as a result of the glorious revolution the colonies revived their representative assemblies and successfully thwarted the plan for colonial unification.
in the process they legitimized the idea that the colonists had some rights within the empire that the english government needed to consider their views in making policies that affected them.
but the glorious revolution in america was not as many americans would later come to believe a clear demonstration of american resolve to govern itself or a clear victory for colonial self rule.
in new york and maryland in particular the uprisings had more to do with local factional and religious divisions than with any larger vision of the nature of the empire.
and while the insurgencies did succeed in eliminating the short lived dominion of new england their ultimate results were governments that increased the crowns potential authority in many ways.
as the first century of english settlement in america came to its end and as colonists celebrated their victories over arbitrary british rule they were becoming more a part of the imperial system than ever before.
looking back the english colonization of north america was part of a larger effort by several european nations to expand the reach of their increasingly commercial societies.
indeed for many years the british empire in america was among the smallest and weakest of the imperial ventures there overshadowed by the french to the north and the spanish to the south.
in the british colonies along the atlantic seaboard new agricultural and commercial societies gradually emerged in the south centered on the cultivation of tobacco and cotton and reliant on slave labor and in the northern colonies centered on traditional food crops and based mostly on free labor.
substantial trading centers emerged in such cities as boston new york philadelphia and charles town and a growing proportion of the population became prosperous and settled in these increasingly complex communities.
by the early eighteenth century english settlement had spread from northern new england in what is now maine south into georgia.
but this growing british empire coexisted with and often found itself in conflict with the presence of other europeans most notably the spanish and the french in other areas of north america.
in these borderlands societies did not assume the settled prosperous form they were taking in the tidewater and new england.
they were raw sparsely populated settlements in which europeans including over time increasing numbers of english had to learn to accommodate not only one another but also the still substantial indian tribes with whom they shared these interior lands.
by the middle of the eighteenth century there was a significant european presence across a broad swath of north america from florida to maine and from texas to mexico to california only a relatively small part of it controlled by the british.
but changes were under way within the british empire that would soon lead to its dominance through a much larger area of north america.
key terms people places events anne hutchinson 45 antinomianism 45 bacons rebellion 40 dominion of new england 62 george and cecilius calvert 40 glorious revolution 62 headright 38 jacob leisler 62 james oglethorpe 57 john smith 36 john winthrop 43 king philips war 48 massachusetts bay company 43 mayflower compact 42 metacomet 48 middle ground 60 navigation acts 61 pequot war 47 plymouth plantation 42 powhatan 36 quakers 52 quitrent 38 roger williams 45 sir william berkeley 40 theocracy 44 virginia house of burgesses 38 william bradford 42 william penn 53 64 chapter 2 recall and reflect 1.
compare patterns of settlement and expansion in the chesapeake with those in new england.
what were the major differences.
were there any similarities.
what were the reasons for the revolts and rebellions that occurred in the colonies of virginia maryland massachusetts and new york between 1660 and 1700.
how were these rebellions resolved.
how did the institution of slavery in englands atlantic seaboard colonies differ from slavery in the caribbean.
what accounted for these differences.
what were the middle grounds and how did conditions there differ from conditions in the colonies along the atlantic seaboard.
how did the glorious revolution in england affect englands north american colonies.
significant events 1607 jamestown 1619 founded first african workers arrive 1620.
q in virginia pilgrims found virginia house of burgesses plymouth colony meets for first time 1624 dutch establish settlement on 1629 manhattan island new hampshire and maine established puritans establish 1634 massachusetts bay colony at boston first english settlements founded in maryland 1635 hartford settled in connecticut 1636 roger williams founds settlement in rhode island 1637 anne hutchinson expelled from 1638 massachusetts bay colony swedes and finns establish new sweden on the delaware river 1642 1649 1649 english civil war charles i executed 1660 english restoration charles ii 1663 becomes king 1664 carolina colony chartered english capture new netherland king philips war in new jersey chartered new england 1676 1681 bacons rebellion in virginia william penn receives charter for pennsylvania 1686 1688 dominion of new england established glorious revolution in england william and mary a 1732 ascend throne georgia chartered society and culture in provincial america looking ahead hshuinnhnniiniihunhnnnuuinhhnbhhnnfhunnnnuhuhnhhhnhnhnnnhhhhhuhmhnhnhhhhhhhdhhhhiunhnhhh 1.
what accounted for the rapid increase in the colonial population in the seventeenth century.
life in the american colonies this colored engraving shows the domestic life of americans during the eighteenth century.
depicted are family members at work in their cozy surroundings.
their industriousness is shown to be a singular virtue of the era.
bettmann corbis 2.
why did african slavery expand so rapidly in the late seventeenth century.
3 how did religion shape and influence colonial society.
setting the stage by the early eighteenth century the british colonies were the outposts of the british world.
as the colonies grew and became more prosperous they also became more english.
the colonists adopted the tastes styles and customs of england bought goods made in england read books and pamphlets published in england and modeled most of their political cultural and educational institutions on their english equivalents.
many perhaps most colonists considered themselves englishmen and englishwomen just as much as the men and women in england itself did.
at the same time however life in the colonies was diverging in many ways from life in england.
the physical environment was very different vaster and less tamed.
the population was more diverse as well.
the area that would become the united states was a magnet for immigrants from many lands other than england scotland ireland the european continent as well as migrants from the spanish and french empires already established in america.
and beginning with the first importation of slaves into virginia english north america became the destination for thousands of forcibly transplanted africans.
in addition europeans and africans were interacting constantly with a native population.
despite the efforts of the colonists to isolate themselves from indian society and create a culture all their own the european african and native american worlds could not remain entirely separate.
the colonists emulated english society and they were becoming more and more like one another.
to the degree that they were shaped by the character of their own regions they were becoming more and more diverse.
although americans would ultimately discover that they had enough in common to join together to form a single nation these regional differences continued to affect their society well beyond the colonial period.
the colonial population and natural increase not until long after the beginning of european colonization did europeans and africans in north america outnumber the native population.
but after uncertain beginnings at jamestown and immigration plymouth the nonnative population grew rapidly and substantially through continued immigration and through natural increase until by the late seventeenth century europeans and africans became the dominant population groups along the atlantic coast.
a lew of the early english settlers were members of the upper classes usually the younger sons of the lesser gentry men who stood to inherit no land at home and aspired to establish estates for themselves in america.
for the most part however the early english population was very unaristocratic.
it included some members of the emerging middle class businessmen who migrated to america for religious or commercial reasons or like john winthrop both.
but the dominant element was english laborers.
some came to the new world independently.
the religious dissenters who formed the bulk of the population of early new england for example were men and women of modest means who arranged their own passage brought their families with them and established themselves immediately on their own land.
but in the chesapeake at least three fourths of the immigrants in the seventeenth century arrived as indentured servants.
indentured servitude the system of temporary servitude in the new world developed out of existing practices in england.
young men and women bound themselves to masters for a fixed term of servitude usually four to five years.
in return they received passage to america food and shelter.
upon completion of their origins terms of service male indentures were supposed to receive such benefits as clothing tools and occasionally land in reality however many left service without anything unprepared and unequipped to begin earning a living on their own.
roughly one ourth of the indentures in the chesapeake were women most of whom worked as domestic servants.
because men greatly outnumbered women in the region in the seventeenth century 66.
society and culture in provincial america 67 pacific ocean.
el pasd del norte 5x1659 v forests area of non indian settlement forts towns or outposts a fort st louis 1685 lafoii st e v.
supe f sauitste.
1641 fort mackinac ntdu 61700 esprit 1666 green bay s 1634 t fort st ouis 1 2 fort creveccyeur.
1680 forttadoussac 1600.
quebec trois rivieres 1634j v c p9 xr fort frontenac j 1b73 iw.
v1633 plymouth 0 io boston 1630 e 1620 i providence 1 36 c v hartford 1635j4 new haven 1636 new amsterdam fort st joseph 1680 cahokia 1698 kaskaskia 1700 y x fz fort prudhomme arkansas post memphis 1682 1686 fort maurepas 1 1699.
philadelphia 1682 new york city annapolis 1626 c 1648 f wilmington j 1 665 st marys 1634 jamestown 1607 w j j antic edenton 1658 ocean charles town charleston 1670.
port royal 1683 pensacola.
1696 gulf of mexico wilmington 1665 fort san mateo st augustine st.
lucia 5751 saltillo 1575.
y 17 0 u s north america in 1700 this map reveals how tiny a proportion of north america was settled by europeans in 1700 nearly a century after the first english settlements began there.
the largest area of settlement was the thin fringe of colonies along the northern atlantic seaboard.
there were additional scattered settlements almost all of them tiny in eastern canada along the southern atlantic coast in the mississippi valley and in the southwest.
what accounted for the isolated colonies in noncoastal areas of north america.
women could reasonably expect to marry when their terms of servitude expired.
male domestic servants however usually had no such options.
most indentured servants came to the colonies voluntarily but not all.
beginning as early as 1617 the english government occasionally dumped shiploads of convicts in america to be sold into servitude although some criminals according to captain john smith mid chuse to be hanged ere they would go thither and were the government also sent prisoners taken in battles with the scots and the irish in the 1650s as well as other groups deemed undesirable orphans vagrants paupers and those who were lewd and dangerous.
other involuntary immigrants were neither dangerous nor indigent but were simply victims of kidnapping or impressment by aggressive and unscrupulous investors and promoters.
it was not difficult to understand why the system of indentured servitude proved so appealing to colonial employers particularly once it became clear as it quickly did that the indian population could not easily be transformed into a servile workforce.
the indenture system provided a means of coping with the severe labor shortage in the new world.
in the chesapeake the headright system by which masters received additional land grants for every servant they imported offered another incentive.
for the servants themselves the attractions were not always so clear.
those who came voluntarily often did so to escape troubles in england others came in the hope of establishing themselves on land or in trades of their own when their terms of service expired.
yet the reality often differed sharply from the hope.
some former indentures managed to establish themselves successfully as farmers tradespeople or artisans.
others mostly males found themselves without land without employment without families and without prospects.
a large floating pop realffies of ulation of young single men traveled restlessly from place to place often in groups in search of work or land and were a potential and at times actual source of social unrest particularly in the chesapeake.
even free laborers who found employment or land and settled down with families often did not stay put for very long.
the phenomenon of families simply pulling up stakes and moving to another more promising location every several years was one of the most prominent characteristics of the colonial population.
indentured servitude remained an important source of population growth well into the eighteenth century but beginning indentured servitude 26 chapter 2 john white created this illustration of life among the eastern woodland indians in coastal north carolina.
it shows the diversified agriculture practiced by the natives squash tobacco and three varieties of corn.
the hunters shown in nearby woods suggest another element of the native economy.
at bottom right indians perform a religious ritual which white described as strange gestures and songs private collection bridgeman images the indian village of secoton ca.
1585 by john white the tiny english populations had no choice but to learn from the indians.
they recognized the value of corn which was easy to cultivate and produced large yields.
the english also learned the advantages of growing beans alongside corn to enrich the soil.
like the natives the english quickly learned to combine the foods they grew and foods they hunted and fished.
they built canoes like the indians and gained the ability to navigate the local streams.
they learned from the indians how to build canoes by hollowing out a single log dugouts or sewing birchbark around a simple frame sealing it with resin.
without what they learned from the natives the early settlers would not have survived.
a few months after the first colonists arrived in virginia additional ships appeared with more men and supplies.
by then of the 144 men who had sailed to america only 38 were still alive the rest killed by diseases and famine.
jamestown survived largely because of two important events.
one was what they learned from the local indians.
the john smith other was the leadership of captain john smith who at age twenty seven was already a famous world traveler.
he imposed work and order on the community created transplantations and borderlands 27 a shaky relationship with the natives sometimes negotiating with the indians and at other times stealing food and kidnapping them.
jamestown was a tiny colony for more than a decade.
the natives were far more powerful than the english for years.
coastal virginia had numerous tribes the algonquians the sioux and the iroquois.
they had drawn together as part of the powhatan powhatan confederacy confederacy named after the great chief who controlled a large area near the coasts.
what the english called virginia the natives called tsenacommacah.
reorganization and expansion as jamestown struggled to survive the london company now renamed the virginia company was already dreaming of bigger things.
in 1609 it obtained a new charter from the king which increased its power and enlarged its territory.
it offered stock in the company to planters who were willing to migrate at their own expense.
and it provided free passage to virginia for poorer people who would agree to serve the company for seven years.
in the spring of 1609 two years after the first arrival of the english a fleet of nine vessels was dispatched to jamestown with approximately 600 people including some women and children.
nevertheless disaster followed.
one of the virginia bound ships was lost at sea in a hurricane.
another ran aground in the bermuda islands and was unable to sail for months.
many of the new settlers succumbed to fevers before winter came.
and the winter of 1609 1610 was especially severe a period known as starving time by then the the starving time natives realized that the colonists were a threat to their civilization and they blocked the english from moving inland.
barricaded in the small palisade unable to hunt or cultivate food the settlers lived on what they could find dogs cats rats snakes toadstools horsehides and even the corpses of dead men as one survivor recalled.
when the migrants who had run aground in bermuda finally arrived in jamestown the following may they found only about 60 emaciated people still alive.
the new arrivals took the survivors onto their ship and sailed for england.
but as the refugees proceeded down the james they met an english ship coming up the river part of a fleet bringing supplies and the colonys first governor lord de la warr.
the departing settlers agreed to return to jamestown.
new relief expeditions soon began to arrive and the effort to turn a profit in jamestown resumed.
new settlements began lining the river above and below jamestown.
the immigrants discovered a newly found crop tobacco which was already popular among the spanish colonies to the south.
it was already being imported to europe.
in 1612 the jamestown planter john rolfe began trying to cultivate the crop in virginia.
other planters followed suit up and down the james river.
tobacco became the first profitable crop in the new colony and its success encouraged tobacco planters to move deeper the tobacco economy inland intruding more and more into the native farmlands.
the emerging tobacco economy soon created a heavy demand for labor.
to entice new workers to the colony the virginia company established what it called the headright system headrights were fifty acre grants of land.
those who already the headright system lived in the colony received two headrights 100 acres apiece.
each new settler received a single headright for himself or herself.
this system encouraged family groups to migrate together since the more family members who traveled to america the more land the family would receive.
in addition anyone who paid for the passage of immigrants to virginia would receive an extra headright for each arrival.
as a result some colonists were quickly able to assemble large plantations.
28 chapter 2 tobacco plant this 1622 woodcut later hand colored represents the tobacco plant cultivated by english settlers in virginia in the early seventeenth century after john rolfe introduced it to the colonists.
on the right is an image of a man smoking the plant through a very large pipe.
mpi getty images the company also transported ironworkers and other skilled crafts workers to virginia to diversify the economy.
in 1619 it sent 100 englishwomen to the colony to become the wives of male colonists.
it also promised male colonists the full rights of englishmen an end to strict and arbitrary rule and even a share in self government.
on july 30 1619 house of burgesses delegates from the various communities met as the house of burgesses the first elected legislature within what was to become the united states.
in late august of 1619 john rolfe recorded that 20 and odd negroes arrived aboard a dutch ship.
it was actually the british war vessel the white lion which had recently raided a portuguese slave ship for its human cargo.
nevertheless rolfe provided the first recorded instance of africans arriving in north america though it is likely that the spanish had brought some earlier in the south.
historians are uncertain if white colonists in jamestown initially viewed the africans as a type of servant to be held for a term of years and then freed or as slaves.
likely it was the former as the majority of laborers at this time were bonded to a master or employer for a fixed period of time.
within about ten years however white colonists noted that it was customary practice to hold some negroes in a form of life service but they also indicated that some africans were still able to work for a period of time after which they were freed.
this variability in black life would not last long.
virginians began to depend on african laborers to farm tobacco and demanded more of them.
the judicial system began to codify what blacks could and could not do.
in 1639 a law forbade them from owning arms in 1640 virginia courts condemned a black runaway servant john punch to serve his said master.
for the time of his natural life and in 1662 the virginia general assembly declared that a negro womens children to serve according to the condition of the mother at the same time europeans began to arrive as indentured servants mostly english immigrants who were also held for a time and then released.
for a while indentured servants were by far the most populous workers in virginia and other colonies.
the european settlers in virginia built their society also on the effective suppression of the local indians.
for two years in the 1610s sir thomas dale de la warrs successor as governor commanded unrelenting assaults against the powhatan indians led by transplantations and borderlands 29 and named for their formidable chief powhatan.
in the process dale kidnapped powhatans young daughter pocahontas.
several years earlier pocahontas had pocahontas played a role in mediating differences between her people and the europeans.
but now powhatan refused to ransom her.
living among the english pocahontas gradually adapted many of their ways.
she converted to christianity and in 1614 married john rolfe and visited england with him.
there she stirred interest among many english in projects to civilize the indians.
she died shortly before her planned return to virginia.
by the time of pocahontass marriage powhatan had ceased his attacks on the english in the face of overwhelming odds.
but after his death several years later his brother opechancanough began secretly to plan the elimination of the english intruders.
on a march morning in 1622 tribesmen called on the white settlements as if to offer goods for sale then they suddenly attacked.
not until 347 whites of both sexes and all ages including john rolfe lay dead did the indian warriors finally retreat.
and not until over twenty years later were the powhatans finally defeated.
by then the virginia company in london was defunct.
in 1624 james i revoked the companys charter and the colony came under the control of the crown where it would remain until 1776.
the colony if not the company had survived but at a terrible cost.
in virginias first seventeen years more than 8 500 white settlers had arrived in the colony and nearly 80 percent of them had died.
countless natives died as well and s lavery became part of the colony.
maryland and the calverts the maryland colony ultimately came to look much like virginia but its origins were very different.
george calvert the first lord baltimore envisioned george and cecilius calvert establishing a colony in america both as a great speculative venture in real estate and as a refuge for english catholics like himself.
calvert died while he was still negotiating with the king in london for a charter to establish a colony in the chesapeake region.
but in 1632 his son cecilius the second lord baltimore finally received the charter.
lord baltimore remained in england but he named his brother leonard calvert governor of the colony.
in march 1634 two ships the ark and the dove bearing calvert along with 200 or 300 other colonists entered the potomac river turned into one of its eastern tributaries and established the village of st marys on a high dry bluff.
neighboring indians befriended the settlers and provided them with temporary shelter and with stocks of corn.
the calverts needed to attract thousands of settlers to maryland if their expensive colonial venture was to pay.
as a result they had to encourage the immigration of protestants as well as their fellow english catholics.
the calverts soon realized that catholics would always be a minority in the colony and so they adopted a policy of religious toleration the 1649 act concerning religion nevertheless politics in maryland remained plagued for years by tensions and at times violence between the catholic minority and the protestant majority.
at the insistence of the first settlers the calverts agreed in 1635 to the calling of a representative assembly the house of delegates.
but the proprietor retained absolute authority to distribute land as he wished and since lord baltimore granted large estates to his relatives and to other english aristocrats a distinct upper class soon established itself.
by 1640 a severe labor shortage forced a modification of the land grant procedure and maryland like virginia adopted a headright system a grant of 100 acres to each male settler another 100 for his wife and each servant and 50 for each of his children.
but the great landlords of the colonys earliest years remained powerful.
like virginia maryland became a center of tobacco cultivation planters worked their land with the aid first of indentured servants imported from england and then beginning late in the seventeenth century of slaves imported from africa.
30 chapter 2 pennsylvania boundary claimed by lord baltimore 1632 50 mi 100 km boundary settlement 1750 frederick 1648 wilmington fort christina 1638 west jersey maryland pot o baltimore 1729 ma cr dover 1717 providence annapolis c 1648.
lower counties of delaware a nn ha virginia st marys 1634 rap p kr oc.
ke bay fort royal 1788 richmond 1645 williamsburg fort charles middle plantation 1698 fort henry chesapea fredericksburg 1671 yorktown jamestown 1631 1607 newport news norfolk 1682 atlantic ocean virginia colony fairfax proprietary elizabeth city 1793 to lord baltimore 1632 granville proprietary 1682 date settlement founded le sound albemar north carolina the growth of the chesapeake 1607 1750 this map shows the political forms of european settlement in the region of the chesapeake bay in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
note the several different kinds of colonial enterprises the royal colony of virginia controlled directly by the english crown after the failure of the early commercial enterprises there and the proprietary regions of maryland northern virginia and north carolina which were under the control of powerful english aristocrats.
did these political differences have any significant effect on the economic activities of the various chesapeake colonies.
bacons rebellion for more than thirty years one man sir william berkeley the royal governor of virginia dominated the politics of the colony.
he took office in 1642 at the age of thirty six and with but one brief interruption remained in control of the government until 1677.
in his first years as governor he helped open up the interior of virginia by sending explorers across the blue ridge mountains and crushing a 1644 indian uprising.
the defeated indians agreed to a treaty ceding to england most of the territory east of the mountains and establishing a boundary west of which white settlement would be prohibited.
but the rapid growth of the virginia population made this agreement difficult to sustain.
between 1640 and 1660 virginias population rose from 8 000 to over 40 000.
by 1652 english settlers had established three counties in the territory set aside by the treaty for the indians.
william berkeleys long tenure transplantations and borderlands 31 in the meantime berkeley was expanding his own powers.
by 1670 the vote for delegates to the house of burgesses once open to all white men was restricted to landowners.
elections were rare and the same burgesses representing the established planters of the eastern or tidewater region of the colony remained in office year after year.
the more recent settlers on the frontier were underrepresented.
resentment of the power of the governor and the tidewater aristocrats grew steadily in the newly settled lands of the west often known as the backcountry.
in 1676 this resentment helped create a major conflict led by nathaniel bacon.
backcountry resentment bacon had a good farm in the west and a seat on the governors council.
but like other members of the new backcountry gentry he resented the governors attempts to hold the territorial line.
bacons hostility toward berkeley was a result of the governors refusal to allow white settlers to move farther west.
berkeley forbid further settlement for fear of antagonizing indians.
adding to the resentment was that berkeley controlled the lucrative fur trade.
bacon wanted a piece of that trade.
the turbulence in virginia was not just the tension between berkeley and bacon both of them frontier aristocrats.
it was also a result of the consequences of the indentured servant system.
by the 1670s many young men had finished their term as indentures and had found themselves without a home or any money.
many of them began moving around the colony sometimes working sometimes begging sometimes stealing.
they would soon become a factor in what became bacons rebellion.
in 1675 a major conflict erupted in the west between english settlers and natives.
as the fighting escalated bacon and other concerned landholders demanded that the governor send the militia.
when berkeley refused bacon responded by offering to organize a volunteer army of backcountry men who would do their own fighting.
berkeley rejected that offer too.
bacon ignored him and launched a series of vicious but unsuccessful pursuits of the indian challengers.
when berkeley heard of the unauthorized military effort he proclaimed bacon and his men to be rebels.
bacon now turned his army against the governor and in what became known as bacons rebellion twice led his troops east to jamestown.
the first time he won a temporary pardon from the governor the second time after the governor repudiated the agreement bacon burned much of the city and drove the governor into exile.
but then bacon died suddenly of dysentery and berkeley soon regained control.
in 1677 the indians reluctantly signed a new treaty that opened new lands to white settlement.
bacons rebellion was part of a continuing struggle to define the indian and white spheres of influence in virginia.
it also revealed the bitterness of the consequences of bacons rebellion competition among rival white elites and it demonstrated the potential for instability in the colonys large population of free landless men.
one result was that landed elites in both eastern and western virginia began to recognize a common interest in quelling social unrest from below.
that was among the reasons that they turned increasingly to the african slave trade to fulfill their need for labor.
african slaves unlike white indentured servants did not need to be released after a fixed term and hence did not threaten to become an unstable landless class.
the growth of new england the northern regions of british north america were slower to attract settlers than those in the south.
that was in part because the plymouth company was never able to mount a successful colonizing expedition after receiving its charter in 1606.
it did however sponsor other explorations.
captain john smith after his departure from jamestown made 32 chapter 2 an exploratory journey for the plymouth merchants wrote an enthusiastic pamphlet about the lands he had seen and called them new england.
plymouth plantation a discontented congregation of puritan separatists in england unconnected to the plymouth company established the first enduring european settlement in new england.
in 1608 a congregation of separatists from the english hamlet of scrooby began emigrating quietly and illegally a few at a time to leyden holland where they believed they could enjoy freedom of worship.
but as foreigners in holland they had to work at unskilled and poorly paid jobs.
they also watched with alarm as their children began to adapt to dutch society and drift away from their church.
finally some of the separatists decided to move again across the atlantic there they hoped to create a stable protected community where they could spread the gospel of the kingdom of christ in those remote parts of the world in 1620 leaders of the scrooby group obtained permission from the virginia company to settle in virginia.
the pilgrims as they saw themselves sailed from plymouth england plymouth founded in september 1620 on the mayflower thirty five saints puritan separatists and sixty seven strangers people who were not part of the congregation were aboard.
in november after a long and difficult voyage they sighted land the shore of what is now cape cod.
that had not been their destination but it was too late in the year to sail farther south.
so the pilgrims chose a site for their settlement in the area just north of the cape a place john smith had labeled plymouth on a map he had drawn during his earlier exploration of new england.
because plymouth lay outside the london companys territory the settlers were not bound by the companys rules.
while still aboard ship the saints in the group drew up an agreement the mayflower compact to establish a government for themselves.
then on december 21 1620 they stepped ashore at plymouth rock.
the pilgrims first winter was a difficult one.
half the colonists perished from malnutrition disease and exposure.
but the colony survived in large part because of crucial pilgrim indian interaction assistance from local indians.
trade and other exchanges with the indians were critical to the settlers and attractive to the natives.
the tribes provided the colonists with furs.
they also showed the settlers how to cultivate corn and how to hunt wild animals for meat.
after the first autumn harvest the settlers invited the natives to join them in a festival the original thanksgiving.
but the relationship between the settlers and the local indians was not a happy one for long.
thirteen years after the pilgrims arrived a devastating smallpox epidemic a result of natives exposure to europeans carrying the disease wiped out much of the indian population around plymouth.
the pilgrims could not create rich farms on the sandy and marshy soil around plymouth but they developed a profitable trade in fish and furs.
new colonists arrived from england and in a decade the population reached 300.
the people of plymouth plantation chose as their governor william bradford who governed successfully for many years.
the pilgrims were always poor.
as late as the 1640s they had only one plow among them.
but they were on the whole content to be left alone to live their lives in what they considered godly ways.
motives of english separatists the massachusetts bay experiment events in england encouraged other puritans to migrate to the new world.
king james i had repressed puritans for years.
when he died in 1625 his son and successor charles i was even more hostile to puritans and imprisoned many of them for their beliefs.
the transplantations and borderlands 33 king dissolved parliament in 1629 it was not recalled until 1640 ensuring that there would be no one in a position to oppose him.
in the midst of this turmoil a group of puritan merchants began organizing a new colonial venture in america.
they obtained a grant of land in new england for most of the area now comprising massachusetts and new hampshire.
they acquired a charter from the king allowing them to create the massachusetts bay company and to establish a colony in the new world.
some members of the massachusetts bay company wanted to create a refuge in new england for puritans.
they bought out the interests of company members who preferred to stay in england and the new owners elected a governor john winthrop.
they then sailed for new england in 1630.
with 17 ships and 1 000 people it was the largest single migration of its kind in the seventeenth century.
winthrop carried with him the charter of the massachusetts bay company which massachusetts bay company meant that the colonists would be responsible to no company officials in england.
portrait of a boston woman anne pollard a member of the original winthrop expedition to boston was 100 years old when this portrait was painted in 1721.
when she died in 1725 she left 130 direct descendants.
the artist is unknown but it is assumed to be an american working in the primitive style common in new england before the arrival of academically trained portraitists from england.
massachusetts historical society boston ma usa bridgeman images 34 chapter 2 the massachusetts migration quickly produced several settlements.
the port of boston became the capital but in the course of the next decade colonists established several other towns in eastern massachusetts charlestown newtown later renamed cambridge roxbury dorchester watertown ipswich concord sudbury and others.
the massachusetts puritans strove to lead useful conscientious lives of thrift and hard work and they honored material success as evidence of gods favor.
winthrop and the winthrops city upon a hill other founders of massachusetts believed they were building a holy commonwealth a model a city upon a hill for the corrupt world to see and emulate.
colonial massachusetts was a theocracy a society in which the church was almost indistinguishable from the state.
residents had no more freedom of worship than the puritans themselves had had in england.
like other new settlements the massachusetts bay colony had early difficulties.
during the first winter 1629 1630 nearly 200 people died and many others decided to leave.
but the colony soon grew and prospered.
the nearby pilgrims and neighboring indians helped with food and advice.
incoming settlers brought needed tools and other goods.
the prevalence of families in the colony helped establish a feeling of commitment to the community and a sense of order among the settlers and it also ensured that the population would reproduce itself.
the expansion of new england it did not take long for english settlement to begin moving outward from massachusetts bay.
some people migrated in search of soil more productive than the stony land around boston.
others left because of the oppressiveness of the church dominated government of massachusetts.
the connecticut river valley about 100 miles west of boston began attracting english families as early as the 1630s because of its fertile lands and its isolation from massachusetts bay.
in 1635 thomas hooker a minister of newtown cambridge defied the massachusetts government led his congregation west and established the town of hartford.
four years later the people of hartford and of two other newly founded towns connecticut nearby adopted a constitution known as the fundamental orders of connecticut which created an independent colony with a government similar to that of massachusetts bay but gave a larger proportion of the men the right to vote and hold office.
women were barred from voting virtually everywhere.
another connecticut colony grew up around new haven on the connecticut coast.
unlike hartford the fundamental articles of new haven 1639 established a bible based government even stricter than that of massachusetts bay.
new haven remained independent until 1662 when a royal charter officially gave the hartford colony jurisdiction over the new haven settlements.
european settlement in what is now rhode island was a result of the religious and political dissent of roger williams a controversial young minister who lived for a time in salem massachusetts.
williams was a confirmed separatist who argued that the massachusetts church should abandon all allegiance to the church of england.
he also proclaimed that the land the colonists were occupying belonged to the natives.
the colonial government voted to deport him but he escaped before they could do so.
during the winter of 1635 1636 he took refuge with narragansett tribesmen the following spring he bought a tract of land from them and with a few followers created the town of providence.
in 1644 after obtaining a charter from parliament he established a transplantations and borderlands 35 lake champlain to mason and gorges 1622 to mason to duke of york an to hartford colony 1662lake gi n scog dro r to massachusetts bay 1691 kennebec r.
to massachusetts bay maine mass.
champlain to rhode island portland settled by conn and new haven colonies to new york 1664 me at l a n t i c ocean rrim dover portsmouth.
ac r new hampshire newbury salem marblehead mass.
concord new york northampton worcester springfield hartford conn boston plymouth providence mes r th a hud son r.
deerfield plymouth r i newport danbury new haven greenwich southampton long island the growth of new england 1620 1750 the european settlement of new england as this map reveals traces its origins primarily to two small settlements on the atlantic coast.
the first was the pilgrim settlement at plymouth which began in 1620 and spread out through cape cod southern massachusetts and the islands of marthas vineyard and nantucket.
the second much larger settlement began in boston in 1630 and spread rapidly through western massachusetts north into new hampshire and maine and south into connecticut.
why would the settlers of massachusetts bay have expanded so much more rapidly and expansively than those of plymouth.
g overnment similar to that of massachusetts but without any roger williams and rhode island ties to the church.
for a time rhode island was the only colony in which all faiths including judaism could worship without interference.
another challenge to the established religious order in massachusetts bay came from anne hutchinson an intelligent and charismatic woman from a substantial anne hutchinson boston family.
she argued that many clergy were not among the elect and were therefore entitled to no spiritual authority.
such teachings known as the antinomian heresy co ns ider t he s o urc e cotton mather on the recent history of new england 1692 reviewing the history of english settlers during the seventeenth century puritan cleric cotton mather in this excerpt from his history of new england saw the devil as the root of mishap and evil.
he demonstrated a real mistrust of indians and saw them as servants of the devil.
i believe there never was a poor plantation more pursued by the wrath of the devil than our poor new england and that which makes our condition very much the more deplorable is that the wrath of the great god himself at the same time also presses hard upon us.
it was a rousing alarm to the devil when a great company of english protestants and puritans came to erect evangelical churches in a corner of the world where he had reigned without any control for many ages and it is a vexing eye sore to the devil that our lord christ should be known and owned and preached in this howling wilderness.
wherefore he has left no stone unturned that so he might undermine this plantation and force us out of our country.
first the indian powwows used all their sorceries to molest the first planters here but god said unto them touch them not then seducing spirits came to root in this vineyard but god so rated them off that they have not prevailed much farther than the edges of our land.
after this we have had a continual blast upon some of our principal grain annually diminishing a vast part of our ordinary food.
herewithal wasting sicknesses especially burning and mortal agues have shot the arrows of death in at our windows.
next we have had many adversaries of our own language who have been perpetually assaying to deprive us of those english liberties in the encouragement whereof these territories have been 36 settled.
as if this had not been enough the tawnies among whom we came have watered our soil with the blood of many hundreds of our inhabitants.
desolating fires also have many times laid the chief treasure of the whole province in ashes.
as for losses by sea they have been multiplied upon us and particularly in the present french war the whole english nation have observed that no part of the nation has proportionately had so many vessels taken as our poor new england.
besides all which now at last the devils are if i may so speak in person come down upon us with such a wrath as is justly much and will quickly be more the astonishment of the world.
alas i may sigh over this wilderness as moses did over his in psalm 90 7 9 we are consumed by thine anger and by thy wrath we are troubled all our days are passed away in thy wrath and i may add this unto it the wrath of the devil too has been troubling and spending of us all our days.
let us now make a good and a right use of the prodigious descent which the devil in great wrath is at this day making upon our land.
upon the death of a great man once an orator called the town together crying out concurrite cives dilapsa cunt vestra moenia that is come together neighbors your town walls are fallen down but such is the descent of the devil at this day upon our selves that i may truly tell you the walls of the whole world are broken down.
the usual walls of defense about mankind have such a gap made in them that the very devils are broke in upon us to seduce the souls torment the bodies sully the credits and consume the estates of our neighbors with impressions both as real and as furious as if the invisible world were becoming incarnate on purpose for the vexing of us.
in as much as the devil is come down in great wrath we had need labor with all the care and speed we can to divert the great wrath of heaven from coming at the same time upon us.
the god of heaven has with long and loud admonitions been calling us to a reformation of our provoking evils as the only way to avoid that wrath of his which does not only threaten but consume us.
it is because we have been deaf to those calls that we are now by a provoked god laid open to the wrath of the devil himself.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
according to cotton mather what articular hardships did the colonists p suffer.
what did mather mean when he wrote that now at last the devils have descended in person.
what deeper explanation did cotton mather offer for new englands crisis.
what response did he suggest.
source cotton mather the wonders of the invisible word boston 1692 pp.
41 43 48 cited in richard godbeer the salem witch hunt a brief history with documents boston bedford st martins pp.
were a serious threat to the spiritual authority of the established clergy.
hutchinson also challenged prevailing assumptions about the proper role of women in puritan society.
as her influence grew and as she began to deliver open attacks on members of the clergy the massachusetts hierarchy mobilized to stop her.
in 1637 she was convicted of heresy and sedition and was banished.
with her family and some of her followers she moved to a point on narragansett bay not far from providence.
later she moved south into new york where in 1643 she and her family died during an indian uprising.
new hampshire and maine were established in 1629 by two english proprietors.
but few settlers moved into these northern regions until the religious new hampshire and maine disruptions in massachusetts bay.
in 1639 john wheelwright a disciple of anne hutchinson led some of his fellow dissenters to exeter new hampshire.
others soon followed.
new hampshire became a separate colony in 1679.
maine remained a part of massachusetts until 1820.
settlers and natives the first white settlers in new england had generally friendly relations with the natives.
indians taught whites how to grow vital food crops such as corn beans pumpkins and squash.
european farmers also benefited from the extensive lands indians had already cleared and had either abandoned or sold.
white traders used indians as partners in some of their most important trading activities.
indeed commerce with the indians was responsible for the creation of some of the first great fortunes in british north america.
other white settlers attempted to educate the indians in european religion and culture.
protestant missionaries converted some natives to christianity and a few indians became at least partially assimilated into white society.
but the great majority continued to practice their traditional faiths.
as in other areas of white settlement however tensions soon developed primarily as a result of the white colonists insatiable appetite for land and uneven respect for indian culture and beliefs.
the religious leaders of new england came to consider the tribes a threat to their hopes of creating a godly community in the new world.
see consider the source cotton mather on the recent history of new england gradually the image of indians as helpful neighbors came to be replaced by the image of indians as heathens and barbarians.
37 38 chapter 2 king philips war and the technology of battle in 1637 hostilities broke out between english settlers in the connecticut valley and the pequot indians of the region a conflict known as the pequot war in which the natives were almost wiped out.
but the bloodiest and most prolonged encounter between whites and indians in the seventeenth century began in 1675 a conflict that whites called king philips war.
the wampanoag tribe under the leadership of a chieftain known to the metacomet white settlers as king philip and among his own people as metacomet rose up to resist the english.
for three years the natives terrorized a string of massachusetts towns killing over a thousand people.
but beginning in 1676 the white settlers gradually prevailed enlisting a group of mohawk allies who ambushed metacomet and killed him.
without metacomet the fragile alliance among the tribes collapsed and the white settlers were soon able to crush the uprising.
the conflicts between natives and settlers were crucially affected by earlier exchanges of technology between the english and the tribes.
in particular the indians made effective use of a relatively new european weapon that they had acquired from the english the flintlock muskets flintlock rifle.
it replaced the earlier staple of colonial musketry the matchlock rifle which proved too heavy cumbersome and inaccurate to be effective.
the matchlock had to be steadied on a fixed object and ignited with a match before firing.
the flintlock could be held up without support and fired without a match.
an english artist drew this view of a fortified pequot village in connecticut surrounded by english soldiers and their allies from other tribes during the pequot war in 1637.
the invaders massacred more than 600 residents of the settlement.
the library of congress a pequot village destroyed transplantations and borderlands 39 many english settlers were slow to give up their matchlocks but the indians recognized the advantages of the newer rifles right away and began purchasing them in large quantities.
despite rules forbidding colonists to instruct natives on how to use and repair the weapons the natives learned to handle the rifles and even to repair them very effectively on their own.
in king philips war the very high casualties on both sides were partly a result of the use of these more advanced rifles.
indians also used more traditional military technologies especially the construction of forts.
the narragansett allies of the wampanoag in king philips war built an enormous fort in the great swamp of rhode island in 1675 which became the site of one of the bloodiest battles of the war before english attackers burned it down.
after that a band of narragansett set out to build a large stone fort with the help of a member of the tribe who had learned masonry while working with the english.
when english soldiers discovered the stone fort in 1676 after the end of king philips war they killed most of its occupants and destroyed it.
in the end the technological skills of the indians were no match for the overwhelming advantages of the english settlers in both numbers and firepower.
the restoration colonies for nearly thirty years after lord baltimore received the charter for maryland in 1632 no new english colonies were established in america.
england was dealing with troubles of its own at home.
the english civil war after charles i dissolved parliament in 1629 and began ruling as an absolute monarch he alienated a growing number of his subjects.
finally desperately in need of money charles called parliament back into session in 1640 and asked it to levy new taxes.
but he antagonized the members by dismissing them twice in two years and in 1642 members of parliament organized a military force sparking the english civil war.
the conflict between the cavaliers the supporters of the king and the roundheads the forces of parliament who were largely puritans lasted seven years.
in 1649 the roundheads defeated the kings forces and shocked all of the restoration of the monarchy europe by beheading the monarch.
the stern roundhead leader oliver cromwell assumed the position of protector but when cromwell died in 1658 his son and heir proved unable to maintain his authority.
two years later charles ii son of the executed king returned from exile and seized the throne in what became known as the restoration.
among the results of the restoration was the resumption of colonization in america.
charles ii rewarded faithful courtiers with grants of land in the new world and in the twenty five years of his reign he issued charters for four additional colonies carolina new york new jersey and pennsylvania.
charles ii faced some of the same problems that his father had confronted mostly because of the popular belief that he was secretly a roman catholic.
the king supported religious toleration which would allow catholicism again in england to the dismay of many protestants.
the parliament refused to agree.
charles was prudent enough not to 40 chapter 2 fight for the right of catholics to worship openly.
but he himself made a private agreement with louis xiv of france that he would become a catholic which he did only on his deathbed.
his brother james ii faced many of the same problems.
the carolinas in charters issued in 1663 and 1665 charles ii awarded joint title to eight proprietors.
they received a vast territory stretching south from virginia to the florida peninsula and west to the pacific ocean.
like lord baltimore they received almost kingly p owers over their grant which they prudently called carolina a name derived from the latin word for charles.
they reserved tremendous estates for themselves and distributed the rest through a headright system similar to those in virginia and maryland.
although committed anglicans themselves the proprietors guaranteed religious freedom to all christian faiths.
they also created a representative assembly.
they hoped to attract settlers from the existing american colonies and to avoid the expense of financing expeditions from england.
but their initial efforts to profit from settlement in carolina failed dismally.
anthony ashley cooper however persisted.
he convinced the other proprietors to finance expeditions to carolina from england the first of which set sail with 300 people in the spring of 1670.
the 100 people who survived the difficult voyage established a settlement at port royal on the carolina coast.
ten years later they founded a city at the junction of charles town the ashley and cooper rivers which in 1690 became the colonial capital.
they called it charles town it was later renamed charleston.
with the aid of the english philosopher john locke cooper now the earl of shaftesbury drew up the fundamental constitution for carolina in 1669.
it divided the colony into counties of equal size and divided each county into equal parcels.
it also established a social hierarchy with the proprietors themselves who were to be known as seigneurs at the top a local aristocracy consisting of lesser nobles known as landgraves or caciques below them and then ordinary settlers leet men.
at the bottom of this stratified society would be poor whites who would have few political rights and african slaves.
proprietors nobles and other landholders would have a voice in the colonial parliament in proportion to the size of their landholdings.
in reality carolina developed along lines quite different from the carefully ordered vision of shaftesbury and locke.
for one thing the northern and southern regions of settlement were widely separated and socially and economically distinct from each other.
the northern settlers were mainly backwoods farmers.
in the south fertile lands and the good harbor at charles town promoted a more prosperous economy and a more stratified aristocratic society.
settlements grew up rapidly along the ashley and cooper rivers and colonists established a flourishing trade particularly beginning in the 1660s in rice.
southern carolina very early developed commercial ties to the large and overpopuclose ties with the caribbean lated european colony on the caribbean island of barbados.
during the first ten years of settlement in fact most of the new residents in carolina were barbadians some of whom established themselves as substantial landlords.
african slavery had taken root on barbados earlier than in any of the mainland colonies and the white caribbean migrants tough uncompromising profit seekers established a similar slave based plantation society in carolina.
carolina was one of the most divided english colonies in america.
there were tensions between the small farmers of the albemarle region in the north and the wealthy planters transplantations and borderlands 41 in the south.
and there were conflicts between the rich barbadians in carolina divided southern carolina and the smaller landowners around them.
after lord shaftesburys death the proprietors proved unable to establish order.
in 1719 the colonists seized control of the colony from them.
ten years later the king divided the region into two royal colonies north carolina and south carolina.
new netherland new york and new jersey in 1664 charles ii granted his brother james the duke of york all the territory lying between the connecticut and delaware rivers.
this land however was also claimed by the dutch.
the growing conflict between the english and the dutch was part of a larger commercial rivalry between the two nations throughout the world.
but the english particularly rejected the dutch presence in america because it served as a wedge between the northern and southern english colonies and because it provided bases for dutch smugglers evading english custom laws.
and so months after james received the grant an english fleet under the command of richard nicolls put in at new amsterdam the capital of the dutch colony of new netherland and extracted a surrender from the governor peter stuyvesant.
several years later in 1673 the dutch reconquered and briefly held their old provincial capital.
but they lost it again this time for good in 1674.
the duke of york renamed his territory new york.
it contained not only dutch and english but also scandinavians germans french and a large number of africans new york imported as slaves by the dutch west india company as well as members of several different indian tribes.
james wisely made no effort to impose his own roman catholicism on the colony.
he delegated powers to a governor and a council but made no provision for representative assemblies.
property holding and political power remained highly divided and highly unequal in new york.
in addition to confirming the great dutch patroonships already in existence james granted large estates to some of his own political supporters.
power in the colony thus remained widely dispersed among wealthy english landlords dutch patroons wealthy fur traders and the dukes political appointees.
by 1685 when the duke of york ascended the english throne as james ii new york contained about four times as many people around 30 000 as it had twenty years before.
shortly after james received his charter he gave a large part of the land south of new york to a pair of political allies both carolina proprietors sir john berkeley and sir george carteret.
carteret named the territory new jersey.
but the new jersey venture in new jersey generated few profits and in 1674 berkeley sold his half interest.
the colony was divided into two jurisdictions east jersey and west jersey which squabbled with each other until 1702 when the two halves of the colony were again joined.
new jersey like new york was a colony of enormous ethnic and religious diversity and the weak colonial government made few efforts to impose strict control over the fragmented society.
but unlike new york new jersey developed no important class of large landowners.
the quaker colonies pennsylvania was born out of the efforts of a dissenting english protestant sect the society of friends.
they wished to find a home for their own distinctive social order.
the society began in the mid seventeenth century under the leadership of george fox a nottingham 42 chapter 2 shoemaker and margaret fell.
their followers came to be known as quakers from foxs instruction to them to tremble at the name of the lord.
unlike the puritans quakers rejected the concept of predestination and original sin.
all people they believed had divinity within themselves and needed only learn to cultivate it all could attain salvation.
the quakers had no formal church government and no paid clergy in their worship they the quakers spoke up one by one as the spirit moved them.
disregarding distinctions of gender and class they addressed one another with the terms thee and thou words commonly used in other parts of english society only in speaking to servants and social inferiors.
as confirmed pacifists they would not take part in wars.
unpopular in england the quakers began looking to america for asylum.
a few migrated to new england or carolina but most quakers wanted a colony of their own.
as members of a despised sect however they could not get the necessary royal grant without the aid of someone influential at the court.
fortunately for the quaker cause a number of wealthy and prominent men had converted to the faith.
one of them was william penn an outspoken evangelist who had been in prison several times.
penn worked with george fox on plans for a quaker colony in america and when penns father died in 1681 charles ii settled a large debt he had owed to the older penn by making an enormous grant to the son of territory between new york and maryland.
at the kings insistence the territory was to be named pennsylvania after penns late father.
through his informative and honest advertising penn soon made pennsylvania the pennsylvania established best known and most cosmopolitan of all the english colonies in america.
more than any other english colony pennsylvania prospered from the outset because of penns successful recruiting his careful planning and the regions mild climate and fertile soil.
penn sailed to pennsylvania in 1682 to oversee the laying out of the city he named philadelphia brotherly love between the delaware and schuylkill rivers.
penns relatively good relations with the indians were a result in large part of his religious beliefs.
quakerism was a faith that included a refusal to participate in war or any violence and that believed that all people whatever their background were capable of becoming christian.
penn worked to respect the natives and their culture.
he recognized indians claim to the land in the province and he was usually scrupulous in reimbursing the natives for their land.
in later years the relationships between the english residents of pennsylvania and the natives were not always so peaceful.
by the late 1690s some residents of pennsylvania were beginning to resist the nearly absolute power of the proprietor.
pressure from these groups grew to the point that in 1701 shortly before he departed for england for the last time penn agreed to a charter charter of liberties of liberties for the colony.
the charter established a representative assembly consisting alone among the english colonies of only one house that greatly limited the authority of the proprietor.
the charter also permitted the lower counties of the colony to establish their own representative assembly.
the three counties did so in 1703 and as a result became in effect a separate colony delaware although until the american revolution it continued to have the same governor as pennsylvania.
borderlands and middle grounds the english colonies clustered along the atlantic seaboard of north america eventually united expanded and became the beginnings of a powerful nation.
but in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries their future was not at all clear.
in those years they were small frail settlements surrounded by other competing societies and transplantations and borderlands 43 settlements.
the british empire in north america was in fact a much smaller and weaker one than the great spanish empire to the south and in many ways weaker than the enormous french empire to the north.
the continuing contests for control of north america were most clearly visible in areas around the borders of english settlement the caribbean and along the northern southern and western borders of the coastal colonies.
in the regions of complex cultural interactions the borderlands emerged societies very different from those in the english seaboard colonies areas described as middle grounds in which diverse civilizations encountered one another and for a time at least shaped one another.
the caribbean islands the chesapeake was the site of the first permanent english settlements in the north american continent.
throughout the first half of the seventeenth century however the most important destinations for english immigrants were the islands of the caribbean and the northern way station of bermuda.
more than half of the english migrants to the new world in the early seventeenth century settled on these islands.
before the arrival of europeans most of the caribbean islands had substantial native populations.
but beginning with christopher columbuss first visit in 1492 and accelerating after 1496 the native populations were all but wiped out by european epidemics.
the spanish empire claimed title to all the islands in the caribbean but spain created substantial settlements only in the largest of them cuba hispaniola and puerto rico.
english french and dutch traders began settling on some of the smaller islands early in the sixteenth century despite the spanish claim to them.
after spain and the netherlands went to war in 1621 distracting the spanish navy and leaving the the english caribbean english in the caribbean relatively unmolested the pace of english colonization increased.
by midcentury there were several substantial english settlements on the islands the most important of them on antigua st kitts jamaica and barbados.
in their first years in the caribbean english settlers experimented unsuccessfully with tobacco and cotton.
but they soon discovered that the most lucrative crop was sugar for which there was a substantial and growing market in europe.
sugarcane could also be distilled into rum for which there was also a booming market abroad.
planters devoted almost all of their land to sugarcane.
because sugar was a labor intensive crop english planters quickly found it necessary to import laborers.
as in the chesapeake they began by bringing indentured sugar and slavery servants from england.
but the arduous work discouraged white laborers.
by midcentury therefore the english planters in the caribbean like the spanish colonists were relying more and more heavily on an enslaved african workforce which soon substantially outnumbered them.
on barbados and other islands where a flourishing sugar economy developed the english planters were a tough aggressive and ambitious people.
since their livelihoods depended on their workforces they expanded and solidified the system of african slavery there remarkably quickly.
by the late seventeenth century there were four times as many african slaves as there were white settlers.
masters and slaves in the caribbean fearful of slave revolts whites in the caribbean monitored their labor forces closely and often harshly.
planters paid little attention to the welfare of their workers.
many concluded that it was cheaper to buy new slaves periodically than to protect the well being of those 44 chapter 2 they already owned and it was not uncommon for masters literally to work their slaves to death.
few african workers survived more than a decade in the brutal caribbean working environment they were either sold to planters in north america or died.
even whites who worked far less hard than did the slaves often succumbed to the harsh climate most died before the age of forty.
establishing a stable society and culture was extremely difficult for people living in such harsh and even deadly conditions.
white landowners in the caribbean islands returned to england with their fortunes when they could and left their estates in the hands of overseers.
europeans in the caribbean lacked many of the institutions that gave stability to the north american settlements church family community.
africans in the caribbean faced much greater difficulties than did whites but because they had no chance of leaving they created what was in many ways a more elaborate culture than did the white settlers.
they started families although many of them were slave culture and resistance broken up by death or the slave trade they sustained african religious and social traditions and they blended them with church rituals to create their new signature expression of faith.
and within the rigidly controlled world of the sugar plantations they established patterns of resistance.
the caribbean settlements were an important part of the atlantic trading world in which many americans became involved a source of sugar and rum and a market for goods made in the mainland colonies and in england.
they were the first principal source of african slaves for the mainland colonies.
harsh conditions for slaves the southwest borderlands by the end of the seventeenth century the spanish had established a sophisticated and impressive empire.
their capital mexico city was the most dazzling metropolis in the americas.
the spanish residents well over a million enjoyed much greater prosperity than all but a few english settlers in north america.
but the principal spanish colonies north of mexico florida texas new mexico arizona and california were relatively unimportant economically to the empire.
they attracted religious minorities catholic missionaries and independent ranchers spanish outposts in north america fleeing the heavy hand of imperial authority.
spanish troops defended the northern flank of the empire.
but they remained weak and peripheral parts of the great empire to their south.
new mexico was the most prosperous and populous of these spanish outposts.
by the end of the eighteenth century new mexico had a non indian population of over 10 000 the largest european settlement west of the mississippi and north of mexico and it was steadily expanding through the region.
the spanish began to colonize california once they realized that other europeans among them english merchants and french and russian trappers were beginning to establish a presence in the region.
formal spanish settlement of california began in the 1760s when the governor of baja california was ordered to create outposts of the empire farther north.
soon a string of missions forts or presidios and trading communities were springing up along the pacific coast beginning with san diego and monterey in 1769 and eventually san francisco 1776 los angeles 1781 and california santa barbara 1786.
the arrival of the spanish in california had a devastating effect on the native population who died in great numbers from the diseases the colonists imported.
as the new settlements spread the spanish insisted that the transplantations and borderlands 45 remaining natives convert to catholicism.
that explains the centrality of missions in almost all the major spanish outposts in california.
but the spanish colonists were also intent on creating a prosperous agricultural economy and they enlisted indian laborers to help them do so.
californias indians had no choice but to accede to the demands of the spanish although there were frequent revolts by natives against the harsh conditions imposed on them.
the spanish considered the greatest threat to the northern borders of their empire to be the growing ambitions of the french.
in the 1680s french explorers french and spanish claims traveled down the mississippi valley to the mouth of the river and claimed those lands for france in 1682.
they called the territory louisiana.
fearful of french incursions farther west the spanish began to fortify their claim to texas by establishing new forts missions and settlements there including san fernando later san antonio in 1731.
much of the region that is now arizona was also becoming increasingly tied to the spanish empire and was governed from santa fe.
the spanish colonies in the southwest were the sparsely populated edges of the great spanish empire to the south created less to increase the wealth of the empire than to defend it from threats by other european powers in the north.
nevertheless these spanish outposts helped create enduring societies that were very unlike those being established by the english along the atlantic seaboard.
the spanish colonies did not displace the native populations.
rather they enlisted them.
they sought to convert them to catholicism to recruit them sometimes forcibly as agricultural workers and to cultivate them as trading partners.
the southeast borderlands the southeastern areas of what is now the united states posed a direct challenge to english ambitions in north america.
after spain claimed florida in the 1560s missionaries and traders began moving northward into georgia and westward into what is now known as the florida panhandle.
some ambitious spaniards began to dream of expanding their empire still farther north into what became the carolinas and beyond.
the founding of jamestown in 1607 dampened those hopes and replaced them with the spanish threat fears.
the english colonies the spaniards worried could threaten their existing settlements in florida and georgia.
as a result the spanish built forts in both regions to defend themselves against the increasing english presence there.
throughout the eighteenth century the area between the carolinas and florida was the site of continuing tension and frequent conflict between the spanish and the english and to a lesser degree between the spanish and the french who were threatening their northwestern borders with settlements in louisiana and in what is now alabama.
there was no formal war between england and spain in these years but that did not dampen the hostilities in the southeast.
english pirates continually harassed the spanish settlements and in 1668 actually sacked st augustine.
the english encouraged indians in florida to rise up against the spanish missions.
the spanish offered freedom to african slaves owned by english settlers in the carolinas if they agreed to convert to catholicism.
about 100 africans accepted the offer and the spanish later organized some of them into a military regiment to defend the northern border of new spain.
by the early eighteenth century the constant fighting in the region had driven almost all the spanish out of florida except for settlers in st augustine on the atlantic coast and pensacola on the gulf coast.
46 chapter 2 eventually after more than a century of conflict in the southeastern borderlands the english prevailed acquiring florida in the aftermath of the seven years war known in america as the french and indian war and rapidly populating it with settlers from their colonies to the north.
before that point however protecting the southern boundary of the british empire in north america was a continual concern to the english and contributed in crucial ways to the founding of the colony of georgia.
the founding of georgia georgia the last english colony to be established in what would become the united states was founded to create a military barrier against spanish lands on the southern border of english america.
it was also designed to provide a refuge for the impoverished a place where english men and women without prospects at home could begin anew.
its founders led by general james oglethorpe served as unpaid trustees of a society created to serve the needs of the british empire.
oglethorpe himself a veteran of the most recent spanish wars with england was keenly aware of the military advantages of an english colony south of the carolinas.
yet oglethorpes mission his interest in settlement rested even more on his philanthropic commitments.
as head of a parliamentary committee investigating english prisons he had been appalled by the plight of honest debtors rotting in confinement.
such prisoners this view of savannah by an english artist shows the intensely orderly character of early settlement in the georgia colony.
as the colony grew its residents gradually abandoned the plan created by oglethorpe and his fellow trustees.
historic map works getty images savannah in 1734 transplantations and borderlands 47 and other poor people in danger of succumbing to a similar fate could he believed become the farmer soldiers of the new colony in america.
in 1732 king george ii granted oglethorpe and his fellow trustees control of the land between the savannah and altamaha rivers.
their colonization policies reflected the vital military purposes of the colony.
they limited the size of landholdings to make the settlement compact and easier to defend against spanish and indian attacks.
georgia founded they excluded africans free or slave oglethorpe feared that slave labor would produce internal revolts and that disaffected slaves might turn to the spanish as allies.
the trustees strictly regulated trade with the indians again to limit the possibility of wartime insurrection.
they also excluded catholics for fear they might collude with their coreligionists in the spanish colonies to the south.
oglethorpe himself led the first colonial expedition to georgia which built a fortified town at the mouth of the savannah river in 1733 and later constructed additional forts south of the altamaha.
in the end only a few debtors were released from jail and sent to georgia.
instead the trustees brought hundreds of impoverished tradesmen and artisans from england and scotland and many religious refugees from switzerland and germany.
among the immigrants was a small group of jews.
english settlers made up a lower proportion of the european population of georgia than of any other english colony.
oglethorpe whom some residents of georgia began calling our perpetual dictator created almost constant dissensions and conflict through his heavy handed regulation of the colony.
he also suffered military disappointments such as a 1740 assault on the spanish outpost at st augustine florida which ended in failure.
georgias political evolution gradually as the threats from spain receded he lost his grip on the colony which over time became more like the rest of british north america with an elected legislature that loosened the restrictions on settlers.
georgia continued to grow more slowly than the other southern colonies but in other ways it now developed along lines roughly similar to those of south carolina.
middle grounds the struggle for the north american continent was not just one among competing european empires.
it was also a series of contests among the many different peoples who shared the continent the spanish english french dutch and other colonists on one hand and the many indian tribes with whom they shared the continent on the other.
in some parts of the british empire virginia and new england for example english settlers quickly established their dominance subjugating and displacing most natives until they had established societies that were dominated almost entirely by europeans.
but in other regions the balance of power shifted for many years.
along the western borders of english settlement in particular europeans and indians lived together in regions in which neither side was able to establish clear dominance.
in these middle grounds the two populations despite frequent conflicts carved out ways of living together with each side making concessions to the other.
see debating the past native americans and the middle ground these were the peripheries of empires in which the influence of formal colonial governments was at times almost invisible.
european settlers and the soldiers scattered in forts throughout these regions to protect them were unable to displace the indians.
so they had to carve out their own relationships with the tribes.
in those relationships debating the past native americans and the middle ground for many generations historians chronicling the westward movement of european settlement in north america portrayed native americans largely as weak and inconvenient obstacles swept aside by the inevitable progress of civilization indians were presented either as murderous savages or as relatively docile allies of white people but rarely as important actors of their own.
francis parkman the great nineteenth century american historian described indians as a civilization crushed and scorned by the march of european powers in the new world.
many subsequent historians departed little from his assessment.
in more recent years historians have challenged this traditional view by examining how white civilization victimized the tribes.
gary nashs red white and black 1974 was one of the important modern presentations of this approach and ramon guttierezs when jesus came the corn mothers went 1991 was a more recent contribution.
they and other scholars rejected the optimistic progressive view of white triumph over adversity and presented instead a picture of white brutality and futile indian resistance ending in defeat.
more recently however a new view of the relationship between the peoples of the old and new worlds has emerged.
it sees native americans and euro americans as uneasy partners in the shaping of a new society in which for a time at least both were a vital part.
richard whites influential 1991 book the middle ground was among the first important statements of this view.
48 white examined the culture of the great lakes region in the eighteenth century in which algonquian indians created a series of complex trading and political relationships with french english and american settlers and travelers.
in this borderland between the growing european settlements in the east and the still largely intact indian civilizations farther west a new kind of hybrid society emerged in which many cultures intermingled.
james merrells into the american woods 1999 contributed further to this new view of collaboration by examining the world of negotiators and go betweens along the western pennsylvania frontier in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
like white he emphasized the complicated blend of european and native american diplomatic rituals that allowed both groups to conduct business make treaties and keep the peace.
daniel richter extended the idea of a middle ground further in two important books the ordeal of the long house 1992 and facing east from indian country 2001.
richter demonstrates that the iroquois confederacy was an active participant in the power relationships in the hudson river basin and in his later book he tells the story of european colonization from the native american perspective revealing how western myths of first contact such as the story of john smith and pocahontas look entirely different when seen through the eyes of native americans who remained in many ways the more powerful of the two societies in the seventeenth century.
how did these important collaborations collapse.
what happened to the middle ground.
over time the delicate partnerships along the frontiers of white settlement gave way to the sheer numbers of europeans and in some places africans who moved westward.
joyce chaplins subject matter 2001 argues as well that old world americans at first admired the natives as a kind of natural nobility until european diseases ravaged the tribes.
their vulnerability to disease strengthened the sense of superiority among europeans that had been a part of their view of indians from the beginning.
jill lepores the name of war 1998 describes how the violence of king philips war in seventeenth century new england helped transform english views of the tribes.
that was because of the white victory over the indians and because of their success in turning this victory into a rationale for the moral superiority of europeans.
in fact europeans had used at least as much savagery against the natives as the natives had used against them.
as the pressures of white settlement grew as the indian populations weakened as a result of disease and war and as the relationship between the tribes and the european settlers grew more and more unequal the cultural middle ground that for many decades characterized much of the contact between the old and new worlds gradually disappeared.
by the time historians began seriously chronicling this story in the late nineteenth century the indian tribes had indeed become the defeated helpless obstacles that they portrayed.
but for generations before the relationship between white americans and native americans was much more equal than it later became.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
how have historians views of native americans and their role in the european colonization of north america changed over time.
why did the middle ground between native americans and european settlers disappear.
the europeans found themselves obligated to adapt to tribal expectations at least as much as the indians had to adapt to european ones.
to the indians the european migrants were both menacing and appealing.
they feared the power of these strange european people their guns their rifles their forts.
but they also wanted the french and british settlers to behave like fathers to help them mediate their own internal disputes to offer them gifts to moderate their conflicts.
europeans came from a world in which the formal institutional and military power of a nation or empire governed relationships between societies.
but the natives had no understanding of the modern notion of a nation and thought much more in terms of ceremony and kinship.
gradually europeans learned to fulfill at least some of their expectations to settle disputes among tribes to moderate conflicts within tribes to participate solemnly in indian ceremonies and to offer gifts as signs of respect.
in the seventeenth century before many english settlers had entered the interior the french were particularly adept at creating successful relationships with the tribes.
french migrants in the interior regions of the continent were often solitary fur traders and some of them welcomed the chance to attach themselves to even to marry within tribes.
they also recognized the importance of treating tribal chiefs with respect and channeling gifts and tributes through them.
but by the mid eighteenth century french influence in the interior was in decline and british settlers gradually became the dominant european group.
eventually the british learned the 49 50 chapter 2 lessons that the french had long ago absorbed that simple commands and raw force were ineffective in creating a workable relationship with the tribes that they too had to learn to deal with indian leaders through gifts and ceremonies and mediation.
in large western regions especially those around the great lakes they established a precarious peace with the tribes that lasted for several decades.
but as the british and after 1776 american presence in the region grew the balance of power between europeans and natives shifted.
newer settlers had difficulty adapting to the complex rituals that the earlier migrants had developed.
the stability of the relationthe shifting balance of power ship between the indians and whites deteriorated.
by the early nineteenth century the middle ground had collapsed replaced by a european world in which indians were ruthlessly subjugated and eventually removed.
nevertheless for a considerable period of early american history the story of the relationship between whites and indians was not simply a story of conquest and subjugation but also in some regions a story of difficult but stable accommodation and tolerance.
elements of a precarious peace the development of empire the english colonies in america had begun as separate projects and for the most part they grew up independent of one another and subject to only nominal control from london.
but by the mid seventeenth century the growing commercial success of the colonial ventures was producing pressure in england for a more uniform structure to the empire.
the english government began trying to regulate colonial trade in the 1650s when parliament passed laws to keep dutch ships out of the english colonies.
later parliament the navigation acts passed three important navigation acts.
the first of them in 1660 closed the colonies to all trade except that carried by english ships.
the british also required that tobacco and other items be exported from the colonies only to england or to english possessions.
the second act in 1663 required that all goods sent from europe to the colonies pass through england on the way where they would be subject to english taxation.
the third act in 1673 imposed duties on the coastal trade among the english colonies and it provided for the appointment of customs officials to enforce the navigation acts.
these acts formed the legal basis of englands regulation of the colonies for a century.
the dominion of new england before the creation of navigation acts all the colonial governments except that of virginia had operated largely independently of the crown with governors chosen by the proprietors or by the colonists themselves and with powerful representative assemblies.
officials in london recognized that to increase their control over the colonies they would have to increase british authority in order to enforce the new laws.
in 1675 the king created a new body the lords of trade to make recommendations lords of trade for imperial reform.
in 1679 the king moved to increase his control over massachusetts.
he stripped it of its authority over new hampshire and chartered a separate royal colony there whose governor he would himself appoint.
and in 1684 citing the colonial assemblys defiance of the navigation acts he revoked the massachusetts charter.
charles iis brother james ii who succeeded him to the throne in 1685 went further.
he created a single dominion of new england which combined the government of transplantations and borderlands 51 massachusetts with the governments of the rest of the new england colonies and later with those of new york and new jersey as well.
he appointed a single governor sir edmund andros to supervise the entire region from boston.
andross sir edmund andros rigid enforcement of the navigation acts and his brusque dismissal of the colonists claims to the rights of englishmen made him highly unpopular.
the glorious revolution james ii unlike his father was openly catholic.
in addition he made powerful enemies when he appointed his fellow catholics to high offices.
the restoration of catholicism in england led to fears that the vatican and the pope would soon overtake the country and that the king would support him.
at the same time james ii tried to control parliament and the courts making himself an absolute monarch.
by 1688 the opposition to the king was so great that parliament voted to force out james ii who showed no resistance to giving up the crown aware of his grandfathers execution.
he eventually left the country and spent the rest of his life in france.
his daughter mary ii and her husband william of orange of the netherlands both protestants replaced james ii to reign jointly.
no catholic monarch has reigned since.
this bloodless coup came to be known as the glorious revolution when bostonians heard of the overthrow of james ii they arrested and imprisoned the unpopular andros.
the new sovereigns in england abolished the dominion of new england and restored separate colonial governments.
in dominion of new england abolished 1691 however they combined massachusetts with plymouth and made it a single royal colony.
the new charter restored the colonial assembly but it gave the crown the right to appoint the governor.
it also replaced church membership with property ownership as the basis for voting and officeholding.
andros had been governing new york through a lieutenant governor captain francis nicholson who enjoyed the support of the wealthy merchants and fur traders of the province.
other less favored colonists had a long accumulation of grievances against nicholson and his allies.
the leader of the new york dissidents was jacob leisler a german merchant.
in may 1689 when news of the glorious revolution and the fall of andros reached new york leisler raised a militia captured the city fort drove nicholson into exile and proclaimed himself the new head of government in new york.
for two years he tried in vain to stabilize his power in the colony amid fierce factional rivalry.
in 1691 when william and mary appointed a new governor leisler briefly resisted.
he was convicted of treason and executed.
fierce rivalry between what became known as the leislerians and the anti leislerians dominated the leislerians and anti leislerians politics of the colony for years thereafter.
in maryland many people wrongly assumed that their proprietor the catholic lord baltimore who was living in england had sided with the catholic james ii and opposed william and mary.
so in 1689 an old opponent of the proprietors government the protestant john coode led a revolt that drove out lord baltimores officials and led to marylands establishment as a royal colony in 1691.
the colonial assembly then established the church of england as the colonys official religion and excluded catholics from public office.
maryland became a proprietary colony again in 1715 after the fifth lord baltimore joined the anglican church.
the glorious revolution of 1688 in england touched off revolutions mostly bloodless ones in several colonies.
under the new king and queen the representative assemblies 52 chapter 2 that had been abolished were revived and the scheme for colonial unification from above was abandoned.
but the glorious revolution in america did not stop the reorganization of the empire.
the new governments that emerged in america actually increased the crowns potential authority.
as the first century of english settlement in america came to its end the colonists were becoming more a part of the imperial system than ever before.
the crowns power conclusion the english colonization of north america was part of a larger effort by several european nations to expand the reach of their increasingly commercial societies.
indeed for many years the british empire in america was among the smallest and weakest of the imperial ventures there overshadowed by the french to the north and the spanish to the south.
in the british colonies along the atlantic seaboard new agricultural and commercial societies gradually emerged those in the south centered on the cultivation of tobacco and cotton and were reliant on slave labor those in the northern colonies centered on more traditional food crops and were based mostly on free labor.
substantial trading centers emerged in such cities as boston new york philadelphia and charles town and a growing proportion of the population became prosperous and settled in these increasingly complex communities.
by the early eighteenth century english settlement had spread from northern new england in what is now maine south into georgia.
but this growing british empire coexisted with and often found itself in conflict with the presence of other europeans most notably the spanish and the french in other areas of north america.
in these borderlands societies did not assume the settled prosperous form they were taking in the tidewater and new england.
they were raw sparsely populated settlements in which europeans including over time increasing numbers of english had to learn to accommodate not only one another but also the still substantial indian tribes with whom they shared these interior lands.
by the middle of the eighteenth century there was a significant european presence across a broad swath of north america from florida to maine and from texas to mexico to california only a relatively small part of it controlled by the british.
but changes were under way within the british empire that would soon lead to its dominance through a much larger area of north america.
key terms people places events anne hutchinson 35 antinomianism 35 bacons rebellion 31 dominion of new england 50 george and cecilius calvert 29 glorious revolution 51 headright system 27 indentured servant 28 jacob leisler 51 james oglethorpe 46 jamestown 25 john smith 26 john winthrop 33 king philips war 38 massachusetts bay company 33 mayflower compact 32 metacomet 38 middle grounds 43 transplantations and borderlands 53 navigation acts 50 pequot war 38 plymouth plantation 32 powhatan 29 quakers 42 restoration of the english monarchy 39 roger williams 34 theocracy 34 virginia house of burgesses 28 william berkeley 30 william penn 42 recall and reflect 1.
compare patterns of settlement and expansion in the chesapeake with those in new england.
what were the major differences.
were there any similarities.
what were the reasons for the revolts and rebellions that occurred in the colonies of virginia maryland massachusetts and new york between 1660 and 1700.
how were these rebellions resolved.
how did the institution of slavery in englands atlantic seaboard colonies differ from slavery in the caribbean.
what accounted for these differences.
what were the middle grounds and how did conditions there differ from conditions in the colonies along the atlantic seaboard.
how did the glorious revolution in england affect englands north american colonies.
society and culture in provincial america the colonial population the colonial economies patterns of society awakenings and enlightenments looking ahead 1.
what accounted for the rapid increase in the colonial population in the seventeenth century.
why did african slavery expand so rapidly in the late seventeenth century.
how did religion shape and influence colonial society.
most people in both england and america believed that the british colonies were outposts of the british world.
and it is true that as the colonies grew and became more prosperous they also became more english.
some of the early settlers had come to america to escape what they considered english tyranny.
but by the early eighteenth century many perhaps most colonists considered themselves english just as much as the men and women in england itself did.
at the same time however life in the colonies was diverging in many ways from england simply by the nature of the new world.
the physical environment was very different vaster and less tamed.
the population was more diverse as well.
the area that would become the united states was a magnet for immigrants from many lands other than england scotland ireland the european continent eastern russia and the spanish and french empires already established in america.
english north america became as well the destination for thousands of forcibly transplanted africans.
to the degree that the colonists emulated english society they were becoming more and more like one another.
to the degree that they were shaped by the character of their own regions they were becoming more and more different.
54 the colonial population after uncertain beginnings the non indian population of english north america grew rapidly and substantially through continued immigration and through natural increase.
by the late seventeenth century european and african immigrants outnumbered the natives along the atlantic coast.
a few of the early settlers were members of the english upper classes but most were english laborers.
some came independently such as the religious dissenters in early new england.
but in the chesapeake at least three fourths of the immigrants in the seventeenth century arrived as i ndentured servants.
indentured servitude the system of temporary or indentured servitude developed out of practices in england.
young men and women bound themselves to masters for fixed terms of servitude usually four to five years in exchange for passage to america food and shelter.
their passage to america was a terrible trial of want and hunger.
see consider the source gottlieb mittelberger the passage of indentured servants male indentures were supposed to receive clothing tools and occasionally land upon completion of their service.
in reality however many left service with nothing.
most women indentures who constituted roughly onefourth of the total in the chesapeake worked as domestic servants and were expected to marry when their terms of servitude expired.
by the late seventeenth century the indentured servant population had become one of the largest elements of the colonial population and was creating serious social problems.
some former indentures managed to establish themselves successfully as farmers tradespeople or artisans and time line americas first college harvard founded first printing press in colonies begins operation huguenots migrate to america salem witchcraft trials conclude cotton mather starts smallpox inoculation slave importations increase george whitefield arrives in america great awakening begins zenger trial great awakening intensifies stono slave rebellion 1740s indigo production begins 55 co ns ider t he s o urc e gottlieb mittelberger the passage of indentured servants 1750 gottlieb mittelberger a german laborer traveled to philadelphia in 1750 and chronicled his voyage.
both in rotterdam and in amsterdam the people are packed densely like herrings so to say in the large sea vessels.
one person receives a place of scarcely 2 feet width and 6 feet length in the bedstead while many a ship carries four to six hundred souls not to mention the innumerable implements tools provisions water barrels and other things which likewise occupy such space.
on account of contrary winds it takes the ships sometimes 2 3 and 4 weeks to make the trip from holland to.
but when the wind is good they get there in 8 days or even sooner.
everything is examined there and the custom duties paid whence it comes that the ships ride there 8 10 or 14 days and even longer at anchor till they have taken in their full cargoes.
during that time every one is compelled to spend his last remaining money and to consume his little stock of provisions which had been reserved for the sea so that most passengers finding themselves on the ocean where they would be in greater need of them must greatly suffer from hunger and want.
many suffer want already on the water between holland and old england.
when the ships have for the last time weighed their anchors near the city of kaupp cowes in old england the real misery begins with the long voyage.
for from there the ships unless they have good wind must often sail 8 9 10 to 12 weeks before they reach philadelphia.
but even with the best wind the voyage lasts 7 weeks.
but during the voyage there is on board these ships terrible misery stench fumes horror vomiting many kinds of sea sickness fever dysentery headache heat constipation boils scurvy cancer mouth rot and the 56 like all of which come from old and sharply salted food and meat also from very bad and foul water so that many die miserably.
add to this want of provisions hunger thirst frost heat dampness anxiety want afflictions and lamentations together with other trouble as.
the lice abound so frightfully especially on sick people that they can be scraped off the body.
the misery reaches the climax when a gale rages for 2 or 3 nights and days so that every one believes that the ship will go to the bottom with all human beings on board.
in such a visitation the people cry and pray most piteously.
children from 1 to 7 years rarely survive the voyage.
i witnessed.
misery in no less than 32 children in our ship all of whom were thrown into the sea.
the parents grieve all the more since their children find no resting place in the earth but are devoured by the monsters of the sea.
that most of the people get sick is not surprising because in addition to all other trials and hardships warm food is served only three times a week the rations being very poor and very little.
such meals can hardly be eaten on account of being so unclean.
the water which is served out of the ships is often very black thick and full of worms so that one cannot drink it without loathing even with the greatest thirst.
toward the end we were compelled to eat the ships biscuit which had been spoiled long ago though in a whole biscuit there was scarcely a piece the size of a dollar that had not been full of red worms and spiders nests.
at length when after a long and tedious voyage the ships come in sight of land so that the promontories can be seen which the people were so eager and anxious to see all creep from below on deck to see the land from afar and they weep for joy and pray and sing thanking and praising god.
the sight of the land makes the people on board the ship especially the sick and the half dead alive again so that their hearts leap within them they shout and rejoice and are content to bear their misery in patience in the hope that they may soon reach the land in safety.
when the ships have landed at philadelphia after their long voyage no one is permitted to leave them except those who pay for their passage or can give good security the others who cannot pay must remain on board the ships till they are purchased and are released from the ships by their purchasers.
the sick always fare the worst for the healthy are naturally preferred and purchased first and so the sick and wretched must often remain on board in front of the city for 2 or 3 weeks and frequently die whereas many a one if he could pay his debt and were permitted to leave the ship immediately might recover and remain alive.
the sale of human beings in the market on board the ship is carried out thus every day englishmen dutchmen and high german people come from the city of philadelphia and other places in part from a great distance say 20 30 or 40 hours away and go on board the newly arrived ship that has brought and offers for sale passengers from europe and select among the healthy persons such as they deem suitable for their business and bargain with them how long they will serve for their passage money which most of them are still in debt for.
when they have come to an agreement it happens that adult persons bind themselves in writing to serve 3 4 5 or 6 years for the amount due by them according to their age and strength.
but very young people from 10 to 15 years must serve till they are 21 years old.
many parents must sell and trade away their children like so many head of cattle for if their children take the debt upon themselves the parents can leave the ship free and unrestrained but as the parents often do not know where and to what people their children are going it often happens that such parents and children after leaving the ship do not see each other again for many years perhaps no more in all their lives.
it often happens that whole families husband wife and children are separated by being sold to different purchasers especially when they have not paid any part of their passage money.
when a husband or wife has died at sea when the ship has made more than half of her trip the survivor must pay or serve not only for himself or herself but also for the deceased.
when both parents have died over halfway at sea their children especially when they are young and have nothing to pawn or pay must stand for their own and their parents passage and serve till they are 21 years old.
when one has served his or her term he or she is entitled to a new suit of clothes at parting and if it has been so stipulated a man gets in addition a horse a woman a cow.
when a serf has an opportunity to marry in this country he or she must pay for each year which he or she would have yet to serve 5 or 6 pounds.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
what hardships did passengers suffer at sea.
what relief could they hope for upon reaching philadelphia.
explain the different purchase agreements between passengers and masters.
how did the death of a family member affect a passengers indenture contracts.
what do the ordeals of indentured servants tell us about prospects in europe.
what does it tell us about the concept of liberty in the colonies.
some of the women married propertied men.
others mostly males found themselves without land without employment without families and without prospects.
as a result there emerged in some areas particularly in the chesapeake a large floating population of young single men who were a source of social unrest.
