chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 87 the n 8a new england courant from m ft o february 4 to ma bit february ij.
m te8m miet twd fwlhtt plmf o rewtfe min oiri ma w.
fsck vs jrijpttlon tfo aakbm l 47 i.
h gf ihsir sdm.
if ump u ttj ix nfotn w of ptopn m ilfe u a ft oh1 his majestys muff curious speech to both houfts of patlunjest ctf tbuxmsy vllebcr 11 gf i k i4i ot bt1 w rss wai wtiitot l a w.
v euoyj r kik sv vt p k.
t hsuts of jaw ku n.
tims ihe w ftfoa hern v t pstpruml d a t k.
fife s of ioju the new england courant one of the early colonial newspapers was published from 1722 to 1726 but both its publisher james franklin and his younger brother benjamin continued to publish newspapers in the 1720s and 1730s.
zengers acquittal has been celebrated ever since as a key victory for freedom of speech and freedom of the press.
in part it was a victory.
zenger was free to keep up his critique and other publishers were emboldened by the result.
on the other hand the laws against seditious libel were not repealed and every editor of zengers day knew that there was a danger of arrest and trial before a jury that might not be i as sympathetic as the one zenger faced.
nevertheless by the 1730s there were more than 20 newspapers being printed in the north american colonies and the majority included not only critiques of royal governors and colonial governments but also republished articles from the english press demanding freedom and calling attention to what they called the rights of englishmen these newspapers also published news from other colonies and began to create a stronger sense of unity among americans a name that residents of the british colonies were starting to call themselves.
the defense of freedoms that zenger and his attorneys considered basic to their rights as residents of the british colonies clearly reflects the views of a growing number of english inhabitants of north america at the time.
the great divisions over religious and political authority which had created turmoil and uprisings in england and in the colonies were receding into the dim past.
in spite of numerous new tensions many who lived in america between 1690 and 1760 were feeling a strong sense of pride in being british enjoying the prosperity that the british empire was creating and appreciating an elected parliament that was playing a dominant role in asserting individual liberties.
however that pride in british institutions and british rights slowly changed as some colonists began to shift their loyalties.
over time many came to distrust the british government as protector of their rights and began to talk of a way to separate from that government and protect their own rights as colonists.
understanding that shift is key to understanding the decades before the american revolution.
englands glorious revolution and the rights of englishmen 1689 glorious revolution bloodless revolt that occurred in england in 1688 when parliamentary leaders invited william of orange a protestant and his wife mary the daughter of king james ii to assume the english throne in place of james ii.
analyze the impact of england s glorious revolution on the thinking and political organization of british colonists in north america.
the 25 years between 1675 and 1700 were times of turmoil in england and its north american colonies.
a little more than a decade after king philips war and bacons rebellion convulsed the colonies the english parliament came to distrust king james ii who they believed was centralizing too much authority and who they suspected of privately supporting catholicism.
they ousted him in 1689 in what was known as the glorious revolution.
for many in england and its colonies it was an exciting time an assertion of the rights of englishmen and the authority of elected assemblies to control their destiny.
initially news of the overthrow of james ii brought rebellions in many of the colonies.
royal governors were arrested and popular assemblies demanded new authority just as parliament had done in london.
soon enough a new english government asserted its authority in colonial matters.
in the process a new sense of rights had been created on both sides of the atlantic ocean.
4 1 parliament s decision to elect a new king and queen king james ii r 1685 1688 who came to the english throne at the death of his brother charles ii was a catholic even though he was officially the head of the protestant church of england.
as he expanded religious freedoms for catholics and appointed some to high office his moves aroused serious opposition in britains protestant majority many of whom associated protestantism with british independence and catholicism with foreign domination especially by the spanish and french.
part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 james also wanted to assert royal authority especially in englands increasingly independent colonies.
he appointed a single royal governor sir edmund andros over a newly designated dominion of new england which comprised plymouth massachusetts new hampshire connecticut rhode island as well as new york and new jersey.
he also abolished most of the local autonomy that the colonies had enjoyed.
the colonists resented the unwanted merger of their colonies as well as the new king and governor who were enforcing it but they could do little about it.
however in england parliament turned against james ii.
rather than risk losing his head like his father james fled the country.
parliament invited jamess protestant daughter mary and her husband prince william of orange rulers of the netherlands to come to england as joint sovereigns.
this move by parliament was a dramatic change that would have far reaching effects.
the concept of the divine right of kings by which the sovereign good or bad inherited the throne from the previous sovereign and ruled with unquestioned authority was already in decline.
but now parliament had decided not only to limit royal authority but also to take some control over the choice of a king or queen themselves.
to justify the ouster of one king and the virtual election of new monarchs english people had to rethink how they understood themselves and their system of government.
kings and queens retained power after 1689 but their supremacy was now bound by law.
after 1689 it was clear that parliament as representative of the people was a deciding force in england.
john locke defending the right to revolution the most famous english philosopher at the time of the glorious revolution john locke justified the revolution by insisting that all government rested on the natural rights of the governed.
this concept was a novel idea in 1689 but locke who was living in exile in holland because of his opposition to jamess rule wrote that humans were born free in a state of nature and only agreed to a social compact when it suited their purposes.
if the people no longer agreed then monarchs had no right to continue to rule.
the basic rights of all englishmen to accept or reject their government came to be the dominant political ideology of the english nation as it then existed on both sides of the atlantic.
in his second treatise on government locke described civil society as a social contract made by free people to live together but one in which everyone retained his natural freedom without being subjected to the will or authority of any other man neither kings nor parliament were supreme.
the people were.
locke insisted there remains still in the people a supreme power to remove or alter the legislative power when they find the legislative act contrary to the trust reposed in them lockes revolutionary ideas helped justify the glorious revolution of 1689.
a hundred years later his ideas would be cited often in north america.
north american responses in englands american colonies news of the glorious revolution brought rejoicing.
in new england the colonists arrested governor andros and sent him back to england though he later returned as governor of virginia.
the new monarchs william and mary allowed the new england colonies to return to their former separate existences.
however when the king and queen reestablished the governments of massachusetts and connecticut they included a clause in the royal charters granting liberty of conscience to all protestants but not catholics.
baptists anglicans and others were now free to build their own churches and worship as they wished.
some puritans protested against this tolerance for error as they called allowing other churches to conduct their own services but the rules stuck in spite of their protests.
significant dates 1662 halfway covenant in massachusetts 1689 the glorious revolution janies ii replaced by william and mary 1692 salem witch trials 1701 1713 queen anne s war 1704 mohawk indians destroy deerfield massachusetts esther williams taken hostage first regular colonial newspaper begins publication in boston 1707 act of union between england and scotland 1715 1716 yamasee war in south carolina 1721 first smallpox inoculations advocated by cotton mather and administered in boston 1730s jonathan edwards leads religious revivals 1732 georgia established benjamin franklin begins publication of poor richard s almanack 1734 beginning of first great awakening 1735 john peter zenger acquitted in trial for libel 1739 stono slave rebellion in south carolina 1739 war of jenkins ear between england and spain in the caribbean 1741 slave conspiracy in new york city 1744 1748 king george s war between britain and france 1754 albany plan of union advocates unifying the colonies for war with france divine right of kings a belief that the king or queen was selected by god through birth in the royal family and that it was irreligious to question either a monarch s fitness to serve or a monarch s decisions.
during the 1600s england overthrew two monarchs and afterwards few still held such a belief.
natural rights political philosophy that maintains that individuals have an inherent right found in nature and preceding any government or written law to life and liberty.
chapter 4 creatingthecultureof british north america 89 4t 4 2 other protestants were free to build churches at their own expense and worship freely but everyone paid taxes to support the congregationalists and catholic worship was not allowed in new england.
in new york news of the change in england brought a general uprising.
those on the bottom of the social order merchants dockworkers and traders seized power under the leadership of a german immigrant jacob leisler.
leisler held power for 2 years but when he was slow in ceding power to the new royal governor appointed by william and mary he was arrested and executed for treason.
however those loyal to leisler remained a faction in new york politics for a generation to come.
in maryland there was also an uprising.
the catholic proprietor was driven from office and lost ownership of the colony.
maryland became a royal colony with a governor appointed by the king and queen and the anglican church of england became the colonys official church.
after the glorious revolution maryland a colony that had been chartered in 1632 to protect catholics excluded catholics from public office.
in the americas the glorious revolution produced winners and losers.
after 1689 independent corporations like the virginia company and the massachusetts company as well as colonial proprietors like lord baltimore or william penn faced a decline in power.
catholics in england and maryland lost hard won political rights as the new monarchs asserted englands status as a protestant nation.
all protestants gained rights and protestant men who had been excluded from the voting lists because they belonged to a dissenting religious group could now vote.
elected legislatures elected by landowning white males competed with royal governors to make the laws governing each colony.
in all the colonies changing ones social and economic status was becoming more difficult.
an english colonial elite supported by english military authority now dominated colonial life.
the british communities became larger more secure and wealthier.
quick review 1.
how do the colonists reactions to the glorious revolution reflect their sense of connection to ideas and events in england.
based on what you read for whom in the british colonies did the glorious revolution have a positive effect.
a negative effect.
the plantation world from a society with slaves to a slave society 4 2 explain why and how slavery developed as it did in the late 1600s and early 1700s.
fit amid all the talk of the rights of englishmen one group of north american residents lost rights after the 1680s african slaves.
all of the british colonies had slaves in the late 1600s but the institution of slavery changed most dramatically in the southern colonies maryland virginia and soon also the carolinas.
bacons rebellion brought great changes to virginia and its neighbor maryland after 1676.
once the planter elite had defeated bacons ragtag militia they quickly consolidated their power.
they did not want another rebellion like the one they had just lived through in which poor whites allied with africans slave and free.
having decided that slaves would make better and more dependable workers than indentured servants this planter elite wrote new slave codes that more clearly made slavery an inherited and permanent status.
they also imported many more african slaves and reduced the numbers of english indentured servants allowed into these colonies.
historian ira berlin described this shift a society with slaves gave way to a slave society it was a significant change from a society in which slavery existed to a society in which the institution of slavery dominated all aspects of society particularly for those who were enslaved.
although this shift began in virginia and maryland its effects would eventually extend to other southern colonies.
art ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 seeking stability by creating a slave society as the institution of slavery came to be more rigidly defined it also came to be linked more closely to race.
africans were seen as slaves.
europeans even the poorest europeans were seen as free.
more and more indians were simply excluded from the colonies.
those africans who had already achieved their freedom and those few who did so during the 1700s lived in a dangerous world.
while anthony johnson had moved from slavery to freedom and prosperity in the virginia of the mid 1600s see chapter 3 his children and grandchildren fled from virginia in the late 1600s to avoid the risks of slavery some of them living with the nanticoke indians in a small community of african european and american indian origin.
children of mixed race were marginalized or simply declared to be african slaves.
any child born to a black woman was automatically considered to be african even if as was often the case the father was a european slave owner.
but mixed race children born to white mothers were more problematic to marginalize or cast into slavery so stringent efforts were made to prohibit sexual liaisons between white women and males of other races.
while there were slaves in all of englands north american colonies as slavery became institutionalized the numbers of african slaves in the southern colonies rose dramatically.
in the 1680s approximately 2 000 africans were shipped to virginia.
between 1700 and 1710 approximately 8 000 arrived.
in 1668 white indentured servants outnumbered african slaves by five to one and there were about equal numbers of indian and african slaves.
by 1700 nearly all tobacco and rice workers in virginia and the carolinas were african slaves see map 4 1.
the atlantic slave trade the middle passage and the nature of colonial slavery north american slavery was always a relatively small part of the atlantic slave trade.
the sugar plantations of the caribbean brazil and new spain needed many more slaves and slaves there died much more quickly so there was a constant flow of slaves to islands controlled by the english french dutch danish and spanish and to the south american mainland.
some 10 15 million africans were forced across the atlantic between 1500 and 1900 but only a fraction came to the mainland british colonies see map 4 2.
economic developments in all of north and south america came to depend more and more on slavery he hunt for slaves went deeper and deeper into the african continent leadmg to slaw.
coffles as they ere known in which newly captured people were marched hundreds of m les to the coast for transport cross the atlantic in numbers never before seen.
chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 91 i distribution of slaves eastern north america 1750 l j north region i i upper south region lower south region numbers listed below each colony indicate total slave population in that colony numbers in parentheses represent slave population as a percentage of that colony s total population darkly shaded areas suggest expanding zones of colonial occupation new hampshire 550 2 massachusetts 4 075 2 rhode island 3 347 10 connecticut 3 010 3 map 4 1 enslaved people in british north america in 1750.
between 1700 and 1750 there were growing numbers of slaves in all 13 of the mainland british colonies in north america but hardly in equal numbers.
by 1750 the percentage of slaves in most of new england was 2 3 of the population while in rhode island and new york the northern colonies with the most slaves they represented 10 14.
but there was a much higher proportion of slaves in the southern colonies ranging from 27 of the population of north carolina to 61 of the population of south carolina.
middle passage the horrendous voyage in which slaves were taken from west africa to slave colonies in the americas during which as many as a quarter died.
new states in west africa asante dahomey and oyo emerged along the african coast fueled by the transfer of slaves from the interior of africa to the coast for sale and shipment to the americas.
some african states such as benin refused to engage in the slave trade.
but those that did grew rich as the slave trade grew rapidly.
what had been a limited if brutal business now seemed to have no limit.
for most west africans the huge growth of the african slave trade was a disaster.
in addition to the warfare and fear among africans that the slave trade inspired the continent lost millions of people which sapped its strength.
once slaves arrived on the african coast they were kept naked in cramped quarters in what were called slave factories.
they were fed only bread and water.
those found to be fit were marked on the breast with a red hot iron imprinting the mark 92 part ii settlements old and new 160 754 of tht uaw ur rooktl vnbtr tht regelated slave trade c r yht w yr tmm m ma mwm tht m site.
tjyim if 4 1 t i.
jv j this sketch of the inside of a slave ship and the chart showing british rules for the slave trade shows how tightly slaves were packed for the horrendous middle passage from africa to the americas.
not surprisingly a quarter of the slaves often died on the voyage and survivors never forgot the trauma.
of the french english or dutch companies that so each nation may distinguish their own.
sorted and branded the slaves were held for sale to ship captains who would take them across the atlantic.
the middle passage the transit of slaves from africa to the americas was a horrifying experience.
one slave ship captain said that slaves were packed like books upon a shelf so close that the shelf would not easily contain one more up to 400 on a ship.
men were chained shoulder to shoulder.
women were generally not chained but packed just as tightly for a voyage that took 7 weeks in a filthy ships hold that stank of human waste.
the rate of disease was high 25 percent of slaves died on the voyage.
slaves were force fed to reduce the loss of valuable cargo to starvation.
one slave trader noted the tendency of slaves to revolt aboard ships slaves would he said watch all opportunities to deliver themselves by assaulting a ships crew and murdering them all slaving was a dangerous and dirty but profitable business.
the first generation of slaves in north america those arriving in the early 1600s came from the coast of west africa.
they were familiar at least in a general way with each other and with european culture and languages since europeans had been trading along the coast for more than 100 years.
those who arrived later often had been captured much further inland.
they knew little about european ways or about each other.
the first generation of slaves were allowed some dignity but by the late 1600s every effort was made to rob slaves of their self respect.
slaves were inspected like animals by those who bought and sold them.
masters used names as part of an effort to break the slaves spirits.
new slaves were named jack or sukey or jumper or hercules.
slave marriages were not recognized by law and a master could sell husband away from wife or children from parents.
olaudah equiano was born around 1745.
according to his autobiography he was captured when he was 11 years old shipped to america and put to work first as a domestic servant in virginia and then aboard a ship.
he had much better luck than most slaves eventually purchasing his freedom and writing a description of his experiences that became an early tract for the budding antislavery movement.
he reported what it meant to be taken onboard a slave ship on the coast of africa i was soon put down under the decks and there i received such a salutation in my nostrils as i had never experienced in my life so that with the loathsomeness of the stench and crying together i became so sick and low that i was not able to eat nor had i the least desire to taste anything.
i now wished for the last friend death to relieve me but soon to my grief two of the white men offered me eatables and on my refusing to eat one of them held me fast by the hands and laid me across i think the windlass and tied my feet while the other flogged me severely.
millions of other africans suffered the same experiences but never achieved the freedom that equiano did.
most africans especially those imported into the southern colonies after the 1680s faced a lifetime of slavery on a tobacco cotton or rice plantation.
their difficult lives were not long ones.
until the mid 1700s one quarter of newly arrived slaves died within a year.
young children often worked in the fields alongside adults and the labor for women and men was backbreaking from sunup to sundown.
the law gave plantation owners a free hand in how they treated their slaves.
slaves were whipped branded tortured and executed for the smallest infractions to warn according to his popular autobiography olaudah equiano was captured in nigeria in 1756 when he was 11 years old sold into slavery and unlike the vast majority of slaves of his generation eventually was able to purchase his freedom and rise to prosperity.
the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano which he wrote was published in 1789 and became an important antislavery tract that provided a firsthand account of the experience of slavery.
chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 93 map 4 2 origin and destinations of enslaved africans 1700 1800.
this map shows not only the places of origin in africa for most of the slaves transported across the atlantic between 1700 and 1800 but also their destinations in the americas.
while perhaps half a million humans were sold into slavery in british north america almost three times as many people were sold into the british caribbean colonies and an equal number to portuguese brazil.
others of what resistance would mean.
total and unquestionable authority became the order of the day for male owners making them absolute monarchs over their slaves.
by the early 1700s a small group of plantation owners controlled nearly all aspects of life in the southern colonies.
it was a society in which slaves were given no respect a few wealthy white males had unlimited power and the institution of slavery defined the social order.
part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 nations participating and their share in the slave traffic 1700 1800 r l britain d the netherlands 3 100 100 349 600 portugal uss denmark 1 846 900 52 770 i i france british colonies u s a.
1 028 950 211 100 roughly 800 000 africans perished at sea senegambia approximately 6 600 000 departed from africa 1700 1800 africans taken to the americas 1700 1800 es3 senegambia ess bight of biafra 389 150 1 174 050 i i windward coast sis west central africa 521 100 2 440 000 czs gold coast hi mozambique 758 550 131 000 i i bight of benin m 187 300 the fear of slave revolts south carolina and new york in the early 1700s british landowners especially in the southern colonies imported more and more slaves from africa.
the production of tobacco rice and indigo was growing quickly.
charleston south carolina became the largest slave trading center in mainland north america.
but slaves did not accept their fate easily.
they longed for and sometimes fought for their freedom.
as more white colonists came to depend on slave labor for their growing prosperity they also lived in constant fear of slave revolts uprisings that were far from uncommon in all of the colonies.
two examples reflect the volatile conditions throughout the colonies.
the stono slave rebellion of 1739 england and spain were often at war making the border between spanish florida and british south carolina and georgia a tense boundary see map 4 3.
in 1693 spain offered freedom to all fugitives from chanter 4 creatina the culture of british 1 map 4 3 british georgia and spanish florida.
while the border between georgia and florida was considered an international boundary between the british and spanish colonies the reality was that most of the unguarded territory was filled with forest and swamp and for slaves the path from south carolina to spanish florida was a path from slavery to freedom.
south carolina savannah georgia so tt charleston t l.
sullivans island h.
stono rebellion 1739 beaufort ort royai sound l purrysburg new inverness st simons island battle of bloody marsh 1742 atlantic ocean st george gulf of mexico ft mose st augustine english spanish competition and the expansion of slavery into georgia ezz3 southern extent of british slavery regime before 1751 e3 southern extent of british slavery regime 1751 1763 northern limit of spanish claim in 1670 southern limit of british claim in 1736 path from charleston to st augustine major battles 5 fort st george a british lookout post 5 fort mose spanish outpost made up of escaped south carolina slaves stono rebellion uprising in 1739 of south carolina slaves against whites inspired in part by spanish officials promise of freedom for american slaves who escaped to florida.
british territories who came into spanish territory and converted to catholicism.
many carolina slaves heard about spains offer and the number of runaways increased.
throughout the early 1700s a steady stream of slaves managed to make their way to florida and freedom.
some of these runaways were already catholic because they came from parts of africa such as the kingdom of kongo long since converted by portuguese missionaries.
for others converting to catholicism was a route to freedom.
at first the spanish authorities were slow to make good on their promise but they soon realized the value of their policy.
the runaway slaves were a drain on the carolina economy and an embarrassment to the british.
in addition the newly freed slaves were a strong first line of defense on the spanish side of the border.
after all as newly free people in spanish florida they had special reason to defend the territory from the british who wanted to perpetuate their slavery.
one of these former carolina slaves francisco menendez won a special commendation from the spanish in 1728 for his heroism in defending st augustine from english attack.
when the spanish authorities decided to create a separate settlement they called mose to the north of st augustine as a buffer against further attacks the spanish governor placed menendez in charge.
mose was more a fort than a town but it was home to approximately 100 africans who defended florida and organized attacks on the british in south carolina.
a large effort by carolina slaves to gain freedom in spanish florida in 1739 came to be called the stono rebellion the largest slave uprising in the colonies before the american revolution.
it terrified slave masters throughout the british colonies.
the rebellion began when some 60 slaves from the south carolina rice plantations led by a slave named cato walked off their plantations armed themselves burned buildings of the slave owners and killed whites who got in their way as they sought freedom in spanish florida.
fearful slave owners sent the south carolina militia to stop them.
in a battle at stono south carolina 50 miles from what was then the florida border many of the rebels and their white pursuers were killed.
other slaves were captured and returned to slavery.
but some made it to freedom in florida and 96 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 joined the free black community there.
in response the white planter government of south carolina temporarily restricted the importation of more african slaves and permanently curtailed the rights of slaves to assemble with one another.
after the stono rebellion was crushed individual slaves continued to escape south across the border.
menendez the former slave had further adventures.
traveling to spain he was captured by the british and threatened with execution but he eventually escaped and by 1752 was again back leading the militia in florida.
by 1763 mose had a population of 3 000 mostly escaped slaves.
when spain ceded florida to britain in that year they moved the mose africans to cuba where they were given land tools a subsidy and ironically a slave for each leader in the community.
tensions in new york city 1741 in the 1700s slavery was not limited to the southern colonies.
new york city and providence rhode island had some of the largest concentrations of slaves in north america at that time.
new yorks african american community included approximately 2 000 out of the citys 10 000 residents.
slave labor in new york might not have been as backbreaking as on a virginia tobacco or carolina rice plantation but it was slavery nonetheless.
slaves did the worst jobs got no pay and had limited freedom.
they could also be sold south at any time.
nevertheless unlike rural slaves urban slaves had a chance to meet other slaves either at their work or in those taverns that welcomed them.
some of these opportunities frightened whites leading them to react to what they assumed was pending rebellion.
in the early months of 1741 fires swept new york destroying businesses and homes including the governors house.
governor george clarke became convinced that the negros are rising whether or not slaves had anything to do with it the 1741 fires were real.
new yorkers were suffering through a harsh winter.
news of south carolinas stono slave rebellion was in circulation and memories of other slave revolts were fresh.
there had been a slave revolt in the caribbean in the 1730s.
in 1712 new york slaves had killed nine whites and wounded six more.
fear spread easily.
a zealous prosecutor became convinced that there was a conspiracy to kill the citys whites so he brought charges against targeted suspects pitted accused against accused and elicited confessions.
thirty africans most of them slaves and four whites were executed either hanged or burned at the stake.
eighty four other suspects were transported to slavery in jamaica.
the degree to which new yorkers experienced an actual revolt as opposed to being caught up in a fear induced mass hysteria will never be known but the trials illustrate the way those who enslaved others also feared the reality that they had created.
quick review what is the difference between a society with slaves and a slave society and how did part of north america become the latter.
4 3 stability and instability in the american and british worlds analyze the changes in the ideas and daily lives of the people in british north america in the 1700s as a result of events within and beyond the colonies.
in 1706 1707 the english and scottish parliaments passed the act of union formally uniting england and scotland to create great britain.
although the two countries had been ruled by a single monarch since james i came to the throne in 1603 they were separate nations with separate parliaments and the american colonies were english colonies after 1707 england and scotland were one country and the english colonies became british north america.
the act extended the political stability of the glorious revolution.
by 1707 third and fourth generations of people living in the american colonies had never seen britain even though they were of english and act of union the 1707 vote by the scottish and english parliaments to become one nation of great britain.
chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 97 as their dress and the picture s background illustrate charles and anne byrd carter of virginia were among the colonial elite when these pictures were painted in the 1730s.
occasionally scottish descent.
they were being joined by other europeans especially immigrants from ireland and germany along with increasing numbers of unwilling and unfree africans.
the british economy on both sides of the atlantic was changing and people were prospering.
although many people were still poor the desperate starving time in virginia and similar early struggles elsewhere were far behind.
in british cities on both sides of the atlantic and on the great plantations developing in the southern colonies a growing social and economic elite lived comfortable lives largely made possible by the slave trade and the backbreaking work of african slaves.
the wealthiest colonial residents were those who lived on the tobacco rice and indigo plantations of virginia and the carolinas including people like charles and anne byrd carter whose families owned thousands of acres as well as many slaves and produced some of the goods most in demand in great britain and britains other colonies around the world.
nevertheless colonial life was still full of uncertainty.
the hysteria that led to the salem witch trials in the 1690s reflected these deep seated fears that were just under the surface of much of colonial society.
rural women were often isolated and even urban women were confined to domestic worlds which could be boring and lonely.
fears and uncertainties were often shaped by information about events that took place in another colony.
the ever present danger of indian raids continued to threaten british colonies just as raids by settlers were a constant danger for tribes living near the colonies.
the wealthy elite whose wealth depended on slaves feared slave revolts.
in addition wars in europe often led to battles in north america.
by the early 1700s england was the worlds dominant sea power bringing great financial benefits to those who controlled the trade in goods and people across the atlantic and bringing prosperity to those who lived in port cities on both sides of the ocean.
as trade and prosperity grew the quest for commercial success began to replace religious devotion as the prime focus of many peoples lives.
the salem witch trials of 1692 underlying tensions in colonial life surfaced in massachusetts during the harsh unrelenting winter of 1691 1692.
the residents of salem and the surrounding massachusetts communities also lived in fear because new england was under siege from indians allied with french canada.
in midwinter indians killed 50 residents of york maine and took another hundred hostage.
residents of other maine communities fled in terror and were living in or near salem.
exiles from maine may have been especially traumatized but all of the residents feared further attacks.
moreover other 98 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 tensions were brewing in the port city of salem.
many poorer residents resented their neighbors who formed a more prosperous commercial elite.
in addition women in salem like in all english colonies lived often unwillingly within strict submissive gender roles women who were unusually assertive especially women who lived alone or were of non english backgrounds were not trusted.
as these tensions simmered salem fell into a kind of mass hysteria late that winter.
two young girls in the home of reverend samuel parris of salem village his daughter betty and her cousin abigail began to suffer fits.
they seemed to be bitten and pinched by invisible agents.
the town doctor wondered if their disease might be a result of witchcraft.
in march the girls accused tituba the familys indian slave of bewitching them.
thus began the salem witch trials one of the best known episodes of mass hysteria in the english colonies.
soon other young women came forward with tales similar to those of betty and abigail.
as a result formal charges were brought and court proceedings began.
in time some of those accused including tituba confessed to being witches.
witnesses turned against one another and convictions for witchcraft became common.
between february 1692 and may 1693 legal action was taken against 144 people 106 women and 38 men.
six men and 14 women including tituba were executed.
that so many people in salem believed their illnesses and troubles were the work of witches was not strange in the 1600s.
most people in europe believed that there were witches people who had made a compact with the devil and could appear as ghosts and make other people and animals sick.
hundreds of supposed witches were executed in england in that century and many other accusations of witchcraft had surfaced in new england although never on the scale of what happened in salem.
in salem the whole community became involved as the accusations spread quickly from one household to another.
virtually all of the accusers were young women under age 25 and most of the victims were also women though often older.
the hysteria ended almost as quickly as it had begun.
by the fall of 1692 massachusetts authorities clergy and political leaders were starting to have doubts about the trials and executions.
most people in the colony probably still believed in witchcraft but they were increasingly uneasy about what was happening in salem.
by spring 1693 it was all over.
one of the judges samuel sewall publicly apologized for his role and asked gods pardon.
reverend parris was forced to leave salem and the massachusetts authorities voted compensation for victims and families.
the salem witch trials were one of the last times that people were executed for explicitly religious reasons in north america.
women s lives by the middle of the 1700s the white culture of british north america was generally divided between the public and private realms.
because women were generally relegated to the private realm many of them lived cut off from society.
urban women had much more opportunity for social contact with other women and men than those living in more isolated regions.
in williamsburg virginia two women anne shields and jane vobe both ran their own taverns.
mary channing ran a large store in boston and lydia hyde had her own shop in philadelphia.
while these women may have been the exception city women did have many opportunities to interact.
however more than 90 percent of the british residents of north america lived on farms sometimes very isolated farms and the lives of rural women could be frighteningly lonely.
in more settled communities especially in southern new england women could often find limited contact with other women in ways that allowed them to build some friendships such as gathering to trade soap candles cheese and butter or attending church.
growing commercial prosperity also meant that some women were able to purchase imported goods including tea china and for a few even silk.
an illustration from the book full and plain evidence concerning witches and apparitions published in london in 1681 represented beliefs on both sides of the atlantic about the powers of those who made a pact with the devil.
salem witch trials the 1692 1693 hysteria in salem massachusetts during which women and men were accused of being witches who had made a pact with the devil some of whom were executed for the crime.
chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 99 as the american population expanded finding land often required moving to more isolated rural areas which could make contact and community life more difficult especially for women.
while male farmers also lived very isolated lives they traveled to town to sell goods and buy necessities more often than women.
these trips provided men far more opportunity to meet neighbors and participate in the social and political discussions.
in contrast women were limited not only by assumptions that they should stick to household matters and leave political discussion and trade to their husbands but also by the physical demands of pregnancy birth nursing and child rearing as well as by the daily chores of a farm taking care of the animals cultivating the vegetables preserving food preparing meals spinning wool weaving cloth and making clothes.
womens work also included playing the role of physician or pharmacist because most farm families did not have access to more formal medical care.
women had to be familiar with medical information and herbal medicines.
manuals such as aristotle s complete masterpiece displaying the secrets of nature in the generation of man provided many women with detailed information on sexual matters childbirth and child rearing.
in addition the opportunities women had to share medical and child rearing information provide medical care and support each other through medical emergencies and childbirth were extremely important to womens community life.
midwives and healers had special status but any nearby farm wife might be summoned to attend a birth and a woman in labor might well have 6 10 female attendants.
the times surrounding a birth were an important social occasion as women had time to sew tell stories and catch up with each other.
at the bottom of the social hierarchy were enslaved women.
for women living in slavery the usual gender distinctions of white society had less meaning.
on farms and plantations male and female slaves all worked long hours in the fields.
in urban areas where there might be greater gender distinctions in specific forms of work enslaved women were still afforded little of the protections that were expected if not always enforced for white women.
there were of course exceptions to the general isolation that women living outside of cities experienced.
eliza lucas 1722 1793 was born to a wealthy english sugar growing family on the island of antigua in 1722.
she was educated in london and then joined her family in south carolina in 1738.
she quickly became a popular member of charlestons elite.
however in 1739 war between england and spain required her father to return to antigua.
she was left in charge of three carolina plantations at the age of 16.
in 1744 eliza married charles pinckney.
he also traveled a great deal and left her in charge of the plantations.
like male plantation owners eliza pinckney supervised a large labor force of slaves whose labor was the basis of her wealth and leisure.
her position gave her time and opportunity to develop her agricultural ideas and cultivate her intellect which she did throughout her life.
she experimented with new crops and crop rotations.
she also helped develop cultivation of the indigo plant which was used to create a blue dye that was popular in england and which soon rivaled rice as a source of wealth in south carolina.
the growth of cities philadelphia new york boston charleston in 1700 british north america had a population of approximately 250 000 including both europeans and africans but not indians.
boston was the largest city in the colonies with 8 000 inhabitants followed by new york city with 6 000.
philadelphia and charleston were both under 3 000 but philadelphia was growing fast.
by contrast the capital of new spain mexico city had 100 000 residents and london had over 500 000 in 1700.
with growing trade and prosperity the british north american population would dramatically increase see table 4 1.
100 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 table 4 1 estimated populations of the four largest cities in british north america between 1700 and 1775 city 1700 1720 1750 1775 boston 8 000 12 000 16 000 i 17 500 philadelphia 2 000 10 000 15 000 31 000 new york 6 000 7 000 14 000 s 21 500 charleston 2 000 3 500 6 500 11 000 by the 1770s on the eve of the american revolution philadelphia would have 30 000 residents followed by new york with 25 000 boston with 16 000 and charleston with 12 000.
the total colonial population would be 2 5 million including 500 000 slaves of african origin.
many colonists responded to the growing trade and prosperity with pride in being part of the british empire.
in the 1690s virginia moved its capital from jamestown to williamsburg complete with a new capitol building that reflected this pride.
the structure had two wings one for the elected legislature the house of burgesses and one for the royally appointed council just as the parliament that sat in london had places for the elected house of commons and the hereditary house of lords.
the governors elegant williamsburg residence reflected the status of the crowns representative in the colony.
although most people still lived on farms or in small towns the port cities were becoming significant centers of trade and culture for the whole british empire.
between 1701 and 1754 the cities of british north america moved from being rude outposts to cities that looked and felt very much like similar cities in britain.
they were important to the british empires commercial and maritime success and residents were proud of their connection to the mother country.
in the early 1700s new york city philadelphia boston and charleston all emerged as significant trading centers for the british world.
the ocean based commerce of these cities was based on their good harbors britains growing dominance of the worlds oceans and industries that included britains naval building the tea trade and the slave trade.
ships based in north america carried food cornmeal pork and beef and naval stores tar pitch turpentine and lumber to the great sugar plantations of the british west indies.
these prosperous plantations on barbados jamaica and other british controlled islands were far richer than anything on the mainland of north america.
they also had many more slaves than any plantation on the mainland.
but they depended on outsiders often colonists living on the vast mainland of north america to supply their food and building supplies.
the ships returned to north american ports with slaves sugar rum molasses cotton and fruit from the caribbean manufactured goods from great britain and letters of credit that expanded the cash in circulation in the colonies and in london.
cities also became safer places to live after boston clergyman cotton mather championed the first vaccinations against smallpox in 1721.
while smallpox had been a major cause of death among indians who had never developed immunity to the disease many europeans also died of it.
mather a puritan theologian and pastor was also an acute scientific observer.
he had read about a turkish doctor who had produced light cases of smallpox by deliberately infecting healthy people with the disease which produced immunity in them against more lethal strains.
when the smallpox epidemic of 1721 hit boston mather advocated using that doctors inoculation approach and a physician zabdiel boylston tried it.
mather collected the statistics.
of some 300 people inoculated only five or six died compared with 900 deaths among the 5 000 who were not inoculated.
the statistics were compelling.
smallpox inoculations spread throughout the colonial world though it was another 30 years before smallpox inoculations were common in england.
chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 101 american voices benjamin franklin the way to wealth 1757 4 3 benjamin franklin 1706 1790 was born in modest circumstances in boston massachusetts in 1706.
at age 12 after 2 years of schooling franklin became an apprentice an indentured servant to his older brother james a printer in boston.
in 1723 at the age of 17 and 4 years before his indenture expired benjamin took advantage of a loophole in the contract and left boston for philadelphia.
by 1729 at the age of 23 he was sole owner of a printing business having bought out a partner.
while he made money printing government documents and publications for private businesses franklin also produced poor richard s almanack that predicted the weather for the coming year and shared friendly advice.
by 1748 when he was 42 years old franklin with his flourishing printing business was one of the richest people in the northern colonies and decided that it was time to retire from work live the life of a gentleman and devote himself to public service.
public service had always been important to franklin and it was a measure of the status he sought.
he had already helped launch the library company of philadelphia.
soon after he retired franklin engaged in his famous experiment with a kite to prove that lighting was indeed electricity.
in 1755 he helped found the college of philadelphia that would become the university of pennsylvania.
in 1757 franklin wrote a preface to the last edition of his almanac he had published for 30 years.
he used a fictional father abraham to quote all of the best passages that he had written over the years.
this preface was subsequently published as the way to wealth one of franklin s most enduring works which reflected a growing emphasis on financial success.
the advice from poor richard shed light on a changing colonial culture one in which religious orthodoxy and national loyalties mattered less and individual commercial success mattered much more.
i stopped my horse lately where a great number of people were collected at a vendue sale of merchant goods.
the hour of sale not being come they were conversing on the badness of the times and one of the company called to a plain clean old man with white locks pray father abraham what think you of the times.
won t these heavy taxes quite ruin the country.
how shall we be ever able to pay them.
what would you advise us to.
friends says he and neighbors the taxes are indeed very heavy and if those laid on by the government were the only ones we had to pay we might more easily discharge them but we have many others and much more grievous to some of us.
we are taxed twice as much by our idleness three times as much by our pride and four times as much by our folly and from these taxes the commissioners cannot ease or deliver us by allowing an abatement.
however let us hearken to good advice and something may be done for us god helps them that help themselves as poor richard says in his almanac of 1733 if time be of all things the most precious wasting time must be as poor richard says the greatest prodigality since as he elsewhere tells us lost time is never found again and early to bed and early to rise makes a man healthy wealthy and wise.
diligence is the mother of good luck as poor richard says and by diligence and patience the mouse ate in two the cable and little strokes fell great oaks as poor richard says in his almanac the year i cannot just now remember and now to conclude experience keeps a dear school but fools will learn in no other and scarce in that for it is true we may give advice but we cannot give conduct as poor richard says thus the old gentleman ended his harangue.
the people heard it and approved the doctrine and immediately practiced the contrary just as if it had been a common sermon.
source benjamin franklin the works of benjamin franklin with notes and a life of the author by jared sparks.
london benjamin franklin stevens 1882 thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what values did franklin endorse.
historical interpretation what groups in colonial society would have been most likely to see franklin s values as their own.
mercantilism economic system whereby the government intervenes in the economy for the purpose of increasing national wealth.
capitalism economic system best described by adam smith in 1776 in which trade is seen as the source of wealth rather than as exchange of goods themselves as a result wealth can continually expand as trade expands.
102 part ii settlements old and new 1607 commercial attitudes commercial success mercantilism and the new trading economy the economy of europe and europes american colonies changed drastically between 1689 and 1754.
since at least the time of queen elizabeth the western worlds economy and certainly the economy of britain and britains possessions had been organized around an economic system known as mercantilism.
but as trade developed in the colonies the seeds of what would later be described in 1776 as capitalism were already taking hold.
advocates of mercantilism believed that economic transactions should be directed to increase the nations wealth without regard for other participants in 1754 those transactions that the world s wealth was finite and that for any nation to grow in wealth some other nation needed to be the loser.
using this mercantile approach the british empire closely guarded the colonies so that their wealth went exclusively to britain and not to other european countries.
economists of the time believed that it was critical that the colonies be used only to produce raw materials that would enrich the european nation that claimed them and that colonies also consume manufactured products from their mother country.
any trade outside of this closed loop they claimed ran the risk of diluting the nations wealth.
as the later idea of capitalism emerged advocates for that concept saw the economic world very differently.
economists who favored capitalism believed there was no limit to the worlds wealth because it was trade not the goods that were being traded that was the ultimate key to wealth.
thus trade between individuals and between nations allowed continuing growth for all parties.
the prime example of mercantilism in the americas were the british navigation acts of 1650 and 1660.
the 1660 navigation act proclaimed that from thenceforward no goods or commodities whatsoever shall be imported into or exported out of any lands islands plantations or territories to his majesty belonging or in his possession but in such ships or vessels as do truly and without fraud belong only to the people of england or ireland dominion of wales or town of berwick upon tweed in other words anything shipped to north america or to other british colonies had to be transported in english ships and everything shipped from the colonies had to be transported in english ships bound for england.
the goal was clear the colonies would produce raw goods as the act stipulated sugars tobacco cotton wool indigoes ginger fustic or other dyeing wood and ship them only to england.
england would produce manufactured goods and the colonies would be limited to buying goods only from england.
the arrangement was a closed economic system and it was designed to ensure that wealth from the colonies flowed only to london not back to the colonies and certainly not to any other country.
clearly britain had no interest in cultivating wealth within the colonies themselves.
the problem with mercantilism was that it focused too much on control of things and too little on the trade of things.
the efforts on the part of spain to maintain its wealth by controlling the worlds supply of silver and gold are illustrative of that problem as was the effort of british pirates to steal the same gold.
many european wars of the era were fought over issues related to mercantilism as each european power sought to control the greatest amount of what they saw as the worlds limited wealth.
as the navigation acts made clear for much of the 1700s even as britain itself was beginning to focus on developing an economy based on trade its government attempted to use mercantile principles to control that trade with the american colonies.
the triangle trade that developed in response to british mercantile policies involved the shipment of slaves from africa to the west indies and north america in exchange for rum see map 4 4.
sugar and rum made from sugar were also shipped to britain and goods manufactured in britain were shipped to africa the west indies and to the mainland of north america.
but there was also significant trade directly between north america and britain.
raw materials including fur grain tobacco rice and indigo the last three all produced by slave labor were shipped directly to britain in return for manufactured products that by law though not always in reality could be produced only in great britain.
for british colonists living in north america the trade problems were more real life than theoretical.
they hated mercantilism and the navigation acts not because they opposed slavery or the introduction of slave labor into the colonies or because they thought capitalism was a better economic theory but because the british policies were keeping them from getting rich.
molasses could be bought more cheaply from french colonies than from british.
slaves could sometimes be bought more cheaply as colonial life became more settled in british north america between the 1680s and the 1750s economic patterns became more established.
in the early 1700s a british study reported the kinds of trades practiced in the colonies including this illustration of a male master and apprentice working in a shop.
triangle trade a pattern of trade that developed in the 1700s in which slaves from africa were sent to the west indies and mainland north america while goods and other resources were shipped between the west indies and north america and britain.
chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 103 4 3 europe map 4 4 the triangle trade.
as this map shows the so called triangular trade was not a perfect triangle.
but for the british colonies the most significant trade focused on england from which manufactured products were shipped to the americas and to africa.
in return african slaves were shipped to the caribbean and to north america caribbean rum was shipped to africa and to england and raw materials including fish fur grain rice indigo and tobacco were shipped directly from north america to england which according to mercantile laws was the only place where raw materials could be turned into finished manufactured goods.
africa from dutch traders than from english.
similarly goods produced in the colonies tobacco rice foodstuffs and ships stores could often fetch higher prices elsewhere in the world than in britain.
trading with a wider world especially the rich colonies of the caribbean made more sense and produced greater profit than limiting trade to england alone.
circumventing the navigation acts either through finding legal loopholes or simply sailing off in a different direction than british laws allowed became a major enterprise and source of wealth throughout all of the british colonies.
the involvement of the colonies in worldwide trade even when that trade was illegal foreshadowed not only american independence but also a shift in economic systems from the closed world of mercantilism to a more open and elastic world in which trade and commerce rather than simply ownership of things was the key to wealth.
trade was also increasing the exchange of information.
cotton mather learned about smallpox inoculations from turkish physicians through contacts in london.
new yorks traders interacted with merchants in jamaica and barbados as well as africa and england.
jews whose forbearers had been exiled from spain mingled on the streets of new york and philadelphia with africans captured from kongo and servants fleeing poverty in london.
news of attacks by indians allied with france or spain sparked uncertainty even hysteria among colonists.
slaves from the carolinas 104 partll settlements old and new 1607 1754 1 i heard about offers from spanish florida and escaped to freedom.
and as the next section in this chapter relates the most influential preacher of the great awakening george whitefield traveled back and forth across the atlantic 13 times preaching transformative sermons to huge crowds in england and america.
these kinds of exchanges gave many people new knowledge of a wider world.
although the world of british north america could be limited and most people did not travel very far colonial society was very much an international society a context that shaped the life of every british north american resident in the mid 1700s.
at the same time trade travel and communication among the colonies grew even though london tried to tighten its control and its separate connections with each of the 13 mainland british colonies.
people along the atlantic coast from new england to the carolinas began to take greater notice of one another exchanging ideas and seeing new reasons to defend their common interests.
by the 1750s colonists were identifying some of those common interests even as they jealously guarded their own colonys independence.
the years between 1707 and 1754 were years of relative stability in british north america but they were also years in which the availability of information attitudes and opinions about the value of british political power in colonial life changed dramatically.
changing social systems as the economic systems gradually shifted starting in the 1730s social systems in british north america also began to change reflecting those economic trends.
although society in north america was not as highly stratified as in britain itself the strong sense of social class had been growing since the late 1600s.
among the many social gradations in british north america those at the top believed that there were really only two social classes in the early to mid 1700s.
a small class of gentlemen and ladies who did not have to work for a living were on top.
gentlemen and ladies might engage in public service and the gentlemen might sit in legislative assemblies or engage in certain professions but they did so as a sign of their social status and not because they needed the money.
below that elite group separated by a great gulf were those who had to work for a living farmers and tradespeople known as mechanics and below them the servants and slaves.
however prosperous the mechanics and farmers might become they were still stigmatized.
they were expected to know their place and maintain proper deference to societys elite.
at the very bottom were those in varying degrees of unfreedom slaves indentured servants or simply desperately poor people.
members of this group were disregarded in terms of having any say or influence.
people in these classes typically acknowledged duty to those above them and deference to those below.
the notion of society as a hierarchy was commonplace.
by the 1720s however some of the mechanics and farmers were beginning to recognize a new social class the middling sorts these prosperous working people earned their success through hard work and frugality both of which the elite scorned.
over generations this group wnuld evolve into what w e now call the middle class.
the middling social class including printers most physicians small farmers and those who sailed on ships differentiated themselves from working people in the less prosperous trades and the servants and slaves.
a new perspective was taking shape.
people began to question the notion of a society that expected deference to those of higher status.
the assumption that one stayed in the class to which one was born was quickly disappearing.
benjamin franklin though much more successful than most was far from the only resident of colonial america to move from one class to another.
of course social movement was not the only in an upward direction.
as class roles weakened some also moved downward or moved outside of the class system altogether such as the most famous outlaw of the mid 1700s thomas bell.
chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 105 41 4 j i j thinking historically thomas bell a very different american life 43 if one depended on colonial newspapers rather than on the work of subsequent historians then the best known american of the first half of the 1700s was not benjamin franklin or jonathan edwards see next section on religion but thomas bell.
the february 10 1743 issue of benjamin franklin s newspaper the pennsylvania gazette describes bell s renown he has it seems made it his business for several years to travel from colony to colony personating different people forging bills of credit c and frequently pretending distress imposed grossly on the charitable and compassionate.
this famous american traveler was known for his thefts swindles and escapes in massachusetts new york new jersey virginia maryland the carolinas and island colonies including barbados and jamaica.
bell was about the same age as benjamin franklin or jonathan edwards.
born in boston in 1713 he attended harvard college but was expelled because he stole a cake of chocolate has been guilty of the most notorious complicated lying.
he quickly left town.
in 1738 he was arrested in williamsburg virginia and again in new york city for falsely unlawfully unjustly knowingly fraudulently and deceitfully composing writing and inventing a false fictitious counterfeit and invented letter.
a year after his arrests in williamsburg and new york bell sparked a riot between jewish and christian communities in barbados when pretending to be the son of the governor of massachusetts he got himself invited to a jewish wedding.
during the celebration he was caught pilfering the family s goods.
bell denied the obvious theft and appealed to the christian community to defend him setting off a christian attack on jews.
two years later in the summer of 1741 bell stopped at a tavern in princeton new jersey.
when he was mistaken for the reverend john rowland a presbyterian minister bell sensed an opportunity and offered to preach at the presbyterian church.
just before sunday services he rifled the goods in his host s home stole his horse and departed.
when the real rowland returned to new jersey the famous minister was arrested for the theft and it took a considerable time before the supreme court of new jersey cleared up the matter of the mistaken identities.
after several more daring escapades bell met his end in kingston jamaica where in 1771 he was hung for piracy.
bell s story and mark in history has faded with time but it represents a part of the story of america s people that has continued throughout american history including outlaws in the west and gangsters in the 1900s.
thinking critically 1.
contextualization how would you explain bell s fame during his own lifetime.
why might his successful acts of impersonation have captured the imagination of the colonial public.
historical interpretation what role did newspapers play in creating bell s fame.
what does his story tell us about the role of newspapers in colonial popular culture.
a changing religious landscape from the halfway covenant to the first great awakening with the first settlement in british north america there was a sense that somehow this new land was a divinely planned opportunity to begin the world again and make it right.
in 1702 cotton mather perhaps the best known minister in boston at the time published a highly romanticized religious history of new england that confirmed this sense.
the book reflected a theme that would be repeated throughout american history the belief that the country had a special divine mission to fulfill.
mather praised god that europe had made contact with the americas after the protestant reformation so british north america was being built by protestants and not by roman catholics.
at the same time some catholics saw their mission from the opposite side of the reformation divide.
giovanni botero wrote in 1595 that it was only divine providence that led the kings of france and england to reject overtures from columbus so that his initial discovery could be made while sailing for catholic spain.
106 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 not all europeans accepted their mission as a special part of divine providence however.
roger williams who led rhode island as a haven for religious tolerance insisted that god did not choose special elect nations not england and not new england.
a group of settlers in northern new england reminded one missionary who spoke of their divine mission sir our main end is to catch fish nevertheless by the early 1700s the notion that america was part of a divine drama of salvation was widespread.
by the early 1700s however the sense of being on a divine mission had declined among many colonists.
the grandchildren and great grandchildren of the original puritan settlers were living increasingly comfortable lives in the commercially prosperous british empire.
religious fervor and religious conversions were less and less common and many were much more tolerant of the growing religious diversity in all of the colonies.
this growth of religious toleration in the 1700s something not imagined in the 1600s prompted more europeans to come to the british colonies in search of religious freedom that they could not find in their homelands.
increasingly more of those who already lived in the colonies began to consider alternatives to the religious dogmas of their parents and communities.
the growth of new philosophical ideas in europe led many intellectuals and eventually more and more people in general to look more to science and human reason than to faith in trying to understand their world.
they called the time in which they were living the age of enlightenment.
some in this period rejected all religious teachings while others simply placed less emphasis on matters of faith and more on reason.
in the colonies as in europe some people began to take religion with a large grain of salt being convinced by enlightenment philosophies that most religious matters were mere superstitions that were at best unprovable by the scientific tools of the new age.
some simply turned their attentions to other matters.
describing his travels in pennsylvania between 1750 and 1754 the german protestant minister gottlieb mittelberger described a scene not at all to his liking we find there lutherans reformed catholics quakers mennonists or anabaptists herrnhuters or moravian brethren pietists seventh day baptists dunkers presbyterians newborn freemasons separatists freethinkers jews mohammedans pagans negroes and indians many pray neither in the morning or in the evening neither before nor after meals.
no devotional book not to speak of a bible will be found with such people.
mittelberger may have been happy to leave pennsylvania and return to his ministry in germany.
however while many ministers expressed similar worries about a religious decline in the colonies in the early 1700s especially new england other preachers sought ways to release religious energy.
prompting some of these religious stirrings were the sermons of solomon stoddard who served as the minister of the congregational church in northampton massachusetts and who had been one of the authors of the halfway covenant.
by the 1720s stoddards sermons were leading to a resurgence of religion not only in northampton but also in much of western massachusetts and connecticut.
stoddards grandson and successor jonathan edwards 1703 1758 became famous for leading even larger religious revivals.
edwards sermons in western massachusetts like those of john wesley in england led many to report that their hearts were strangely warmed and that they were experiencing a new sense of divine presence.
the first great awakening a series of religious revivals that swept all of the north american colonies in the late 1730s had begun.
word of the awakening spread quickly across the colonies as well as great britain and the rest of europe.
edwards prided himself on preaching in a low voice and seeking to convert people solely by the power of the logic of his words.
he rejected any anti intellectual religion as heat without light although the revivals led by edwards and others of his day resulted in a significant emotional release for many they were nothing like the revivals of later times.
if there was music it was not central and sermons were the age of enlightenment major intellectual movement occurring in europe beginning in the 1600s that led many to look more to scientific advances and the role of human reason in understanding the world than to religion.
first great awakening a significant religious revival in colonial america begun by the preaching of solomon stoddard and jonathan edwards in the 1720s and 1730s and expanded by the many tours of the english evangelical minister george whitefield that began in the 1730s.
chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 107 4 3 while a massachusetts pastor jonathan edwards was one of the first preachers to stir some of the religious fervor of the first great awakening.
george whitefield an english preacher shown here was its most prominent leader.
whitefield crossed the atlanticl 3 times beginning in 1739 and was probably heard by more americans than any other individual before the revolution.
designed to be long rational arguments for the importance of changing ones life that depended less on the preachers charisma than any ability to persuade.
but by the 1730s these logical sermons were creating their own dramatic results.
many in edwardss congregation were undergoing deeply emotional conversion experiences while listening to his sermons taking religion seriously in a way that they never had before.
in a short period of time 300 conversions were reported increasing church membership considerably.
for jonathan edwards the purpose of revival preaching was to convince individuals of their sinfulness and move them through an emotional catharsis of conversion to a new life and a new relationship to god.
in perhaps his best known sermon edwards said the god that holds you over the pit of hell much as one holds a spider or some loathsome insect over the fire abhors you and is dreadfully provoked his wrath towards you burns like fire yet it is nothing but his hand that holds you from falling into the fire every moment edwards was urgently pleading with his hearers to rethink the direction of their lives.
later in the 1730s george whitefield 1714 1770 became the most powerful preacher of the great awakening.
whitefield lived in britain but preached to huge audiences in both britain and north america.
his first trip to north america began in georgia in 1738.
in 1739 and 1740 he crossed the atlantic again makinga preaching tour that started in georgia moved through the middle colonies including philadelphia where his preaching deeply impressed benjamin franklin who became a lifelong friend if not a convert and progressed to boston where huge audiences attended a series of sermons including one on boston common that drew a crowd of 30 000 listeners.
whitefield also visited northampton and preached at edwardss church to great acclaim.
whitefield had high regard for edwards and presbyterian ministers like gilbert tennent.
he had a much lower opinion of the majority of preachers and said that the reason why congregations have been so dead is because dead men preach to them timothy cutler an episcopal priest in boston responded by describing whitefields sermons as his beastly brayings cutler was not the only minister to resist the emotionalism of whitefield and edwards.
the leaders at harvard and yale did not like the revivalists whom they saw as emotional and divisive.
churches were split.
the presbyterian church was split into new light pro awakening and old light anti awakening bodies.
many congregational churches were split and towns that had supported one church for much of the past century now supported two or three or even four.
in contrast the baptists who generally sided with the awakening grew dramatically.
the great awakening changed american society.
many who had previously shown little interest in religion became converted.
many who thought of themselves as deeply religious now saw their faith in more emotional and ethical terms.
the revivals of the great awakening cut across many of the traditional divides of class and race even gender.
while more women than men responded to the religious energy some of the rules segregating classes and races seem to have been suspended for these revivals.
africans slave and free and american indians were also converted and became enthusiastic members of religious bodies.
samson occom a mohegan indian from connecticut was a convert in the awakening who went on to be a revival leader preaching to white and native american audiences.
the awakening transformed american higher education which at that time was closely connected to the churches.
harvard resisted the movement while yale first split by it eventually moved into the awakening camp.
prorevival ministers founded dartmouth initially meant to serve american indians and princeton to support the revival cause and help prepare a new generation of revival oriented ministers 108 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 american voices jonathan edwards a tteatise concerning religious affections fn his book a treatise concerning religious affections published in 1746 after the great awakening had run its course edwards asked a fundamental question about any religious experience how does one judge if it is real or not.
he answered that the key was found in the way a person lived.
edwards believed that a person who did not live out what religious truths he or she claimed to believe surely signaled that his or her religious experience was not sincere.
what is the nature of true religion gracious and holy affections have their exercise and fruit in christian practice.
i mean they have that influence and power upon him who is the subject of em that they cause that a practice which is universally conformed to and directed by christian rules should be the practice and business of his life slothfulness in the service of god in his professed servants is as damning as open rebellion christ nowhere says ye shall know the tree by its leaves or flowers or ye shall know men by their talk or ye shall know them by the good story they tell of their experiences or ye shall know them by the manner and air of their speaking and emphasis and pathos of expression or by their speaking feelingly or by making a very great show by abundance of talk or by many tear and affectionate expressions or by the affections ye feel in your heart towards them but by their fruits you shall know them let your light so shine before men that others seeing your good works may glorify your father which is in heaven matt.
5 16 hypocrites may much more easily be brought to talk like saints than to act like saints there may be several good evidences that a tree is a fig tree but the highest and most proper evidence of it is that it actually bears figs w e should get into the way of appearing lively in religion more by being lively in the service of god and our generation than by the liveliness and forwardness of our tongues.
source jonathan edwards a treatise concerning religious affections boston s kneeland and t green 1746 reprinted and edited by john e smith new haven yale university press 1959.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did edwards define true religion.
historical interpretation what does this passage tell us about edwards s views on the state of contemporary colonial religious practice.
4 3 vh ongoing wars in europe and british north america between 1689 and 1815 england and france were engaged in more or less continual war with each other for control of global empires.
spain was often allied with france in these wars.
for those living in north america each war involved not only international struggles but also local battles especially with indian tribes that were in their own shifting alliances with european powers.
from europes perspective the american revolution itself could be seen as just one battle in that ongoing war.
but long before the revolution colonial life in britains colonies as well as in colonies claimed by france and spain was shaped by these wars.
france still claimed the st lawrence river valley and the mississippi valley an area spanning from what is now minnesota to new orleans.
in 1724 cadwallader colden a surveyor reminded the governor of new york that the french plainly shew their intention of enclosing the british settlements and cutting us off from all commerce with the numerous nations of indians despite the larger population of the british colonies many colonists shared his fear that britains colonies were encircled by french ones.
they also worried because spain controlled florida many caribbean islands and the rich lands of central and south america giving spain great power and wealth in its confrontations with britain on both sides of the atlantic.
in addition indian tribes many allied with the french were often the dominant power in territory from western new york through pennsylvania and into the western portions of the carolinas and georgia see map 4 5.
it was not always clear who was winning and who was losing in the ongoing struggles but war was a fact of daily life for much of the colonial era sometimes devastatingly close to home and sometimes more generally reflected in concerns about who would control the future of north america.
when william and mary came to chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 109 ft kaminstiquia m 1 ldke superior ft la pointe l saultste.
ojibwa marie ft st croix menominee ft st pierre winnebago beauharnois i hudson s bay company new france ojibwa ft michilimackinac acadia english conquest 1710 pemikscot mass.
abnaki ottawa ft frontenac quebec trois rivieres e algonquin montreal v port royal nyftj mass.
ft la baye ottawa ft niagara 3 ft detroit v c ft miami penn m ft f ang kiekapoo ft crevecoeur ojibwa jlbwa o r aibany salem ft st joseph ft ouiatanon potawatomi cahokia piankesha vincennes r ft de chartres genevieve kaskaskia.
cherokee ft prudhomme chickasaw if arkansas post quapaw choctaw j natchez creek natchez ft tombeche i baton rouge mobile pensacola kap.
11 new orleans l ft.
le ft dusquesne eric iconn.
new york uladefphia new jersey ft touiou delaware williamsburg spanish florida atlantic ocean gulf of mexico english claims french claims spanish claims french trade routes french forts settlements chickasaw selected native american groups map 4 5 french english and spanish claims 1608.
although it did not have the european population of the british colonies new france which was settled along the st lawrence river to the north and the mississippi river to the west was much larger than the british colonies.
the large areas of land claimed by france along with the area of florida claimed by spain prevented british colonies from growing further and created hostile tensions.
the throne in england in 1689 king louis xiv of france objected to their elevation by parliament.
louis a catholic had already fought william a protestant in holland and now he did so again in what the british colonists called king williams war.
it lasted from 1689 to 1697.
the wars outcome was inconclusive but the battles had devastating consequences for towns in the northern british colonies as indian tribes who were allied with france attacked english settlements.
it was as part of these battles that york maine was attacked sending residents fleeing to salem massachusetts perhaps helping to provoke the salem witch hysteria.
european settlement of maine was delayed for a generation.
soon after that war ended another war began in europe the war of the spanish succession over rival claimants to the spanish throne one of whom was strongly backed by france which sought to tighten its alliance with spain.
the other claimant was supported by britain in part because britain greatly feared a strong french spanish alliance.
the war lasted from 1701 to 1713.
the british colonists in north america called this war queen annes war for the british monarch who ruled during this time.
during this conflict major battles took place between spanish and british 110 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 forces in florida and the carolinas.
in the same period battles continued to erupt between french and british forces in canada and new england with various indian tribes allied on all sides.
in one attack indians who had allied with the french devas tated the town of deerfield massachusetts.
as britain france and spain fought their wars in the 1600s the five nations of the iroquois were firmly allied with the english against the french and frances indian allies.
in 1689 a leader of the mohawks one of the five iroquois nations said of his people that as they are one hand and soul with the english they will take up the ax with pleasure against the french by the beginning of queen annes war however some iroquois were beginning to believe that their alliance with the english meant that the iroquois did all the fighting but received little in return.
in 1701 iroquois leaders signed a separate treaty of peace with the french that gave them new trading rights especially at french owned detroit.
for the next several decades most of the iroquois tried to keep clear of the continuing british french tensions.
some mohawks had different ideas however.
despite their long alliance with the english a group of mohawks settled near montreal in french canada and converted to catholicism.
among these settlements were also settlements of refugees from non iroquois tribes who had been defeated in king philips war 1675 1676.
these refugees harbored an intense dislike of the english especially the english in massachusetts.
they and their canadian based iroquois allies nurtured a desire to show their support for france and seek revenge on massachusetts for the loss of indian lives in king philips war.
in february 1704 canadian based mohawks destroyed the town of deerfield massachusetts and a frontier outpost near the new york border.
fifty colonists were killed and perhaps 70 more were taken captive.
by the end of the day the town was a burning ruin.
deerfields congregational minister reverend john williams as well as his wife and remaining children were taken hostage after one of the children was killed in the attack.
his wife died on the forced march to canada where the captives were taken.
eventually massachusetts officials ransomed williams and most of the captives.
the minister wrote an account of the attack and his captivity that became a best seller at the time.
to the utter surprise of rev.
williams and the massachusetts officials however some of the deerfield captives preferred to stay in canada with the mohawks.
among them was eunice williams the ministers daughter.
she married a mohawk changed her name to aongote gannenstenhawi converted to catholicism and was the mother of three children raised in the mohawk community.
she lived a long life among her adopted community and died there in 1785 at the age of 95.
even when there were periods of relative peace among the european powers indian tribes fought their own battles with the colonists.
as white settlement expanded in the carolinas the tuscarora tribe began to resist.
in 1711 the tuscaroras captured a leader of swiss and german immigrants christoph von graffenried and the carolina surveyor general john lawson.
graffenried was freed but the tuscarora executed lawson.
in response the south carolina authorities declared war on the tuscarora and enlisted another tribe the yamasee as their allies.
within 2 years most tuscarora villages were burned and a thousand of its tribe were killed.
the remaining tuscaroras moved west to avoid white settlement and seeking further protection affiliated with the iroquois in 1722 enlarging the iroquois league to six nations rather than five.
after the war the yamasee expected to be rewarded by the carolina authorities for supporting their efforts.
when no rewards were forthcoming and when whites continued taking yamasee as slaves the yamasee in alliance with the creeks attacked carolina plantations killing settlers and traders in one of the bloodiest wars in colonial history.
for a time it was unclear whether the carolina colony would survive but officials sought an alliance with the powerful cherokees who had become dependent on trade with the british for the clothes and rifles.
the cherokees quickly chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 111 defeated the yamasees.
those creeks and yamasees who survived fled to spanish florida leaving virtually no yamasee or creeks in the carolinas.
the british community also suffered significant loss of life in the yamasee wars but it was clear they were the victors.
in 1739 after 25 years of peace between the major european powers that held claims in north america britain and spain again went to war the so called war of jenkins ear when spain claimed a right to search british ships in the caribbean for contraband goods and britain objected.
the odd nickname for the war referred to a british ships captain robert jenkins whose ear was cut off by a spanish boarding party.
the british defeated spain in this war which confirmed the dominance of british sea power in the atlantic and caribbean and made colonial trade with britain and britains caribbean colonies much easier.
before the war of 1739 with spain had ended britain and france were fighting again in the war of the austrian succession referred to as king georges war in north america.
much of new york and new england was engulfed in that war.
ihe result again was modest victories and land transfers but with considerable loss of life to british and french colonists and to their indian allies.
by 1754 another war erupted known in europe as the seven years war and in british north america as the french and indian war.
unlike the previous wars the british would be decisively victorious at the end of the french and indian war in 1763 see chapter 5.
however the consequences of expanding the british empire in north america would be significant.
the many wars between 1689 and 1763 see table 4 2 disrupted life in north america.
colonial militias were called up.
colonial shipping was attacked.
settlements of colonists and indians were damaged or ruined.
indian alliances shifted.
various tribes were either decimated or fled their homelands.
many colonists and indians died and for many of those who survived life was far from secure.
the unifying effects of the wars on british colonies during the many wars that took place in the 1700s many english colonists developed a deep sense of patriotism to the british cause often linked to an equally strong dislike of all things french and of the indian nations allied with france.
at the same table 4 2 wars in british north america between 1689 and 1763 pates who fought name of war in north america name of war in britain impact outcome 1689 1697 1702 1713 1739 1742 1744 1748 1754 1763 english and british colonies allied with iroquois against france new france and indian allies same as king william s war with spain joining as an ally of france britain against spain france remained neutral britain against france britain against france and spain with important indian allies king william s war queen anne s war war of jenkins ear king george s war war of the league of augsburg orwar of the grand alliance war of spanish succession war of austrian succession french and indian war i seven years war considerable devastation especially in maine no border changes as a result primarily fought in europe but also in new england against french canada and the carolinas against spanish florida france and spain determine to create gulf colonies new orleans and san antonio.
fought mostly in the caribbean though georgia based forces attacked saint augustine in spanish florida.
french forces attacked and destroyed communities in new york significant loss of life in new york and new england.
largest war britain wins control of all of french canada.
112 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 43 4 time they came to realize that the british army was sometimes far away when it was most needed and that they needed to develop their own militias to protect themselves.
the british monarchs were distracted by these wars and were inclined to neglect the colonies in the intervening years.
as a result colonial governments grew stronger and more independent through the early decades of the 1700s.
for most of his life benjamin franklin was a loyal subject of the british empire.
in 1754 franklin wrote that his greatest desire was for the people of great britain and the people of britains american colonies to learn to consider themselves not as belonging to different communities with different interests but to one community with one interest in 1754 many colonists agreed with franklin.
by the early 1750s it was clear to many who were living in british north america that the tension between england and france which was playing out on both sides of the atlantic would soon lead to another war.
in the early summer of 1754 several of the north american colonial governments appointed commissioners to meet in albany new york to negotiate stronger mutual defense treaties with the six nations of the iroquois and to discuss the common defense of the british colonies.
benjamin franklin who was chosen as one of pennsylvanias four commissioners wanted far more.
he arrived in albany with a plan for one general government that may be formed in america including all the said colonies the particulars of the albany plan of union as it came to be known included a provision that each colony would retain its own government but that the new united colonies would be led by a council of representatives from the 13 colonies and a single president general appointed by the crown.
the unified government would have authority to raise soldiers build forts and regulate trade with the indians.
it would help the 13 colonies realize franklins 43 43 albany plan of union plan put forward in 1754 by massachusetts governor william shirley benjamin franklin and other colonial leaders calling for an intercolonial union to manage defense and indian affairs.
even as late as 1774 benjamin franklin shown here with members of parliament considered himself a loyal british subject trying his best to reduce tensions between the colonies and the authorities in london.
chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 113 dream of being one community with one interest in relation to each other as well as to great britain.
franklin could not understand why the colonists couldnt borrow an idea from the six nations of the iroquois with whom they were negotiating.
as franklin said if the iroquois should be capable of forming a scheme for such an union he could not understand why a like union should be impracticable for ten or a dozen english colonies in fact franklins proposed plan though supported by the commissioners who met in june and july of 1754 was defeated resoundingly by the colonies.
every colonial legislature rejected the plan fearing it meant giving up too much control to other colonies and especially to the crown who would appoint the leader.
at the same time officials in london rejected the plan because they saw it giving too much power to the colonies.
they preferred to have each colony accountable separately to london.
nevertheless quite a few colonial leaders met each other for the first time at the albany gathering and the possibility of union had been mentioned and considered.
tensions continued to grow between britain and france and between britains iroquois allies and the tribes allied with the french forces.
as the british colonies saw the world moving toward a war between great britain and france a war they knew would be fought in large part on the border between british north america and new france colonial legislatures sought to raise taxes to provide for their defense.
this need was especially urgent in pennsylvania where indians allied with france had defeated several western settlements and were within a days distance of philadelphia itself.
even in this desperate situation however the penn family which still controlled the colony refused to allow their own lands to be taxed.
although william penn had founded the colony as a refuge for persecuted quakers his son thomas saw it mostly as a source of income.
by 1757 the pennsylvania legislature decided to send a delegation to england to negotiate directly with thomas penn to get him to pay his fair share of the funds to protect his colony or if that failed to request the english government to give them a royal governor rather than one appointed by the penn family.
the obvious representative for pennsylvania to send was benjamin franklin.
the 51 year old franklin sailed for england that summer and except for brief trips home lived there until 1775.
he did not get the funds from penn but enjoyed london and for many years remained a very loyal british subject even attending the coronation of king george iii in 1760.
however beginning in the early 1760s the pressure of war as well as issues of politics trade and taxes began to drive britain and the colonists apart.
quick review how did european nations and the colonies interaction with them affect life in british north america.
conclusion 114 partll settlements old the glorious revolution of 1689 changed the balance of power in englands government.
although kings and queens were much more than figureheads parliament assumed greater control over the nation and its overseas territories.
in 1707 england united with scotland to become great britain and with its colonies in north america and elsewhere around the world became a true empire.
the wars britain conducted on the european mainland over the course of the 1700s with its old enemies france and spain would lead to parallel conflicts between the north american colonies of these empires conflicts that also involved native american tribes allied with each one of them.
great britain also exerted its economic control over the british colonies by enforcing mercantilism a closed economic system that allowed for trade only between the colonies and the mother country.
this system was designed to ensure the colonies supplied great britain with raw materials in return the colonies did not manufacture their own goods or buy them on a world market but rather purchased manufactured and new 1607 1754 goods only from great britain.
nevertheless britains american colonies grew and prospered with thriving port cities and an emerging colonial elite who sometimes became quite good at evading the british governments regulations.
the social and economic life of the american colonists also changed after the 1680s.
in response to the revolt of slaves indentured servants and poor white farmers in bacons rebellion a trend among the wealthy elite to use more slaves and fewer indentured servants led to deeper divisions along racial lines in virginia.
the southern colonies where the greatest growth of the slave population was taking place enacted laws that created a slave society in which african slaves could expect a lifetime of servitude.
the slave trade of the notorious middle passage brought increased numbers of slaves to support a growing slave plantation economy.
in addition underlying tensions connected to indian attacks were growing.
this tension along with long standing tensions about the role of women in society and beliefs across european cultures about the active role of witches in society led to the salem witch trials that involved an entire community in hysterical accusations legal actions and 20 executions.
womens roles were largely relegated to the private realm raising children and working in the home.
rural women often led lonely lives with few opportunities to connect with other women.
helping other women through childbirth was an important way rural women connected.
urban women had more options to socialize particularly in the trade of household necessities such as preserved foods soap and candles.
some women joined their husbands as part of the privileged social and economic elite of the colonies.
from the first settlement in british north america onward colonists maintained a sense that somehow their new land was a divinely planned opportunity to begin the world again and make it right.
cotton mather a well known minister in boston confirmed this sense in his writings.
by the early 1700s however the sense of being on a divine mission had declined among many colonists and tolerance for religious diversity was growing.
those in europe and in the colonies who began to look more to science and human reason than to faith in trying to understand their world called this time the age of enlightenment.
some in this period rejected all religious teachings while others simply emphasized reason over faith.
many ministers worried about a religious decline in the colonies and some sought ways to release religious energy spawning the first great awakening.
yet other colonists came to a growing regard for other forms of self improvement and interest like those championed by benjamin franklin in his poor richards almanack.
increasingly in spite of philosophical differences colonists came to regard themselves more and more as americans and less and less as simply british subjects living on a different side of the atlantic ocean.
chapter review how did events throughout the 1700s transition the north american colonies from separate entities into a colonies with more common pursuits.
chapter 4 creating the culture of british north america 115 chapter 4 chapter review 4 1 england s glorious revolution and the rights of englishmen 1689 analyze the impact of england s glorious revolution on the thinking and political organization of british colonists in north america.
review questions 1.
comparison compare and contrast british ideas of kingship before and after the glorious revolution.
what was the most important change brought about by the events of 1688 and 1689.
historical interpretation what impact did the glorious revolution have on the political landscape of british north america.
the plantation world from a society with slaves to a slave society explain why and how slavery developed as it did in the late 1600s and early 1700s.
review questions 3.
chronological reasoning how and why did the relationship between slavery and race in british north america change between 1650 and 1750.
contextualization describe the sequence of events that took the typical african slave from his or her homeland to the americas.
what physical and psychological hardships did slaves experience during this journey.
4 2 stability and instability in the american and british worlds 4 3 analyze the changes in the ideas and daily lives of the people in british north america in the 1700s as a result of events within and beyond the colonies.
review questions 5.
synthesis what generalizations can you make about the lives of women in british north america during the 1700s.
what are the limits of those generalizations.
historical interpretation what role did cities play in the growing colonial economy of the 1700s.
contextualization what were the goals of the leaders of the first great awakening.
how did they try to achieve them.
historical interpretation how did wars between europes powers disrupt life in colonial america.
contextualization from the point of view of the british government how did the american colonies fit into britains imperial trading economy.
116 part ii settlements old and new 1607 1754 a new birth of free part 1754 1800 part outline chapter 3 sential questions how do new ideas change the way people live.
vhy rfo people trade.
what are the consequences when cultures interact.
v v t lesson 1 a changing world lesson 2 early exploration lesson 3 spain in america lesson 4 competing for colonies the story matters.
the year is 1492 a good year for queen isabella.
after centuries of struggle catholic forces have driven the muslims from spain.
she is grateful to god and determined to use her power for god s glory.
full of these thoughts isabella recalls a visit she received from a sailor named christopher columbus.
he proposed finding a trade route to asia by sailing west.
she ignored him then.
now she decides to fund his voyage.
she knows if columbus succeeds it will bring glory to god and untold wealth to spain.
the european exploration ofthe americas is about to begin.
queen isabella explorations ofthe america the art archive general archive of the indies 1 i t gianni daqli orti r lift jafc a a j k i goto the foldables library in the back ofyour book to make a foldable that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
chapter 3 place and time the americas i400 toi625 starting in the late 1400s europeans explored the oceans hoping to find a direct sea route to the east indies.
instead they found what to them was a new world.
over the next few centuries they explored and settled the americas.
6 n s european exploration 1487 1611 hudson bay north america step into the place map focus this map shows the different routes taken by different explorers.
movement how many european nations made explorations of north and south america.
criticalthinking drawing conclusions why do you think so many nations sent out voyages of exploration at this time.
2a 29b tropic of cancel v i k i i i new spain pacific ocean fpf r o i h 1i j 2000 miles greenlar cuba peru south america i lr h n w e s i 1 0 x 5m 0 2000 km miller projection netw orks et map explore the interactive version of there s more online.
this map on networks.
time line explore the interactive version ofthis time line on networks.
30 e 60e 90e 12o e 150re networks there s more online.
graphic organizer technological advances ef maps.
trade routes to asia.
west african trading kingdoms ef self check quiz ef slideshows the compass.
mansamusa ef video 1m lesson 1 a changing world ential question how do new ideas change the way people live.
tks texas essential knowledge and skills 2a identify reasons for european exploration and colonization of north america.
reading helpdesk it matters because europe was aware of the riches of asia and africa.
attempts to increase trade with these lands eventually developed into an era of european exploration that reached far beyond europe s borders.
new ideas new nations guiding question where did the renaissance take place.
for centuries after the roman empire fell in a d 476 the people of western europe were cut off from the rest of the work.
western europe was made up of small kingdoms and city states dominated by the catholic church.
then in the early a d 6 s a new religion islam began to spread rapidly in the middle east and africa.
this rise of islam would soon end western europes isolation.
in 1095 the europeans launched the first of nine expeditions known as the crusades.
their purpose was to take hack control of christian holy sites in the middle east from the muslims followers of islam.
the crusades also had an unplanned result.
in the middle east europeans met arab merchants who sold them spices sugar silk and other goods from china and india.
european interest in asia grew.
that interest grew even more after italian explorer marco polo returned from china.
in the late 1200s polo wrote about asias people great riches and splendid cities in his book truvcls which was widely read in europe.
two hundred years later his travels would inspire another italian explorer christopher columbus.
taking notes identifying as you read use a diagram like this one to identify the advances in technology that paved the way for european voyages of exploration.
78 exploring the americas technologicatx advances ip content vocabulary crusade.
technology pilgriims classical astrolabe mosque renaissance compass geography connection the growth of trade merchants in europe knew they could make a lot of money selling goods from asia.
wealthy europeans were eager to buy asian spices perfumes silks and precious stones.
merchants first bought these goods from arab traders in the middle east.
the merchants then sent the goods overland by caravan to the mediterranean sea.
from there the goods traveled by ship to italian ports in venice genoa and pisa.
these cities prospered as centers of the growing trade.
however arab traders charged high prices.
this led europeans to look for a route to the east that would not require them to buy from arab merchants.
the growth of ideas by the 1300s several italian city states had become strong economic and cultural centers.
their influence spread across europe.
newly powerful bankers and merchants in pisa venice and genoa studied classical works those of ancient greece and rome.
science was another area in which change occurred.
many scholars tested new and old theories of science.
they performed experiments and evaluated the results.
caravans or groups of travelers from asia carried silks and spices overland to markets in the west.
at the shores ofthe mediterranean and black seas the goods were loaded onto ships and transported to europe.
location how would you describe the location of genoa and venice.
critical thinking drawing conclusions based on the information on this map why do you think european traders charged high prices for silks and spices.
crusade one of a series of expeditions europeans made to regain control of christian holy sites in the middle east from the a d 1000s to the 1200s classical related to the culture of ancient greece and rome reading in the content area understanding visuals when a map shows a historical event or era you will not always find present day boundaries.
sometimes you can identify where things are taking place today by using natural features such as bodies of water.
historical maps provide a sense of time and help us to understand which cities and countries existed hundreds of years ago and which still exist today.
lesson 1 79 r the arts were also influenced by classical forms and new ideas.
authors wrote about the individual s place in the universe.
artists studied classical sculpture and architecture.
they admired the harmony and balance in greek art.
the renaissance this period of intellectual and artistic creativity is known as the renaissance reh nuh sahns.
the word renaissance means rebirth in french.
it refers to the rebirth of interest in classical greek and roman ideas.
as the renaissance spread across europe over the next two centuries it changed the way europeans thought about themselves and the world.
it also set the stage for an age of exploration and discovery.
the mona lisa painted by leonardo da vinci is a masterpiece of the renaissance.
from what we know the portrait features a woman from florence who was 24 years old when da vinci began the painting.
reading helpdesk the rise of powerful nations for centuries europe had been a patchwork of small states.
by the 1400s however a new larger type of state had developed in western europe.
strong monarchs rose to power in spain portugal england and france.
they began to establish national laws courts taxes and armies to replace those of the local rulers.
these ambitious monarchs sought ways to increase trade and make their countries even stronger and wealthier.
as early as the mid 1400s powerful countries such as portugal and spain began to search for sea routes to asia.
they too wanted to engage in foreign trade.
this placed them in direct competition with the italian port cities that had become so powerful a century earlier.
as a result a new era of exploration began.
reading progress check drawing conclusions in what way did trade help to bring about the renaissance.
the effects of new technology guidingquestion what technological advancements paved the way for european voyages of exploration.
advances in technology the use of scientific knowledge for practical purposes helped to make european voyages of exploration possible.
in the 1450s the introduction of the printing press made it much easier to print books.
more people had access to books and to new information.
many europeans read marco renaissance a reawakening of culture and intellectual curiosity in europe from the 1300s to the 1600s technology the use of scientific knowledge for practical purposes astrolabe an instrument used to plan a course of travel using the stars compass an instrument that shows the direction of magnetic north academic vocabulary acquire to get possession or control of 80 exploring the americas compass astrolabe aids to navigation quadrant the compass helped sailors tell which direction they were sailing.
the astrolabe and quadrant qwah druhnt measured the angle of a star to the horizon to help them find their location on the sea.
drawing conclusions explain how the compass astrolabe and quadrant could make a long ocean voyage possible.
critical thinking making connections what tools might sailors use to find their position at sea today.
polos travels when it appeared in printed form in 1477.
this book gave people descriptions of faraway places such as areas that are now iraq siberia japan india ethiopia and madagascar.
whether the descriptions were entirely accurate is open to debate.
however polos travels led european readers to realize that there were many spectacular sights beyond their immediate world.
better maps and instruments most early maps were not accurate.
this was because they were drawn based on the points of view of traders and travelers.
little by little cartographers or mapmakers improved their accuracy.
using reports of explorers and information from arab and chinese scholars and astronomers mapmakers made more accurate land and sea maps.
these maps showed the directions of ocean currents.
they also showed lines of latitude which measured distances north and south of the equator.
people also improved instruments for navigating the seas.
sailors could find their latitude with an astrolabe as truh layb which measured the positions of stars.
in the 1200s europeans acquired the magnetic compass from china.
the compass allowed sailors to accurately determine their direction.
better ship design advances in ship design allowed sailors to make long ocean voyages.
the stern rudder and triangular sail enabled ships to sail into the wind.
the portuguese three masted caravel keruh vehl became the most famous ship of the european age of exploration.
caravels could sail faster and carry more cargo and supplies than earlier ships.
these advances and competition for i foreign trade led countries such as portugal and spain to search for sea routes to asia.
portugal began its explorations along the west coast of africa an area europeans had never visited before.
d reading progress check 3s identifying cause and effect how did the caravel affect exploration in a 5 s positive way.
lesson 1 81 geography connection trade routes across earth s largest desert the sahara provided west african kingdoms with access to the mediterranean coast.
location which west african kingdom extended the farthest west.
critical thinking drawing conclusions other than the information on trade routes what key historic information does the map show.
atlantic ocean marrake tropic of cancer i i v si 2on tomboudou timbuktu n0 equator 0 600 km.
j lambert azimuthal equal area projection west african trading kingdoms a d 400 1600 1 kingdoms and empires in africa guiding question what were the most powerful empires in africa.
between a d 400 and 1600 powerful kingdoms and city states flourished in africa south of the sahara.
much ol their power and wealth came from mining and trade.
arab traders traveled africas east coast exchanging cotton silk and porcelain for african ivory and metals.
west africans mined and traded gold copper and iron ore 1rade with north africas islamic societies brought wealth and islamic customs to the west african kingdoms.
the kingdoms also traded directly with europe.
the portuguese set up trading posts along africas western coast in the mid 1400s.
reading helpdesk ghana a trading empire between a d 400 and 1100 a vast trading empire known as ghana emerged in west africa.
ghana grew wealthy from the taxes it placed on trade.
caravans carrying gold ivory and enslaved people crossed the desert to north africa and returned with salt cloth and brass.
such trading contacts led many west africans to become muslim.
pilgrimage a journey to a holy place mosque a muslim house of worship 82 dloring the americas studios photodisc getty in 1076 north african people called almoravids al muh rah vihdz attacked ghana disrupting the trade routes in the region.
soon new trade routes bypassed ghana altogether.
the drop in trade led to ghanas decline and new kingdoms emerged in the region.
mali wealth and power mali one of the new kingdoms grew very powerful.
mali developed trade routes across the desert to north africa.
by the late 1200s malis territory was huge.
one traveler reported that it took four months to cross it from north to south.
in 1324 malis great king mansa musa a muslim traveled to the muslim holy city of makkah mecca in what is now saudi arabia.
he returned from this religious journey or pilgrimage pihl gruh mihj with an arab architect.
the architect built great mosques mahsks muslim houses of worship in timbuktu malis capital.
timbuktu became a center of islamic art and learning.
the songhai empire in time the songhai sawng geye people who lived along the niger river overthrew mali rule.
they captured timbuktu in 1468.
askiya muhammad leader of the songhai empire divided songhai into provinces each with its own officials.
everyone in the empire followed a legal system based on the teachings of islam.
in the late 1500s north africas kingdom of morocco defeated and ended the songhai empire.
d reading progress check drawing conclusions what did the middle east and africa have that europeans wanted.
lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1.
examine the two terms that follow.
then write a sentence based on what you have read that explains the connection between the terms.
3oa 3ob a astrolabe b technology 2.
write a sentence about the classical ideas that were rediscovered during the renaissance.
3oa 3ob answer the guiding questions 3.
explaining how did the rise of italian city states help lead to the renaissance.
identifying how did new technology pave the way for european voyages of exploration.
listing what were the three most powerful empires in west africa between the 400s and 1500s.
persuasive writing which ofthe following do you think was the most important innovation and why 3oo a the compass b improved maps c the printing press include this lesson s information in your foldable lesson 1 83 networks there s more online.
ef biographies.
christopher columbus d vasco da gama jw.
queen isabella graphic organizer explorers and their sponsors ef maps early portuguese exploration.
european voyages of exploration ef self check quiz video lesson 2 a.
early exploration rial question why do people trade.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 2a identify reasons for european exploration and colonization of north america.
it matters because the ornval of the europeans in the americas in the fifteenth century changed the lives of people in both the americas and europe forever.
the search for new trade routes guidingquestion which country took the lead in finding a trade route to india.
reading helpdesk in 1492 christopher columbus led 90 sailors in three ships on a voyage into the unknown.
as the voyage dragged on the sailors grew angry.
columbus wrote i am told that if i persist in going onward the best course of action will be to throw me into the sea some night before that could happen a lookout from the ship pinta made the signal that he had spotted land.
on october 12 1492 columbus left his ship the santa maria and went ashore.
columbus believed he had arrived in the indies islands located southeast of china.
actually he had reached north america.
how did columbus get it so wrong.
the maps that he and other european explorers used at the time did not include the americas because no one in europe knew they existed.
all maps showed three continents europe asia and africa merged into a huge landmass and bordered by oceans.
some explorers thought that the western atlantic and eastern pacific oceans ran together to form what they called the ocean sea.
no one realized the true size of the oceans or the existence of other continents.
taking notes identifying as you study the lesson use a diagram such as this one to identify the explorers who were sponsored by portugal and those who were sponsored by spain.
14 exploring the americas explorers sponsored by portugal sponsored by spain content vocabulary cape circumnavigate columbus was sailing on behalf of spain but portugal was the first european power to explore the boundaries of the known world by sea.
unlike spain portugal did not have a port on the mediterranean sea.
this meant the portuguese could not use the existing trade routes between asia and europe.
portugals rulers wanted to find a new route to china and india.
the portuguese also knew about the great riches in the west african kingdoms.
these riches were carried by caravan across the desert to north africa and then by ship across the mediterranean.
portuguese traders needed a better route so that they too could get west african gold and other riches.
the beginning of portuguese exploration portugals prince henry laid the groundwork for the era of exploration.
in about 1420 he set up a center for exploration at sagres saw grish on the southwestern tip of portugal where endeth land and where beginneth sea known as henry the navigator the prince never intended to become an explorer himself.
instead he planned the voyages and then analyzed the reports that his crews brought home.
at sagres prince henry set up a school of navigation.
there astronomers geographers and mathematicians came to share their knowledge with portuguese sailors shipbuilders and mapmakers.
as each successful voyage brought back new information henrys expert mapmakers updated the charts.
portuguese ships sailed south along the coast of west africa.
as they went south they traded for gold and ivory and set up trading posts in the region.
because of its abundance of gold africas west coast came to be known as the gold coast in the mid 1400s portuguese traders began to buy enslaved africans there as well.
king john ii of portugal launched new efforts to create a portuguese trading empire in asia.
all the portuguese had to do was find a sea route around africa.
if they succeeded they would be able to trade directly with india and china.
they could bypass the north african and asian caravans and mediterranean merchants.
with that goal in mind in the 1480s king john urged portuguese sea captains to explore farther south along the african coast.
reading strategy reading in the content area answers to the questions what happened.
and why did it happen.
fill the pages of history books.
look for the answers to these questions as you read.
it can help your understanding of history to think of the situations you encounter as a series of cause and effect relationships.
the santa maria was a sturdy vessel built to survive a long ocean voyage.
critical thinking drawing inferences what traits would make a person a good crew member on the santa maria.
if lesson 2 85 critical thinking drawing inferences what can you infer from the fact that bartolomeu dias s route hugged gama s route did not 30w reading helpdesk bartolomeu dias in 1487 bartolomeu dias set out from lisbon with two small caravels and a supply ship.
king john had sent dias to explore the southernmost part of africa.
from there dias was to sail northeast into the indian ocean.
this expedition included some of portugals best pilots.
they sailed for days staying close to the coast ot africa.
after passing the mouth of the orange river in south africa the expedition met with a fierce storm that carried it southward off course and out of sight of land.
when the winds linally died down dias steered east and then north until he found land again.
excitedly dias realized that he had already sailed past the southernmost part of africa.
on the way he had passed a landform called a cape a piece of land that juts into the water.
dias set a course back to portugal.
on the return journey after passing that piece of land again he wrote that he had been around the cape of storms king john renamed it the cape of good hope the king hoped that the passage around africa might provide a new route to india.
vasco da gama portugal s voyages to india began years later.
in july 1497 after much preparation vasco da gama set sail from portugal with four ships headed for africa.
da gamas ships did not hug the cape a point of land that sticks out into water much like a peninsula word origins changing meanings the word pilot used to mean navigator.
what does it mean today.
skills practice when you see a new word think about what yoi have seen and done.
does the word remind you anything you have done.
86 exploring thelaericas african coast as diass ships had.
instead they sailed in a wide arc south and west of africa.
they were out of sight of land for more than three months.
the purpose of this detour was to reach ocean currents that would help the sailors travel safely around the cape of good hope.
after rounding the cape on november 22 da gama was on africas eastern coast.
he made many stops including one at mombasa mahm bahsuh part of present day kenya.
there he met a pilot from india who guided him the rest of the way.
da gama reached the port of calicut in india in may 1498.
portugals long held dream of a sea route to asia was now a reality.
portugal s trading empire events moved quickly.
within six months of da gamas return to portugal 13 ships set sail out of lisbon and headed for india.
the ships were commanded by a nobleman pedro alvares cabral peh droo awl vuh ruhsh kuh brawl.
cabral planned to follow da gamas westward then southward course.
instead he went so far west that he reached brazil.
cabral claimed brazil for his king and sent one of the ships back to portugal with the good news that portugal now had a foothold in the americas.
cabral then continued to india and returned with spices porcelain and other valuable cargo.
other portuguese fleets soon made the journey to india where portugal set up permanent forts.
portuguese fleets began to make yearly voyages to india.
their cargoes made the portuguese capital of lisbon the marketplace of europe.
h reading progress check analyzing what was the importance ofthe voyages of dias and da gama.
biography vasco da gama c 1460 1524 vasco da gama who was the son of a portuguese noble led two voyages of exploration for portugal.
during the second he landed at goa which later became portugal s base of power in india.
in 1524 the king of portugal made da gama portugal s viceroy or governor in india and he returned to goa.
critical thinking drawing inferences why do you think the king appointed vasco da gama his viceroy in india.
columbus crosses the atlantic guidingquestion how did spain and portugal protect their claims in the americas.
keystone stringer hulton born in genoa italy in 1451 christopher columbus became a sailor for portugal.
he traveled as far north as the arctic circle and as far south as africas gold coast.
to reach asia christopher columbus had a different route in mind than the one used by his portuguese comrades.
he planned to sail west.
in the 1400s most educated people believed the world was round.
people were less certain about earths size.
columbus was among those who based their estimates on the works of ptolemy tahl uh mee an ancient greek astronomer.
columbus believed asia was about 2 760 miles 4 441 km from portugal a voyage of about two months by ship.
however ptolemy had underestimated earths size and by using ptolemy s estimate columbus did too.
lesson 2 87 a bilge pump operating from the main deck removed water from storage areas.
the caravel ballast stones were placed in the hull to provide better balance.
f caravels ranged in length from 75 to 90 feet 23 to 27 m and were suited for sailing along shallow coastlines.
criticalthinking explaining how did the caravel s lateen sail help sailors.
lateen sail caught wind that blew perpendicular to or at a right angle to the ship making the ship easier to maneuver.
reading helpdesk academic vocabulary devote to commit oneself or one s resources to something alter to change tloring the americas vikings in north america several centuries before the voyages of da gama cabral and columbus northern europeans known as vikings or norsemen had sailed to north america.
they sailed from present day scandinavia to iceland and greenland in the 800s and 900s and established settlements there for a brief period of time.
according to norse sagas or traditional stories a viking sailor named leif eriksson explored lands west of greenland in about the year 1000.
the sagas refer to this land as vinland ruins from around that period exist in northeastern canada which could support the sagas.
the vikings voyages were not well known throughout europe however.
other europeans did not discover the americas until columbus made his historic voyage.
columbus and queen isabella columbus had a plan for reaching asia but he still needed money to finance his expedition.
he visited european monarchs looking for support.
finally he found a sponsor in spain.
for most of the 1400s spanish monarchs devoted or committed their energy to driving the muslims out of spain.
muslims had invaded spain in the 700s but their power had been declining for centuries.
the last muslim kingdom in spain reading strategy reading a diagram diagrams may include a cutaway view.
this provides a view of the outside and part of the inside of an object at the same time.
li dagli the art fell in 1492.
this freed spains monarchs to focus on other goals.
the spanish observed the seafaring and trading successes of neighboring portugal with envy.
they too wanted the riches of asian trade.
king ferdinand and queen isabella of spain agreed to support columbuss expedition for two reasons.
one reason was that columbus promised to bring christianity to any lands he found.
this was important to isabella because she was a devout catholic.
another reason was that if he succeeded in finding a route to asia spain would become wealthy from trade with that region.
queen isabella promised columbus a share of any riches gained from lands he discovered on his way to asia.
columbus s first voyage on august 3 1492 columbus set sail from palos spain.
he had two small ships the nina and the pinta and a larger one the santa maria.
columbus was captain of the santa maria his lead ship or flagship.
the three ships carried about 90 sailors and a six month supply of food and water.
the small fleet stopped at the canary islands off the coast of west africa for repairs and supplies.
columbus then began the difficult voyage westward across unknown and mysterious stretches of the atlantic ocean.
after a few weeks at sea the sailors grew nervous about the distance they had traveled.
columbus refused to alter his course.
instead he encouraged the crew by describing the riches he believed they would find.
he urged them on saying that with the help of our lord they would arrive in the indies.
on october 12 1492 at two oclock in the morning a lookout shouted tierra.
tierra land.
land he had spotted a small island in the chain now called the bahamas.
columbus went ashore claimed the island for spain and named it san salvador although he did not know it columbus had reached the americas.
columbus believed he had arrived in the east indies the islands off the coast of asia.
this is why today we call the caribbean islands the west indies it also explains why columbus called the local people indians he noted that the natives regarded the europeans with wonder and often touched the crew members to find out if they were flesh and bones like themselves when columbus returned to spain queen isabella and the spanish king ferdinand received him with great honor.
they made him admiral of the ocean sea and agreed to provide funds for his future voyages.
biography queen isabella 1451 1504 queen isabella was a catholic of strong faith.
she insisted columbus treat native americans fairly and ordered him to release several enslaved native americans he brought to spain.
isabella hoped to convert the native americans to christianity.
she also wanted their labor.
she ordered that the native americans be forced to work on buildings to mine and collect gold and to work on farms and crop fields.
christopher columbus 1451 1506 columbus proved himself to be a great navigator and sailor.
he believed he would discover great riches and new lands.
he also knew he could win rich rewards for himself.
columbus wrote in 1492 your highnesses commanded me to go to india and for this accorded me great rewards and ennobled me raised me to the rank of nobility.
critical thinking comparing and contrasting how were the goals of queen isabella and columbus similar and different.
ts lesson 2 89 k european voyages of exploration 1492 1609 john cabot 1497 1498 martin frobisher 1576 1578 giovanni da verrazano 1524 jacques cartier 1535 henry hudson 1609 spanish christopher columbus 1492 1493 amerigo vespucci 1499 1500 portuguese pedro cabral 1500 1 000 miles 0 1 000 km orthographic projec tion geography connection beginning in the late 1400s nations in western europe began exploring the americas.
movement which explorer traveled along the northern coast of south america.
for which country did he sail.
critical thinking analyzing visuals study cabral s route.
based on what you know about portugal and the information in the map key explain why his route is labeled to india.
reading helpdesk columbus s achievements columbus made three more voyages for spain in 1493 1498 and 1502.
he explored the caribbean islands of hispaniola present day haiti and the dominican republic cuba and jamaica.
he also sailed along the coasts of central america and northern south america.
he claimed these lands for spain and started settlements.
he also mapped the eastern coastline of central america.
columbus had not reached asia but instead had found a part of the world that was unknown to europeans asians and africans.
in the years that followed the spanish went on to explore most of the caribbean and to establish the spanish empire in the americas.
dividing the americas both spain and portugal wanted to protect their claims in the americas.
they turned to pope alexander vi for help.
in 1493 he ordered a line of demarcation an imaginary line that reached from the north pole to the south pole and cut through the middle of the atlantic ocean.
spain was to control all lands west of the line and portugal would control all lands east of the line.
circumnavigate to travel completely around something usually by water exploring the americas portugal objected saying that the division gave more land to spain.
in 1494 the two countries signed an agreement called the treaty of tordesillas tohrdaysee yuhs which moved the line farther west.
the two countries had divided the entire unexplored world between themselves.
further explorations after columbus other voyagers explored the americas.
in 1499 italian amerigo vespucci vehspoochee led a voyage funded by spain.
on this and a later journey for portugal he explored the coast of south america.
vespucci realized south america was a separate continent and not part of asia.
european geographers began to call the continent america in his honor.
a spaniard vasco nunez de balboa bal bohuh heard stories of the great waters beyond the mountains of panama in central america.
he hiked through steamy rain forests to find them.
at the coast in 1513 balboa saw a vast body of water which he claimed for spain along with the adjoining lands.
balboa was the first european to see the pacific ocean from the americas.
sailing around the world in 1520 ferdinand magellan a portuguese explorer who was sailing for spain reached the southernmost tip of south america.
he sailed through the stormy waters of a narrow sea passage or strait.
the strait led him into a calm ocean the same one balboa had seen.
the waters were so peaceful pacifico in spanish that s magellan named the ocean the pacific ocean.
magellan died in i the philippine islands but his crew continued to sail westward i arriving back in spain in 1522.
magellans crew were the first people known to circumnavigate or sail around the world.
e8 reading progress check i evaluating what did spain have to gain by supporting columbus and i his voyage.
the strait that led magellan above from the atlantic ocean to the pacific ocean is now called the strait of magellan.
trade exploration z o i circumnavigation include this lesson s con ertsand conqvistai ors.
information in your i gold land foldable.
o i s ortuvest l passage lesson 2 review answer the guiding questions i review vocabulary 1.
use the term cape in a sentence about the explorations of portugal in the late 1400s.
write a sentence about why it was such an achievement for someone to circumnavigate the globe.
identifying why did portugal begin exploring the coast of africa.
identifying forwhattwo reasons did king ferdinand and queen isabella support columbus s expedition.
persuasive writing suppose you are an explorer in the 1400s.
write a letter to a european monarch persuading him or her to finance your overseas expedition.
lesson 2 91 networks there s more online.
ef biography sor juana inesde la cruz ef infographic spanish missions maps spanish explorers spanish missions in california primary source cortes and the aztecs ef self check quiz lesson 3 spain in america question what are the consequences when cultures interact.
yrys texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
2a identity reasons for european exploration and colonization of north america.
12b explain reasons for the development of the plantation system the transatlantic slave trade and the spread of slavery.
23c identify ways conflicts between people from various racial ethnic and religious groups were resolved.
reading helpdesk it matters because spanish explorers in the americas conquered people and searched for gold.
spain became richer while many native americans suffered from harsh treatment at the hands of the spaniards.
european explorers and conquerors guiding question what were the goals of early spanish explorers.
when spanish explorers reached the americas natives told tales of gold silver and kingdoms wealthy beyond belief.
i he spanish listened eagerly and they traveled far and wide in search of these riches.
these explorers known as conquistadors kahn keestah dohrz got encouragement from spanish rulers.
the rulers gave conquistadors the right to explore and create settlements in the americas.
in return the conquistadors agreed to give spain one fifth of any treasure they found.
this deal allowed spanish rulers to explore the americas with little risk.
if a conquistador failed he lost his own fortune.
if he succeeded both he and spain gained wealth and glory.
the conquest of mexico and peru although many of the tales of gold and riches proved to be false some were true.
two wealthy empires the aztec in what is no mexico and central america and the inca in south america were among the richest prizes the conquistadors claimed.
in 1519 hernan cortes landed on the east coast of present day tkinklui uke a mexico.
within two years cortes conquered the aztec empire t t t ct y t.
t a ivt that had ruled the region.
huge amounts of aztec gold made li 1d ilj kjtvin cortes and spain wealthy.
cortess success encouraged other conquistadors.
twelve years after the aztec conquest francisco pizarro led an army into the inca capital in cuzco in present day peru.
the spanish arrested and later executed the inca ruler.
without their leader the inca were not able to fight effectively.
pizarro soon controlled most of the vast and wealthy inca empire.
why spain won the conquistadors victories over the aztec and inca were quick and lasting.
how did cortes and pizarro conquer such mighty empires with their small forces.
first the spanish had weapons and animals the aztec and inca had never seen.
the spanish had guns and cannons.
they rode horses and had huge ferocious dogs.
to the native americans the spanish seemed almost like gods.
one aztec recalled the fear that spread at the soldiers approach tjheir weapons clashed and rattled t hey terrified everyone who saw them cortes received help from some native people who disliked their harsh rulers and were happy to help overthrow them.
finally disease played a large role.
for many native groups contact with the europeans was deadly.
with no immunity or resistance to european diseases the aztec and the inca suffered terrible epidemics.
illnesses weakened them in their struggle against the spanish.
h reading progress check analyzing how were the spanish able to defeat native american empires.
spain in north america guiding question what did spain hope to find in the americas.
mexico and peru were lands rich in silver and gold.
hoping to find similar wealth to the north conquistadors explored the southeastern and southwestern parts of what is today the united states.
analyzing primary sources in 1519 hernan cortes prepared to leave cuba for mexico with 11 ships carrying about 550 spanish soldiers and 16 horses.
before setting off cortes said to his men primary source i know in my heart that we shall take vast and wealthy lands people such as have never before been seen.
if you do not abandon me as i shall not abandon you i shall make you in a very short time the richest of all men who have crossed the seas from the life of the conqueror by his secretary trans.
lesley byrd simpson based on this quote what inspired the conquistadors.
taking notes describing as you study the lesson use a graphic organizer like this one to identify three spanish conquistadors and describe the regions they explored.
s exploring the americas explorer reqion explored content vocabulary conquistador mission immunity presidio pueblo plantation conquistador a spanish explorer immunity resistance such as to disease academic vocabulary contact when two or more groups or objects come together cortes accepts the surrender of the aztec ruler.
lesson 3 93 sorjuana ines de la cruz 16517 1695 juana ines de la cruz was born in new spain the daughter of a spanish father and a creole mother.
she became a famous writer in a culture i where most women were not taught j to read.
her intelligence and thirst for learning led her to seek religious j training which allowed her time to 1 study and write.
her private library was one ofthe largest in the j americas.
in addition to books she 3 also collected musical and scientific 1 instruments.
recognized as a great writer in her own lifetime her 1 poems plays and stories were published in the americas and in j spain.
today de la cruz is seen as one 1 ofthe greatest mexican colonial j writers.
i critical thinking speculating why do you think it might have been difficult for de la cruz to become a successful writer.
reading helpdesk juan ponce de leon pahn suh day lee ohn made the first spanish landing on the east coast of present day florida in 1513.
according to legend ponce de leon was not looking only for gold.
he also hoped to find the legendary fountain of youth.
this had been described by a historian of that time as a spring of running water of such marvelous virtue that drinking it makes old men young again ponce de leon s exploration led to the first spanish settlement in what is now the united states a fort the spanish built at st augustine florida in 1565.
the seven cities of gold still other conquistadors searched for quick riches and several lost their lives in the process.
alvar nunez cabeza de vaca cuh bay suh duh vah cuh was part of a spanish expedition to florida in 1528.
after coming into conflict with native americans in florida the expedition sailed south toward mexico in november led by panfilo de narvaez nahrvah ays.
three of its five boats were lost in a storm.
the two boats that made it through the storm became stuck on a beach on an island near present day texas.
within a few months only a handful of the spanish explorers were still alive.
to survive among the native americans de vaca and an enslaved african named estevanico estay vahn ee koh persuaded the native americans that they had healing powers.
cabeza de vaca later wrote that their method of healing was to bless the sick breathing upon them and to recite latin prayers.
in 1533 the spaniards set off on a long trek across the southwest.
while traveling they often heard stories about seven rich cities in the region.
when cabeza de vaca finally arrived in mexico in 1536 he told eager listeners about the seven cities of cibola seven cities of gold.
de soto searches for gold excited by these stories hernando de soto led an expedition to explore florida and what is today the southeastern united states.
for three years they traveled following stories of gold.
their encounters with the native people often turned violent.
de soto crossed the mississippi river in 1541 describing it as swift and very deep after traveling as far west as present ay oklahoma de soto died of fever.
his men buried him in the waters of the mississippi.
reading in the content area map keys a map key shows what symbols and colors on the map mean in the map on the next page the key explains the colors ofthe lines on the map for example the yellow line represents ponce de leon s route in 1513 exploring the americas imiill w liu nillo llll lljllill4 0 800 km lambert azimuthal equal area projection coronado takes up the search another conquistador who searched for the seven cities of cibola was francisco vasquez de coronado kawr oh nah doh.
his travels took him through northern mexico and present day arizona and new mexico until his expedition reached a zuni zoo nee settlement in 1540.
finally convinced that there was no gold members of the expedition traveled west to the colorado river and east into what is now kansas.
they found no gold only windswept plains and strange shaggy cows buffalo.
h reading progress check speculating why do you think that the encounters between de soto s party and native americans were sometimes violent.
life under spanish rule the granger collection nyc guiding question what effect did spanish rule have on society.
spanish law set up three kinds of settlements in the americas pueblos missions and presidios.
pueblos or towns were centers of trade.
missions were religious communities.
they included a church a small town and fields for crops.
a presidio was a type of fort and was usually built near a mission.
juan de onate day ohnyahtay traveled up from mexico to establish a spanish presence in the lands to the north.
he was also assigned to convert the native people to christianity.
skills practice keep a list of words you hear often during class lessons and discussion.
use these words in class discussion.
lesson 3 95 mission nuestra senora de la purisima concepcion de acuna located in san antonio texas was dedicated in 1755 after 20 years of construction.
all missions had the same basic plan and were located near wood water and land for farming and grazing.
there was a church housing for the priests and native american converts grain fields with irrigation ditches and corrals for cattle sheep and goats.
reading helpdesk in 1598 onate founded or established the province of new mexico.
he introduced cattle and horses to the pueblo people.
the first spanish city in the southwest santa he was established in 1607.
santa fe became the capital of the province in 1610 spanish colonial society there was a very clear class system in spanish colonial society.
the highest level of society was made up of the penbisulares people who were born in spain.
they were the landowners leaders of government and heads of the catholic church.
next in rank were the creoles people born in the americas whose parents were spanish.
the next level below were the mestizos mehsteezohs people with one spanish and one native american parent.
still lower were the native americans most of whom lived in great poverty and enslaved africans.
the spanish government granted conquistadors who settled in the americas the right to demand either taxes or labor from native americans living on the land.
this system forced the native americans into a form of slavery.
for example in the 1540s when the spanish discovered silver ore in northern mexico they set up mining camps.
they then forced native americans to dig for silver.
the damp mineshafts were a grueling environment in which to work.
many native americans died there from malnutrition and disease.
pueblo a town in the spanish ruled lands mission a religious community where farming was carried out and native americans were converted to christianity presidio a fort plantation a large farm academic vocabulary found to start to establish 9 exploring the americas a spanish priest bartolome de las casas spoke out against such cruel treatment of native americans and pleaded for laws to protect them.
he claimed that millions had died because the spanish made gold their ultimate aim seeking to load themselves with riches in the shortest possible time las casass reports convinced spanish leaders to pass the new laws in 1542.
these laws forbade enslaving native americans.
unfortunately the laws were not always enforced.
the plantation system not all spaniards sought gold.
some found wealth shipping crops to spain.
in the west indies key exports were tobacco and sugarcane.
the spanish developed the plantation system to raise these crops.
a plantation is a large farm.
the spanish first used native american labor to work their plantations.
las casas suggested that they be replaced by enslaved africans a suggestion he bitterly regretted later.
as a result thousands of enslaved africans were brought from west africa to the americas.
those who survived the brutal voyage were sold to plantation owners.
by the late 1500s slave labor was an essential part of the economy of the colonies.
i a fc san diego dealcaid 1769 san carlos borrome de carmelo 1770 san antonio de pi san luis obispo de tok 17 pacific ocean 100 miles i 0 100 km albers equal area projection geography connection by 1820 there were 21 missions along the california portion of el camino real the royal road.
location what was the i southernmost spanish mission.
ii critical thinking drawing conclusions why do i you think so many missions were located along waterways.
lesson 3 97 connections to today our spanish heritage spanish influence in the united states is strong.
many spanish words have been incorporated into the language such as fiesta and canyon the spanish who were expert ranchers introduced animals such as horses sheep pigs and beef cattle into the american southwest.
many place names in the united states today are spanish in origin.
some examples in the text are santa fe and california.
can you think of any others.
include this lesson s information in your foldable.
spanish settlement in the southwest in the 1600s and 1700s the spanish with much help from native americans settled the southwest including present day new mexico texas and california.
the spanish explorer juan cabrillo kuh bree yoh first sighted what is now california in 1542.
however for 200 years the spanish had left the area alone.
around 1769 that policy changed.
california was the northern frontier of the spanish empire in north america and spain needed a large number of colonists to solidify its hold on the region.
spain also wanted to convert more native americans to christianity.
spanish settlement in california consisted mostly of mission building.
the spaniards trained native americans who lived on the mission to be farmers.
they learned how to grow crops irrigate farmland and perform other tasks usually carried out on a ranch.
eventually the missions became economically profitable enough to sell some of their goods such as wine olive oil and leather.
effect on native american life californias many native american groups had well ordered societies before the spanish arrived.
they hunted fished and gathered plants for food.
the arrival of the spanish disrupted this way of life.
the spanish forced native peoples to convert to christianity and to live and work at the missions.
q reading progress check summarizing what kinds of settlements did the spanish build in the americas.
1 lesson 3 review teks review vocabulary 1.
use the following content vocabulary terms to write a short paragraph about spanish settlement in the americas.
3oa a pueblo c presidio b mission d plantation answer the guiding questions 2.
identifying why did the conquistadors want to conquer and settle the americas.
2a 98 exploring the americas 3.
explaining why was 1513 a significant year in the history of the americas.
explaining why did the spanish bring africans to their colonies in the americas.
descriptive writing the conquistadors are often described as possessing both good and bad qualities.
write a paragraph in which you express what you think were the qualities both good and bad of the spanish conquistadors.
3od reading helpdesk taking notes t st ng as you study the lesson use a diagram like this to list the explorers who tried to find a northwest passage.
networks there s more online.
game column game ef graphic organizer the northwest passage images jacques marquette and louis joliet new amsterdam sf self check quiz ef video ml lesson 4 competing for colonies tial question what are the consequences when cultures interact.
it matters because the european competition for colonies in the americas led to settlement and exploration in many parts of north america.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
2a identify reasons for european exploration and colonization of north america.
religious rivalries guidingquestion m ftflf were the religious motives behind the a ge of exploration.
the europeans who explored and settled in north america in the 1500s sought wealth.
they also wanted to spread their christian faith.
the first to arrive were roman catholics the only christian church in the western part of europe at that time.
not long after columbus made his first voyage across the atlantic however religious conflict shook europe.
new rivalries based on religious beliefs emerged.
luther and the reformation in 1517 a german priest named martin luther nailed a list of complaints on the door of a local catholic church questioning the power and authority of catholic leaders including the pope the head of the catholic church.
luther hoped to spark reform within the church but pope leo x rejected his ideas.
others agreed with luther.
his ideas helped launch a movement called the reformation rehfuhrmay shuhn.
the movement led to a new form of christianity called protestantism prah tuhstuhntih zuhm.
among the differences between protestants and catholics was that protestants did not accept the leadership of the pope.
the reformation led to widespread conflict within and between the nations of europe.
search for the northwest passage content vocabulary reformation protestantism armada northwest passage tenant farmer lesson 4 99 in 1639 a french woman named marie guyard or marie of the incarnation arrived in quebec frances first colony.
later she wrote religious books in the languages of the native peoples she met there.
in a letter guyard wrote primary source you will perhaps laugh that at the age of fifty years i am beginning to study a new tongue language but one must undertake all things for the service of god and the salvation of ones neighbour from word from new france by marie guyard religious rivalry in europe in 1533 the english king henry viii left the catholic church.
later during the rule of his daughter elizabeth i further reforms established england as a protestant nation.
at that time it was common for kings and queens to insist that their subjects follow their religion.
subjects who did not could lose their lands and fortunes.
in england many people were unhappy about leaving the catholic church but they had little power to resist.
englands protestantism caused conflict with spain.
beginning in 1585 king philip of spain made plans to invade england.
a successful invasion could mean the overthrow of protestantism.
in may 1588 philip sent an armada ahr mah duh or war fleet of 132 ships to england.
with 30 000 troops and more than 2 000 guns the spanish armada was the mightiest naval force in the world.
yet the smaller faster english ships quickly gained the upper hand.
the defeat of spains armada marked the end of spanish control of the seas.
now the way was clear for the english to start colonies in north america.
from her letter what do you know about the person and character of marie guyard.
religious rivalries in the americas catholics from spain and france worked to spread their faith among the native americans.
the spanish settled in the southwestern and southeastern regions of north america and the french settled in the northeast.
dutch and english protestants set up colonies along the atlantic coast between the french and the spanish settlements.
religious differences contributed to the rivalries between these settlements.
reading helpdesk search for a northwest passage in the 1500s and early 1600s england france and the netherlands sent explorers to map the coast of north america and later establish trade and colonies.
explorers also hoped to discover a northwest passage to asia a direct water route through the americas.
england sent john cabot an italian to look for a northern sea route to asia in 1497.
cabot probably landed on the coast of present day newfoundland.
in 1524 france hired another italian giovanni de verrazano to look for a northern route.
verrazano explored the coast of north america from present day nova scotia down to the carolinas.
reformation a sixteenth century religious movement rejecting orchanging some roman catholic teachings and practices and establishing the protestant churches protestantism a form of christianity that was in opposition to the catholic church armada a fleet of warships academic vocabulary widespread over a wide area the j icas flk 100 exploring the in 1609 henry hudson and his crew landed on the shores of delaware bay.
the native people offered goods for trade.
in 1535 french explorer jacques cartier kahrteeay sailed up the st lawrence river hoping it would lead to the pacific.
cartier did not make it to the pacific but he discovered a mountain peak that he named mont royal which means royal mountain this is the site of the present day city of montreal.
the netherlands also wanted to find a passage through the americas.
the dutch hired english sea explorer and navigator henry hudson to look for it.
in 1609 he discovered the river that now bears his name.
in his ship the half moon hudson sailed north on the hudson river as far as the site of present day albany new york.
deciding that he had not found a passage to india he turned back.
the following year england sent hudson to try again.
on this trip hudson discovered a huge bay now called hudson bay.
thinking he had reached the pacific hudson spent months looking for an outlet.
his crew became impatient and rebelled.
they set hudson his son and a few sailors adrift in a small boat never to be seen again.
b reading progress check analyzing why did nations want to find a northwest passage.
northwest passage a sea passage between the atlantic and the pacific along the north coast of north america skills practice work with a partner.
take turns describing something.
ask one another questions about the details.
lesson 4 101 k in 1673 father jacques marquette and louis joliet located the great mississippi river.
they hoped to find that the river led to the pacific ocean.
french and dutch settlements guidingquestion how did french and dutch settlements compare to the spanish critical thinking colonies.
explaining in what way was marquette and joliet s expedition successful.
unsuccessful.
reading helpdesk french explorers and settlers trailed the spanish by many years but the french did establish settlements in north america.
at first the french were most interested in natural resources including fish and furs.
french trappers went far into the interior ol north america and traded with native americans.
france built forts to protect its trade.
french missionaries followed the traders.
in 1663 new france became a royal colony.
the new royal governor supported expanded exploration.
c pivnng me ivussissippi river in the 1670s two french explorers a fur trader louis joliet and a priest jacques marquette traveled the mississippi river by canoe.
joliet and marquette hoped to find precious metals.
they were also looking for a northwest passage.
when they realized that the mississippi flowed south into the gulf of mexico rather than west into the pacific they headed back upriver.
in 1682 robert cavelier de la salle followed the mississippi all the way to the gulf of mexico.
he claimed the region for france calling it louisiana in honor of louis xiv.
in 1718 the french founded new orleans.
french explorers and missionaries traveled west to the rocky mountains and the rio grande.
tenant farmer a settler who pays rent academic vocabulary or drovirlps work tn a lanrlnu npr in nyrhanno pose to present to offer or provides work to a landowner in exchange for the right to use the landowner s land 102 exploring the americas new france and new netherland french settlement in north america advanced slowly.
new france was made up of estates along the st lawrence river.
estate holders brought in settlers in exchange for land.
these settlers became tenant farmers teh nuhnt who paid rent and worked for their lord for a set period each year.
the french got along well with the native americans.
french trappers and missionaries lived among them learned their languages and respected their ways.
the missionaries had come to convert native americans to catholicism but they did not try to change their customs.
because the french colony grew slowly it did not seem to pose a threat to the native americans and their lands.
the netherlands was a small country with few natural resources and limited farmland.
this is why the dutch were eager to set up a north american colony.
after hudsons voyage in 1609 the dutch began to explore north america.
the netherlands also had a large fleet of trading ships that sailed all over the world.
in 1621 the netherlands created the dutch west india company to run its trade between the americas and africa.
in 1623 the company took over control of the dutch colony in north america called new netherland the heart of the colony was new amsterdam.
the town was built on the tip of manhattan island.
in 1626 governor y peter minuit bought the island from the manhattoes people for 60 dutch guilders about 24 worth of trade goods.
b reading progress check explaining what were france s goals in north america.
foldables s study organizer include this lesson s information in your foldable o trade exploration o cirojtnaavigdtian sn estsand co stadors o.
gold land tdortlnwest s passage the dutch hoped new amsterdam located where the hudson river enters what is now new york harbor would become an important center for their trade.
critical thinking analyzing which characteristics of the region of new amsterdam might encourage trade for dutch settlers.
lesson 4 review review vocabulary 1.
explain the meaning of the terms armada and protestantism by using both in a sentence.
explain the significance of the term tenant farmer.
30a answer the guiding questions 3.
identifying for what reasons did the english french and dutch establish colonies in north america.
analyzing what effect did the defeat of the spanish armada have on england.
identifying why did louis joliet and jacques marquette set out to explore the mississippi river.
2a narrative writing write a letter to a relative in europe from the point of view of an early french or dutch settler in north america.
describe what life is like and what your goals are in north america.
29d 3od lesson 4 103 3 activities jty directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
ouse your i siwiltfoto explore the essential questions.
expository writing what was the main reason european nations explored north america.
in your opinion was it to spread religion gain wealth search for the northwest passage bring honor to their rulers or control natural resources.
select one reason then write two or more paragraphs defending your choice.
use examples to support your view.
2a 29e 3od social studies skills creating a thematic map work in a group of five to map the routes of columbus magellan cabral cabot and la salle.
each member should research one explorer then trace the route of that explorer on a single map large enough to display in the classroom.
each member contributes a short paragraph on the explorer describing his adventures and importance.
291 3od thinking like a historian creating charts with a partner create a comparison chart of two countries that were exploring the americas during this era.
include in the chart a areas explored b major waterways and c population or settlements.
write three questions about the information that can be answered from the chart.
exchange your chart and questions with another team and answer the questions they provided.
29b 29i 293300 visual literacy drawing inferences this painting shows coronado leading an expedition into new mexico.
what does this image suggest about the way the spanish conquistadors viewed their role in the lands they explored.
explain your answer.
29b 29d 104 e americas assessment directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
checking for understanding o among the causes of european exploration and colonization were the rise of a new spirit of adventure and the competition among nations for new trade routes and gold.
what were some of the effects of this competition.
write a paragraph explaining your answer.
ia jod review the guiding questions 0 identifying what were some of the technological advancements that paved the way for european voyages of exploration.
2a 0 explaining why did the rise of new nations during the renaissance set the stage for a new era of exploration and discovery.
2a o analyzing why did king ferdinand and queen isabella of spain agree to finance columbus s expedition.
2a 29d 0 describing how did the pacific ocean get its name.
0 stating what was the main reason the spanish conquered and colonized the aztec and inca.
2a 0 explaining why did slavery spread in the spanish colonies.
ub 0 identifying what religious rivalry in europe shaped the exploration of the americas.
2a 0 explaining why were the dutch eager to set up a colony in north america.
ia 2a critical thinking 0 contrasting european nations had different reasons for exploring overseas.
how did portuguese efforts to reach asia differ from columbus s efforts.
2a 29b 0 comparing compare how the spanish and the french interacted with the environment.
nc 29b 0 contrasting how did spain s exploration and colonization in the americas differ from england s.
2a 29b 0 interpreting maps using the map in lesson 3 spanish missions in california complete the following tasks ib 29c 29h a.
list the missions in chronological order beginning with the first one serra built.
calculate the number of years that elapsed between the building of the first mission and the last.
interpreting maps using the place and time map in this chapter showing european exploration answer the following questions 29c a.
which regions in north america were controlled by european nations.
when did vespucci make his voyage.
c for what two countries did henry hudson sail.
describing spanish priest bartolome de las casas devoted most of his life to speaking out for the rights of enslaved native americans.
he believed that taking away the freedom and property of indigenous people was contrary to the christian faith.
use the internet to find information about las casas and write a description of one incident in his life in which he spoke out for freedom job need extra help.
ifyou ve missed question o o o o 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 review lesson 1 2 3 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 2 3 4 2 3 4 3 1 2 3 3 105 numb.
l new york weekly journal.
containing the frefbe l advice foreign and dont flick.
the mv kdj.
q ober j h 1734.
mr zenger t have been reading the arguments of mr smith and murray with regard to the courts and there is one thing i cant comprehend w r if it is the fame court i tike it that all rhe writs ought to be taken out in england and tefted by the judges there i if they are taken out here the fa nw judges outht to tell them here it is a like court it is not the r e and if not the fame it is not mat fundamental court which is e flabitihed hy.
intmawml cttsom.
i would be glad feme of your corref jxtttdents would clear up this point iwcanfc in my poor opptnton if the exchequer court here is not the fame identical court as the exchequer court in england it is without lawful authority.
lelves in great poland iw d.
crown sff sk sreig se frk fokeion fj us dantziet jurafi m tbsx j c.
very mauur.
f w his departure sffil be 1 iia for holding of pei on ruiltan and saxon trooro sai ftddenlv 10 the pls 1 1 rnarcl intent guards forrnet vice of king staoirtaus.
bnffelt dt tfi 6 letters from rome of the 17thp fi advife.
that they had advice then that the siege ofgaeta was not jnfj formed altho the spaniards w there 70 cannon and mortars and went working on.
batteries but fteft all they raifed in the night was beat down next morning by the cannon of the palace j and that the heats being already excdfive the spaniards were in fear of loafing a vail number of men in the redu ioa of that fort refs.
hamburg duguft io.
according to letters from theca mp before danrzick the vefiels there were taken up by order ofthe generals in chief to ferve for carrying the heavy artillery and baggage by water to thorn and warfaw we have certain advice that king staniflaus was departed from brandenburg pruffia and arrived fafe in the crown army under the command of m kiowfki near peterkow the 34th part and immedtatelyafterwards held a council of war wherein it was refolved to draw all the difperfed troops into a body and march di refily to volhinia in podolia.
amfl in 1733 publisher john peter zenger in his newspaper the new york weekly journal accused new yorks governor of corruption.
for criticizing the governor officials charged zenger with a crime and threw him in jail.
zenger argued that the statements he had published about the governor were true.
therefore he claimed he had the right to publish them.
zengers lawyer andrew hamilton made a stirring defense primary source john peter zenger s newspaper the new york weekly journal was the battleground in an early case about freedom ofthe press.
civic virtue the democratic ideas practices and values that are at the heart of citizenship in a free society 66 the loss of liberty in general would soon follow the suppression ofthe liberty ofthe press for it is an essential branch of liberty so perhaps it is the best preservative ofthe whole.
99 from the trial of john peter zenger and the birth of freedom ofthe press by doug linder the jury found zenger not guilty.
the case is seen as a key step in the development of a free press in this country.
civic virtue colonists were beginning to form new ideas of freedom.
they began thinking in terms of civic virtue snvihk vuhr choo democratic ideas practices and values that form a truly free society.
de crevecoeur was writing about these ideals when he described the spirit ofthe new american.
benjamin franklin was a shining example of civic virtue at its best.
colonists would soon put their belief in civic virtue into action.
these ideas and actions would become the building blocks of a new nation.
o reading progress check netw rks there s more online.
jy ef biography pontiac gjslb ef graphic organizer native american relations with the europeans sf image george washington and the french and indian war ef map the french and indian war sf primarysource political cartoon gf self check quiz ef video.
lesson 4 rivalry in north america it matters because include this lesson s information in your foldable.
analyzing in what ways did the first great awakening influence american society.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting ofthe declaration of independence creation and ratification ofthe constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
4a analyze causes ofthe american revolution including the proclamation of 1763 the intolerable acts the stamp act mercantilism lack of representation in parliament and british economic policies following the french and indian war 10c analyze the effects of physical and human geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the united states.
11c describe how different immigrant groups interacted with the environment in the united states during the 17th 18th and 19th centuries.
rivalry between great britain and france led to a war for control of north america and set the stage for a dispute between the colonists and great britain.
lesson 3 review vocabulary 1.
describe how each ofthe following terms relates to culture and society in the thirteen colonies.
3oa a immigration b epidemic c apprentice d civic virtue answer the guiding questions 2.
explaining what were the typical family responsibilities of husbands and wives in colonial america.
life in the american colonies 3.
explaining how did the enlightenment and ideas of civic virtue influence colonists beliefs about government.
3c expository writing in a paragraph explain the factors that contributed to population growth in the thirteen colonies in the 1600s and 1700s.
3od content vocabulary militia iroquois confederacy alliance rivalry between the french and the british guidingquestion howdid competition for land in north america lead to the french and indian war.
in the 1700s britain and france were leading european powers.
they competed for wealth and empire in different parts of the world.
in north america their rivalry was very strong.
this rivalry turned especially bitter in the mid 1700s.
the british began to show interest in the ohio river valley.
this vast land beyond the appalachian mountains was rich in resources.
the british believed they had a right to this land.
the french also viewed the valley as theirs.
the french enjoyed a thriving fur trade with the native americans of the region.
they did not want to share this business with british settlers.
to protect their claims in the valley the french built a chain of forts from lake ontario south to the ohio river.
the british responded by starting to build a fort in what is now western pennsylvania.
before they could finish the french seized the site.
on it they built their own fort calling it fort duquesne lesson 4 151 although washington suffered defeat at fort necessity the colonists viewed him as the hero who had struck the first blow against the french.
in spring 1754 the governor of virginia sent a militia muh lih shuh a military force made up of ordinary citizens to drive out the french.
leading this force was a young virginian.
his name was george washington.
after marching to fort duquesne washington set up a small fort of his own nearby.
he called it fort necessity.
washingtons outpost soon came under attack by the french and their native american allies.
this combined army won the battle and forced washingtons soldiers to surrender.
the french later released the soldiers who returned to virginia.
native american alliances skills practice retell important sentences from a text selection using your own words.
reading helpdesk as the conflict got under way the french and the british both sought native american help.
the french had a big advantage.
they already had many native american allies.
native americans generally distrusted the british and their hunger tor land.
in contrast the french were more interested in lur trading than in land.
french trappers and fur traders often married native american women.
french missionaries converted many native americans to catholicism.
for these reasons native americans helped the french and raided british settlements.
to counter the threat of the french and their native american friends the british colonists tried to make a treaty with the iroquois.
the iroquois confederacy ihruhkwoy kuhn fehdu ruhsee was the most powerful group of native americans in eastern north america.
at that time the confederacy included six nations the mohawk seneca cayuga onondaga oneida and tuscarora.
delegates representatives from seven colonies met with iroquois leaders at albany new york in june 1754.
the iroquois refused an alliance uh ly uhns or partnership with the british.
they did however promise to remain neutral that is to take no side.
the albany delegates also talked about how the colonies might work together more closely against the french.
they decided to adopt benjamin franklins albany plan of union for a united colonial government.
to form a colonial government each colony would have to give up some of its powers.
not one colonial assembly militia a military force made up of ordinary citizens alliance iroquois confederacy a group of native american nations in eastern north america joined together under one general government 152 life in the american colonies partnership academic vocabulary convert to change the religious beliefs of someone neutral taking no side was willing to do so.
disappointed franklin wrote everybody cries a union is absolutely necessary but when they come to the manner and form of the union they are perfectly distracted the albany meeting failed to unify the colonists.
meanwhile the conflict between the british and the french expanded into full scale war the french and indian war.
reading progress check identifying cause and effect why did hostilities between the french and british increase during the mid 1700s.
the french and indian war guiding question what was the turning point in the french and indian war.
the french enjoyed early success in the war.
they captured several british forts.
meanwhile their native american allies carried out raids on the frontier or edges of the colonies.
they killed colonists burned farmhouses and crops and drove many families back toward the coast.
the turning point came in 1757 when william pitt became prime minister the head of the british government.
pitt was a great military planner.
he sent more trained british troops to fight in north america.
to stop colonial complaints about the cost of the war pitt decided that britain would pay for it.
he knew that after the war the british would raise colonists taxes to help pay the large bill.
pitt had only delayed the time when the colonists would have to pay their share of the military costs.
pitts goal was not just to open the ohio river valley.
he also wanted to conquer french canada.
in 1758 british forces won a key victory at fort louisbourg in present day nova scotia.
the same year a british force made up mostly of new york and new england militia captured fort frontenac at lake ontario.
analyzing primary sources americas first political cartoon drawn by benjamin franklin in 1754 promoted his albany plan of union.
each section represents a colony.
the new england colonies are combined as one section.
what warning does the cartoon convey about the approaching war with france.
after a month long siege major general james wolfe ordered british forces to cross the st lawrence river and climb the cliffs near the city of quebec.
in less than an hour french troops fled and the city fell.
200 miles mj geography connection during the french and indian war the british and the french fought for control of the lands between their north american territories.
location where are the cities of quebec and montreal located.
critical thinking analyzing why do you think quebec and montreal were related to french dominance in the ohio river valley.
reading helpdesk another british force finally took fort duquesne.
the british renamed it fort pitt.
quebec the capital of new france sat on a cliff above the st lawrence river.
because of its position quebec was thought to be impossible to attack.
in september 1759 british scouts spotted a poorly guarded path along the back of the cliff.
at night british general james wolfes soldiers overwhelmed the french guards and scrambled up the path.
the british troops then surprised and defeated the french army on a field called the plains of abraham.
the fall of quebec and of montreal the next year marked the defeat of france in north america.
fighting between britain and france and their respective allies continued in europe and elsewhere until the war was final.
ended with the treaty of paris of 1763.
this treaty forced france to give canada and most of its lands east of the mississippi riyer to great britain.
great britain also received florida from frances ally spain.
spain acquired french lands west of the mississippi river called louisiana as well as the port of new orleans.
the treaty of paris marked the end of france as a power in north america.
in its aftermath north america was in the hands of two european powers great britain and spain.
h reading progress check explaining why was william pitt successful at managing the war for britain reading strategy finding the main idea in most paragraphs the main idea appears near the beginning.
the rest of the paragraph often gives examples or details to help you understand the main idea.
read the first paragraph under the guiding question on the next page.
identify the main idea of the paragraph and three supporting details.
054 life in the american colonies new british policies guiding question how did the american colonists react to new british policies.
the french defeat was a blow to native americans in the ohio river valley.
they lost their french allies and trading partners and now had to deal with the british.
the british raised the prices of their goods.
unlike the french the british refused to pay native americans to use their land.
worst of all more colonists began settling in native american lands.
many native americans saw the settlers as a threat to their way of life.
one of these was pontiac the chief of an ottawa village near detroit.
in 1763 pontiac and his forces captured the british fort at detroit and other british outposts.
during pontiacs war native americans killed settlers along the pennsylvania and virginia frontiers.
the same year that pontiacs war began britains king george declared that colonists were not to settle west of the appalachian mountains.
to enforce the new rule the british planned to keep 10 000 troops in america.
the proclamation of 1763 helped remove a source of conflict with native americans.
it also kept colonists on the coast where the british could control them.
colonists believed the proclamation limited their freedom of movement.
they feared that the large number of british troops might interfere with their liberties.
as a result distrust began to grow between britain and its american colonies.
britains financial problems also led to trouble.
deeply in debt as a result of the war with france the british government made plans to tax the colonies and tighten trade rules.
these efforts would lead to conflict.
although no one knew it at the time the end of the french and indian war was also the start of a new era z i in history the american revolutionary era.
h reaping progress check i examining why did the proclamation of 1763 anger colonists.
biography pontiac c 1720 1769 pontiac became an ottawa chief while still a young man.
a born leader he brought together three native american groups the ottawa the potawatomi and the ojibwa in an alliance.
as more british settlers moved into their lands he convinced more groups to join.
based on pontiac s plans these groups attacked british forts and settlements.
pontiac himself led the successful attack on the fort at detroit.
pontiac agreed to peace with the british in july 1766.
afterward his allies turned against him.
critical thinking drawing conclusions why do you think pontiac s former allies turned against him.
include this lesson s information in your foldable.
lesson 4 review review vocabulary 1.
write a sentence using the terms alliance and iroquois confederacy.
write a sentence about the colonies using the word militia.
3oa answer the guiding questions 3.
analyzing why was the ohio river valley a source of conflict between the french native americans and british in the mid 1700s.
identifying what was the role of william pitt in the french and indian war.
analyzing why did britain decide to tax the colonies and tighten trade rules after the french and indian war and why do you suppose that upset the colonists.
4a expository writing write a paragraph that summarizes the albany plan of union including the problems it was meant to address and the response it received among the colonies.
29b 3od lesson 4 155 activities directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
o use your b33200 to explore the essential questions.
expository writing how did geography shape the lives of the american colonists.
write a summary essay in which you consider how geographic factors shaped the development of life in the colonies but also how it led to conflict including conflicts with great britain.
io 29b 3od social studies skills create and give a presentation use presentation software or a poster to create a presentation that illustrates how life in colonial america was influenced and shaped by geography.
use illustrations to show life population distribution and settlement patterns in the different colonies and colonial regions.
ioc ha 3oc 3od thinking like a historian creating models you and other settlers arrive in one of the coastal cities of america.
your group decides to form a new town some miles inland.
make a plan for settlement the number of workers and artisans needed farmers carpenters and so on a list of tools food and supplies to take along and things to look for in a site.
sketch a map of the site of your town and the town plan.
291 visual literacy analyzing images this cartoon was drawn by benjamin franklin to promote his albany plan of union.
how does the cartoon express the need for a government capable of representing all of the colonies.
299 ny sc m unit e or die 156 life in the american colonies assessment directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
checking for understanding 0 tension between the american colonies and england increased during the colonial period.
write a paragraph describing some of the reasons for this growing distrust.
1a 300 review the guiding questions 0 explaining why did the plantation system develop in the southern colonies.
ub 0 analyzing how did physical geography influence the population growth of new york city and philadelphia in the 1600s and 1700s.
ha o identifying cause and effect why did the colonists come to resent english trade policies.
29b 0 identifying what economic theory encouraged european nations to colonize north america.
2a 0 describing what impact did the first great awakening have on religious freedom.
2sb 0 identifying what were some ways women contributed to society in colonial america.
23e analyzing how did the proclamation of 1763 help cause the american revolution.
4a 0 analyzing how did british economic policies change after the french and indian war.
4a critical thinking 0 describing the middle colonies had a mix of many different people giving the region a diverse culture.
what ethnic groups came to the middle colonies.
how did they help improve farming.
nc 23o 0 making connections the southern colonies came to rely on slavery to support their economy.
what role did geography play in the spread of slavery in that region.
ioc 12b 0 describing why did both britain and france want control of the ohio river valley.
what economic activity in the region was important for the french.
0 assessing what role did immigrants play in the development of a new spirit of independence among the american people.
how important is this spirit to the american national identity.
230 0 evaluating in what way were town meetings important to the development of local government.
how might they have helped the growth of representative government.
3a 0 synthesizing how did the british system of government change in the 1600s.
what are some british ideas about government that influenced the attitudes of the colonists.
isa 0 comparing and contrasting compare the physical characteristics of new england with those of the middle colonies.
what characteristics led new england to develop more industry and larger cities.
11a 29b 0 analyzing why do you think many puritans quakers and mennonites condemned slavery.
what were the conditions of slavery that led them to this conclusion.
230 29b 0 applying relative chronology what were the key events of the french and indian war.
sequence the events chronologically to show how the war unfolded.
1b 29b 0 describing the first great awakening inspired independence of thought.
how did it contribute to the growth of representative government.
3c 230 0 analyzing the tidewater had many large plantations.
where is the tidewater located.
what natural features of the environment drew planters to the tidewater.
iia 0 analyzing how did the physical characteristics of south carolina and georgia help make rice a major cash crop.
ha need extra help.
ifyou ve missed question o g g o g g g g g 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 review lesson 2 4 1 1 1 4 2 3 3 4 4 1 1 4 1 2 2 1 1 4 3 1 1 157 assessment continued short response prim ary source it is proposed that humble application be made for an act of parliament of great britain by virtue of which one general government may be formed in america including all the said colonies within and under which government each colony may retain its present constitution.
from the albany plan of union 1754 specifying what was being proposed in the albany plan of union.
drawing inferences how would the resulting government have affected the individual colonies.
29b extended response expository writing benjamin franklin believed in the ideal of civic virtue that is the democratic ideas practices and values of a free society.
write an essay evaluating his contribution to this ideal.
give examples of the roles he played his beliefs and his participation in public life.
2ob 3od standardized test practice analyzing documents regions this map illustrates trade and industry in the american colonies around 1750.
based on the map what trade and industry was found only in the southern colonies.
10a 29c a lumber b fur and skins c rice and indigo d fishing location near which major city were there ironworks.
10a 29c f philadelphia g richmond h williamsburg i savannah need extra help.
source historical atlas of the united states ifyou ve missed question review lesson 4 4 3 158 life in the american colonies the spirit of independence networks there s more online about the events that drove the colonists and the british apart.
1763 1776 4 ssential questions why does conflict develop.
wiat motivates people to act.
hi chaptero lesson 1 no taxation without representation lesson 2 uniting the colonists lesson 3 a call to arms lesson 4 declaring independence 1 bh h p hfe 111 the story matters.
he stands proud and tall this minuteman part of a colonial militia.
citizen soldiers like him were the first responders of their time.
a call to arms could come day or night.
the minutemen were out the door on a minute s notice ready to protect their communities.
few would doubt the minutemen s bravery.
but if the growing tension between the colonies and great britain led to war how would these farmers clerks and shopkeepers stand up to a force of skilled british soldiers.
foldables goto the foldables library in the back of your book to make a foldable that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
this portrait of a minuteman was created in 1876 to celebrate 100 years of american independence.
bettmann corbis 1 unrest 0 revolution declaration of independence 0 o 159 chapter 6 place and time the british colonies n3 to n 6 the british colonies extended along the coast of the atlantic ocean.
in the middle of this strip was philadelphia.
this city would become a gathering place for colonial leaders as they discussed the growing conflict with great britain.
step into the place map focus by 1775 british policies had caused unrest in the colonies and a growing movement toward independence.
regions which colonial region appears to have the largest area of loyalist support.
location what lay beyond the borders of british territory in north america.
making connections in which colonies do you think the movement for independence might have been the strongest.
what makes you think so.
pacific ocean 140w british territory strong patriot areas in 1775 1 strong loyalist areas in 1775 ur site of major protests against british tax laws 1764 1774 1 spanish missions native american group 0 200 miles i n h 1 0 200 km lambert azimuthal equal area projection i i.
j ncrw step into the time timeline review the time line.
what was taking place in europe at about the same time the first continental congress 1763 treaty of paris signed 1765 colonists protest stamp act world event networks et map explore the interactive version of there s more online.
this map on networks.
ef timeline explore the interactive version of this time line on networks.
of v 1775 battles of lexington 1774 first and concord occur 1770 boston 1773 boston tea continental 1776 colonies issue the massacre occurs party takes place congress meets declaration of independence 1 networks 1 i 5 british policies et map the proclamation of 1763 et self check quiz et video there s more online.
ef game fill in the blank ef graphic organizer lesson 1 no taxation without representation 1 ial question why dots conflict dwtlop.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 3a explain the reasons for the growth of representative government and institutions during the colonial period.
it matters because conflict between the american colonies and the british government began to deepen in the years after the french and indian war.
3b analyze the importance of the mayflower compact the fundamental orders of connecticut and the virginia house of burgesses to the growth of representative government.
4a analyze causes of the american revolution including the proclamation of 1763 the intolerable acts the stamp act mercantilism lack of representation in parliament and british economic policies following the french and indian war.
4b explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell samuel adams mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez crispus attucks king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
23e identify the political social and economic contributions of women to american society.
reading helpdesk dealing with great britain guidingquestion why did the british go vernment establish new policies.
after their victory in the french and indian war the british controlled much of north america.
to manage this territory king george iii issued the proclamation of 1763.
this order prohibited or barred colonists from living west ofthe appalachian mountains on native american land.
the british believed the proclamation would help keep peace between native americans and settlers.
it would also keep colonist.
near the atlantic coast where british authority was stronger.
finally it would allow britain to control westward expansion and the fur trade in the region.
the king sent 10 000 troops to the colonies to enforce the proclamation.
the colonists feared that the large number of british troops would interfere with their liberties and they resented the restriction on settling western land.
britain restricts trade muain needed new revenue or income to pay for the tr the british also had large debts from the french and indian the king and parliament felt the colonists should pay part oft taking notes identifying as you read identify british policies that affected the colonists.
record each policy in a chart like this one.
then record the colonists views of each policy.
162 the spirit of independence content vocabulary revenue effifly writ of assistance boycott resolution repeal costs so the british government issued new taxes on the colonies.
it also enforced old taxes more strictly.
to avoid taxes some colonists resorted to smuggling.
this caused british revenues to fall.
in 1763 britains prime minister george grenville set out to stop the smuggling.
parliament passed a law to have accused smugglers tried by royally appointed judges rather than local juries.
grenville knew that american juries often found smugglers innocent.
parliament also empowered customs officers to obtain writs of assistance.
these documents allowed the officers to search almost anywhere shops warehouses and even private homes for smuggled goods.
the sugar act in 1764 parliament passed the sugar act which lowered the tax on the molasses the colonists imported.
grenville hoped this change would convince the colonists to pay the tax instead of smuggling.
the act also allowed officers to seize goods from accused smugglers without going to court.
revenue incoming money from taxes or other sources writ of assistance a court document allowing customs officers to enter any location to search for smuggled goods academic vocabulary prohibit to prevent or forbid geography connection king george issued the proclamation of 1763 in the aftermath ofthe french and indian war.
regions how did the proclamation of 1763 attempt to protect native american rights and lands.
critical thinking speculating how do you think the colonists reacted to the proclamation.
lesson 1 163 a growing debt using math skills did british or colonial subjects pay more toward the debt.
what was the difference in pounds and shillings.
critical thinking identifying central issues how did residents of britain and the american colonists pay their shares of the debt.
share of the debt per person britain 1 british pound 1 british shilling 1 pound 20 shillings great britain s national debt soared as a result of the french and indian war.
subjects living in great britain paid more on this debt per person than people living in the colonies.
british efforts to get colonists to pay a bigger share of war related debt led to sharp conflict.
source don cook the long fuse how england lost the american colonies 1760 1785 the sugar act angered many colonists.
they believed this and other new laws violated their rights.
as british citizens colonists argued they had a right to a trial by jury and to be viewed as innocent until proved guilty according to british law.
colonists also believed they had the right to be secure in their homes without the threat of officers barging in to search for smuggled goods.
the colonists also accepted the principle of no taxation without representation as a basic right.
since the colonies lacked representation in parliament many colonists considered it unjust for parliament to tax the colonies.
james otis a lawyer in boston argued primary source m no parts of england s colonies can be taxed without their consent every part has a right to be represented.
w ill from the rights of the british colonies w pi reading progress check analyzing according to the colonists what rights did the sugar act violate skills practice keep a list of academic vocabulary and social studies vocabulary.
before you share information with classmates choose some of these words to use.
reading helpdesk new taxes on the colonies g u i d in g q u e sti o n how did the american colonists react to british policies.
in 1765 parliament passed the stamp act.
this law taxed almost all printed materials.
newspapers wills and even playing cards needed a stamp to show that the tax had been paid.
i resolution an official expression of opinion by a group effigy a mocking figure representing an unpopular individual boycott to refuse to buy items in order to show disapproval or force acceptance of one s terms repeal to cancel an act or law academic vocabulary violate to disregard or go against 164 the spirit of independence opposition to the stamp act the stamp act outraged the colonists.
they argued that only their own assemblies could tax them.
patrick henry a member of the virginia house of burgesses got the burgesses to take action.
the assembly passed a resolution declaring that it had the only and sole exclusive right and power to lay taxes on its citizens.
in boston samuel adams helped start the sons of liberty.
its members took to the streets to protest the stamp act.
protesters burned effigies eh fuh jeez stuffed figures made to look like unpopular tax collectors.
colonial leaders decided to work together.
in october delegates from nine colonies met in new york at the stamp act congress.
they sent a statement to the king and parliament declaring that only colonial assemblies could tax the colonists.
people in colonial cities urged merchants to boycott british goods.
as the boycott spread businesses in britain lost money and demanded parliament repeal or cancel the stamp act.
in march 1766 parliament repealed the law.
however it also passed the declaratory act stating that it had the right to tax and make decisions for the colonies in all cases the townshend acts the stamp act taught the british that the colonists would resist internal taxes those paid inside the colonies.
as a result in 1767 parliament passed the townshend acts to tax imports such as glass tea and paper.
the tax was paid when the goods arrived before they were brought inside the colonies.
protests against the townshend acts began immediately.
in towns throughout the colonies women some organized as daughters of liberty began boycotts of british goods.
mercy otis warren a leader of the daughters of liberty later wrote pamphlets and poems urging separation from britain.
she also i wrote plays ridiculing british officials.
h reading progress check explaining how did the daughters of liberty help the colonial cause.
a british government official placed this seat or stamp on certain paper items in the colonies to show that the tax on them had been paid.
foldable study organized include this lesson s information in your foldable q o 0 unrest reu elution declaration of independence lesson 1 review review vocabulary 1.
write a paragraph about the 1760s in the american colonies.
use these vocabulary words joa 3od a revenue b resolution c effigy d boycott e repeal answer the guiding questions 2.
describing why did the british limit westward settlement in the proclamation of 1763.
using math skills on the chart showing colonial debt per person how much is one british pound worth in shillings.
what was the share of debt per colonist in shillings.
calculate the colonist s share of the debt in pounds.
29c 29h 3oc 4.
identifying why did colonists oppose the stamp act.
4a narrative writing write a conversation between two colonists who disagree over britain s taxing the colonies to help pay off its debts from the french and indian war.
4a 3od lesson 1 165 it matters because harsh british actions aimed at controlling the colonies united them instead.
teks texas essential knowledge and skills 4a analyze causes of the american revolution including the proclamation of 1763 the intolerable acts the stamp act mercantilism lack of representation in parliament and british economic policies following the french and indian war.
4b explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell samuel adams mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez crispus attucks king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
20c analyze reasons for and the impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in u s history such as the boston tea party and henry david thoreau s refusal to pay a tax.
reading helpdesk trouble in massachusetts gusdsngquestion how did the american colonists react to the boston massacre.
protests continued to flare in the colonies making british nervous.
in 1768 they sent word to britain that the colonies were on the brink of rebellion a rejection of british authority.
parliament sent troops to boston.
as angry colonists jeered the redcoats set up camp in the center of the city.
for many colonists this british act went too far.
the colonists were already convinced that the british had passed laws that violated colonial rights.
now britain had sent an army to occupy or take control of colonial cities.
to make matters worse the soldiers in boston acted rudely.
the re coats who were mostly poor men earned little pay.
some stole rom local shops and got into fights with colonists.
also in their o ours the soldiers competed for jobs that bostonians wanted.
tension in the streets on march 5 1770 violence erupted.
a fight broke out between ome ostonians and soldiers.
as british officers tried to calm me crowd a man shouted we did not send for you.
we will not have you here.
well get rid of you well drive you away taking notes describing as you read use a diagram like this one to record how the intolerable acts changed life for the colonists.
the spirit of independence content vocabulary rebellion propaganda committee of correspondence civil disobedience the angry townspeople surged forward.
they began throwing sticks and stones at the soldiers.
come on you rascals you bloody backs you lobster scoundrels fire if you dare someone in the crowd shouted.
after one soldier was knocked down the nervous redcoats did fire.
they killed five colonists.
according to accounts crispus attucks a dockworker who was part african and part native american became the first casualty of the american revolution.
one bostonian cried are the inhabitants to be knocked down in the streets.
are they to be murdered the colonists called the tragic encounter the boston massacre spreading the news colonial leaders used the killings as propaganda information designed to influence opinion.
samuel adams put up posters that described the boston massacre as a slaughter of innocent americans by bloodthirsty redcoats.
paul revere made an engraving that showed a british officer giving the order to open fire on an orderly crowd.
the boston massacre led colonists to call for stronger boycotts of british goods.
troubled by the growing opposition in the colonies parliament repealed the townshend acts taxes on british imports except the one on tea.
in response the colonists ended their boycotts except on tea.
trade with britain resumed.
still some colonists continued to call for resistance to british rule.
in 1772 samuel adams revived the boston committee of correspondence a group used in earlier protests.
the group circulated calls for action against britain.
soon committees of correspondence sprang up throughout the colonies bringing together protesters opposed to british measures.
h reading progress check explaining how did the boston massacre affect relations between the colonists and britain.
e q u crispus attucks was the first colonist killed by the british in the boston massacre.
crisis in boston guidingquestion how did the british government react to the actions of the colonists.
by 1773 the british east india company was facing financial ruin.
to help save the company and protect the british economy parliament passed the tea act.
it gave the british east india company nearly total control of the market for tea in the colonies.
rebellion open defiance of authority propaganda ideas or information intentionally spread to harm or help a cause committee of correspondence an organization that spread political ideas and information through the colonies academic vocabulary occupy to move into and take control of a place especially by force encounter a sudden often violent clash build vocabulary multiple meaning words as a verb the word encounter means to come across or meet.
as a noun encounter can mean a chance meeting or a sudden often violent meeting between lesson 2 167 colonists angry at the restrictions of the tea act staged a dramatic protest.
they threw three shiploads of british tea into boston harbor.
critical thinking analyzing why were american colonists especially angry with the tea act.
j skills practice after a class lesson work with a partner.
take turns retelling the lesson to one another.
ii reading helpdesk the tea act also removed some but not all of the taxes on tea making it less expensive for colonists.
yet the colonists remained angry.
they did not want to pay any tax and they did not want to be told what tea they could buy.
colonial merchants called for a new boycott.
colonists vowed to stop east india company ships from unloading.
1 he daughters of liberty issued a pamphlet declaring that rather than part with freedom well part with our tea a tea party despite warnings of trouble the east india company continued shipping tea to the colonies.
colonists in new york and philadelphia forced the tea ships to turn back.
in 1773 three ships loaded with tea arrived in boston harbor.
the royal governor ordered that they be unloaded.
the boston sons of liberty acted swiftly.
at midnight on december 16 colonists dressed as native americans boarded the ships and threw 342 chests ot tea overboard.
as word of the boston tea party spread colonists gathered to celebrate the bold act.
the boston tea party was an readjngstrategy identifying cause and effect 9eta to happes an effect.
one hu e and on o the spirit of independence civil disobedient use of nonviolent protestsk challenge a government0 1 act of civil disobedience or the refusal to obey laws that are considered unjust.
the intolerable acts when news of the boston tea party reached london king george iii realized that britain was losing control of the colonies.
he declared we must either master them or totally leave them to themselves in 1774 parliament responded by passing a series of laws called the coercive acts.
coercive co ehr sihv describes the forceful pressure used to make someone do something.
these laws were meant to punish the colonists for resisting british authority.
one coercive act applied to all the colonies.
it forced the colonies to let british soldiers live among the colonists.
massachusetts though received the harshest treatment.
one of the coercive acts banned town meetings in massachusetts.
another closed boston harbor until the colonists paid for the ruined tea.
this stopped most shipments of food and other supplies to the colony.
parliament was trying to cut massachusetts off from the other colonies.
instead the coercive acts drew the colonies together.
other colonies sent food and clothing to support boston.
following the coercive acts parliament also passed the quebec act.
this law created a government for canada and extended canadas territory south all the way to the ohio river.
this action ignored the colonies claims to that region.
the colonists believed all of these new laws violated their rights as english citizens.
they expressed their feelings about the laws by calling them the intolerable acts.
intolerable means painful and unbearable.
j i h reading progress check i analyzing how did the intolerable acts affect the residents of j massachusetts.
king george s determination to take a firm stand against the colonies after the boston tea party failed to resolve the growing crisis.
in fact colonial anger grew.
include this lesson s information in your foldable.
j unrest o o 0.
revolution declaration of independence lesson 2 review review vocabulary 1.
explain the significance of the following terms 3oa a rebellion b propaganda c committee of correspondence d civil disobedience answer the guiding questions 2.
sequencing list the events leading up to and following the boston massacre in the order that they occurred ibjzbb analyzing how did samuel adams and paul revere use propaganda to rally colonists after the boston massacre.
explaining how did the british punish the colonists for the boston tea party.
4a narrative writing write an account of the boston massacre from the point of view of a british soldier involved in the event.
3od lesson 2 169 networks there s more online.
ef biography patrick henry ef chart choosing sides et graphic organizer key actions of the continental congress et map battles of lexington and concord ef self check quiz ef video r y vr 7f l fc r i b lesson 3 a call to arms question whatmotivatespeopktoatt.
teks texas essential knowledgejnd skjlls 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
4b explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell samuel adams mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez crispus attucks king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
4c explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including declaring independence writing the articles of confederation fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
1oa locate places and regions of importance in the united states during the 17th 18th and 19th centuries.
26b identify examples of american art music and literature that reflect society in different eras.
29d identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
it matters because as anger toward the british grew colonists began to consider the possibility of independence.
a meeting in philadelphia guidingquestion what roles did key individuals play in the movement toward independence.
in september 1774 55 delegates gathered in philadelphia.
they had come to set up a political body that would represent colonists and challenge british control.
the delegates called this body the continental congress.
leaders from twelve of the thirteen colonies attended the meeting.
only georgia did not send a representative.
massachusetts sent fiery samuel adams and his lawyer cousin john adams.
new york sent john jay another lawyer.
virginia sent george washington as well as richard henry lee and patrick henry two outspoken defenders of colonial rights.
patrick henry wanted the colonies to unite in firm resistance to britain.
he summed up the meaning of the meeting when he addressed the delegates on its second day primarysource 7 7 reading helpdesk the distinctions between virginians pennsylvanians new yorkers and new englanders are no more.
i am not a virginian but an american.
99 patrick henry at the continental congress 177 taking notes summarizing as you read use a diagram like this one to list three key actions of the continental congress.
continental congress content vocabulary minuteman loyalist patriot the delegates vote the delegates discussed complaints against the british.
then they voted.
in a statement of grievances the delegates called for the repeal of 13 acts of parliament.
they believed these laws violated the laws of nature the principles of the english constitution and the several charters of the colonies.
the delegates also voted to boycott british trade.
the colonies would not import or use any british goods nor would they sell their goods in great britain.
the delegates to the continental congress also decided to endorse the suffolk resolves prepared by the people of boston and other towns in suffolk county massachusetts.
these resolutions declared the coercive acts to be illegal.
they called on the countys residents to arm themselves against the british.
after delegates endorsed the resolves other colonies also organized militias groups of citizen soldiers.
the colonial militias american colonists had a long tradition of serving and protecting their communities with militias.
members of a militia were an important part of each towns defense.
militia members trained and drilled with the other citizen soldiers.
they practiced using muskets and cannons.
each member was required to provide his own weapon usually a musket and ammunition.
later as tension between britain and the colonies grew towns began to build vocabulary multiple meaning words the word resolves as used on this page means something that is decided.
as a noun the word resolve can also mean firmness of purpose as in the patriots showed resolve against the british.
as a verb resolve can mean to decide something or to solve a problem.
lesson 3 171 patrick henry 1736 1799 henry was one of the first members of the virginia house of burgesses to argue for independence from britain.
his speaking ability inspired many colonists.
in a debate over whether the virginia colony should form a militia he said give me liberty or give me death.
his stirring cry gave voice to the independence movement.
fighting begins guidingquestion why were the battles at lexington and concord important.
many colonists believed that if fighting with the british were to break out it would happen in new england.
militias in massachusetts held drills made bullets and stockpiled weapons.
some militias were known as minutemen because they boasted they would be ready to fight at a minutes notice.
in the winter of 1774 1775 a british officer stationed in boston noted in his diary.
primary source m the people are evidently making every preparation for resistance.
they are taking every means to provide themselves with arms.
99 from diary of frederick mackenzie 1775 chtkai.
thinking analyzing is the ability to speak well an important quality for a leader.
great britain sends troops the british also got ready for a fight.
king george told parliament that the new england colonies were in a state of rebellion and that blows must decide who would control america.
by april 1775 several thousand british troops were in and around boston with more on the way.
british general thomas gage had orders to seize the weapons from the massachusetts militia and arrest the leaders.
gage learned that the militia was storing arms and ammunition at concord a town about 20 miles 32 km northwest of boston.
he ordered 700 troops under lieutenant colonel francis smith to concord where you will seize and destroy all the artillery and ammunition you can find the british on the move i ii reading helpdesk minuteman during revolutionary era a civilian sworn to be ready to fight with only one minute s notice be spirit of independence on the night of april 18 1775 colonial protest leader dr joseph warren walked through boston.
watching for any unusual activity by the british he saw troops marching out of the city.
warren alerted paul revere and william dawes members of the sons of liberty.
revere and dawes rode to lexington a town east of concord to spread the word that the british were coming.
revere galloped across the countryside shouting his warning of the approaching troops.
hearing the news samuel adams said what a glorious morning this is he was ready to fight.
a british patrol later captured dawes and revere.
another rider named samuel prescott carried the warning to concord.
view the map to see the locations of lexington and concord.
skills practice as you read look for connecting words such as and but or because before after like or unlike.
classify them according to the type of connection they show for example cause comparison or sequence.
7 i geography connection the first fighting between british troops and the colonial militia took place at lexington and concord massachusetts.
movement which towns did paul revere warn on his ride to lexington.
critical thinking analyzing how might the starting point of the british forces in boston have affected the outcome of these battles.
i i lexington and concord meanwhile the british continued their march.
at dawn the redcoats approached lexington.
there they ran into about 70 waiting minutemen.
led by captain john parker the minutemen stood on the town common with muskets in hand.
badly outnumbered the minutemen were about to give way to the redcoats.
just then a shot was fired from where is still not clear.
both sides let loose an exchange of bullets.
when the shooting ended eight minutemen lay dead.
the british continued on to concord.
while some troops burned the few weapons they found the others met a group of minutemen waiting at the north bridge.
in a short battle the british took heavy losses.
they began to make their way back to boston.
all along the road colonists hid behind trees and fired on the soldiers.
by the time the redcoats reached boston at least 174 were wounded and 73 were dead.
about 60 years later poet ralph waldo emerson wrote in the concord hymn that the americans at lexington and concord had fired the shot heard round the world.
the battle for independence had begun.
h reading progress check explaining why did british troops march to concord.
academic vocabulary approach to draw near to something skills practice work with a group.
before you read look at the pictures maps graphs charts and bold faced words in your text.
ask group members to tell you what they know about a topic and tell them what you know.
i lesson 3 173 reading helpdesk this painting shows the british charge at what historians call the battle of bunker hill which actually took place on breed s hill.
more military action guiding question what were the beliefs of the loyalists and patriots.
after the battles at lexington and concord armed conflict with british forces quickly spread.
benedict arnold a captain in the connecticut militia raised a force of 400 to seize fort ticonderoga near lake champlain in new york.
ticonderoga occupied a key location.
it was also rich in military supplies.
arnold learned that ethan allen of nearby vermont also planned to attack the fort so he joined forces with allens men the so called green mountain boys.
together they took the british by surprise.
fort ticonderoga surrendered on may 10 1775.
later arnold became a traitor to the patriot cause.
he sold military information to the british.
when his crime was discovered in september 1780 he fled to british controlled new york city.
there he commanded british troops and led raids against the americans in virginia and connecticut.
the battle of bunker hill following lexington and concord more volunteers joined the colonial militias.
soon militias around boston numbered about 20 000 strong.
the british remained in control of the city with the militia camped nearby.
on june 16 1775 militia commanded by colonel william prescott set up posts on bunker hill and breeds hill across the harbor from boston.
loyalist an american colonist who remained loyal to britain and opposed the war for independence patriot an american colonist who favored american independence academic vocabulary so called known as 174 the spirit of independence the next day the redcoats assembled at breeds hill.
bayonets drawn they charged.
low on ammunition prescott reportedly ordered dont fire until you see the whites of their eyes the americans opened fire forcing the british to retreat.
twice more the redcoats charged receiving furious fire from above.
finally the americans ran out of gunpowder and had to withdraw.
the battle on breeds hill which became known as the battle of bunker hill was a british victory.
yet the british suffered heavy losses of more than 1 000 dead and wounded.
they were learning that defeating the americans on the battlefield would be neither quick nor easy.
choosing sides as news of these battles spread each colonist faced a major decision to join the rebels or remain loyal to great britain.
those who sided with britain the loyalists did not think unfair taxes and laws justified a rebellion.
some were officeholders who felt a responsibility to uphold british rule.
others had not suffered from british policies and saw no reason to break with britain.
still others believed britain would win the war and did not want to be on the losing side.
the patriots on the other hand supported the war.
they believed that the colonists should have the right to govern themselves.
the patriots were determined to fight the british until american independence was won.
the american revolution was not just a war between america and britain.
it was also a civil war patriots against loyalists.
h reading progress check describing what did the british learn from the battle of bunker hill.
making predictions loyalists came from all parts of american society.
political differences divided communities and even split families.
benjamin franklins son william served as royal governor of new jersey.
when the revolution began william remained loyal to britain and quarreled with his father.
do you think benjamin franklin and william franklin resolved their differences.
foldables study organizer include this lesson s information in your foldable.
i unrest o 0 os.
revolution declaration of independence lesson 3 review review vocabulary 1.
write a paragraph explaining what the words below have in common.
3oa 3od a minuteman b loyalist c patriot answer the guiding questions 2.
drawing conclusions how did the continental congress s support for the suffolk resolves push the colonies closer to war.
explaining why did the continental congress vote in 1774 to repeal the coercive acts passed by parliament.
interpreting reread patrick henry s quote about the continental congress.
what change was taking place in how the colonists saw themselves.
290 narrative writing write a scene from a play in which colonists in a small town react to the news of the battles at lexington and concord.
remember not all colonists wanted independence from britain.
290 300 lesson 3 175 what do you think.
should the colonies declare their independence from great britain.
some americans did not think that independence was the right path for the colonies.
they wanted to remain under british rule.
these colonists were called loyalists.
colonists who believed the colonies should become an independent nation were called patriots.
in these excerpts patriot thomas paine and loyalist charles inglis express different points of view about the fight for american independence.
yes ssas volumes have been written on the subject of the struggle between england and america and the period of debate is closed.
i challenge the warmest advocate for reconciliation to show a single advantage that this continent can reap by being connected with great britain.
but the injuries and disadvantages are without number and our duty to mankind at large as well as to ourselves instruct us to renounce the alliance.
every thing that is right or reasonable pleads for separation.
the blood of the slain the weeping voice of nature cries tis time to part.
99 thomas paine tension between 1 british authorities and the colonists grew during the 1770s.
wim h a s w s.
not every colonist agreed with the behavior of the protesters involved with the boston tea party.
vocabulary charles inglis primary source tt i think it no difficult matter to point out many advantages which will certainly attend our reconciliation and connection with great britain.
the blood of the slain the weeping voice of nature cries ft is time to be reconciled it is time to lay aside those animosities which have pushed on britons to shed the blood of britons a declaration of independency would infallibly disunite and divide the colonists torrents of blood will be spilt and thousands reduced to beggary and wretchedness america is far from being yet in a desperate situation.
i am confident she may obtain honourable and advantageous terms from great britain.
99 charles inglis the true interest of america impartially stated 1776 advocate supporter reconciliation settlement understanding renounce to give up to abandon animosity hostility ill will hatred infallibly without fail torrent fast moving liquid whatdoyou think.
dbq o drawing inferences both of these passages were written in 1776 the same year that the declaration of independence was adopted.
how do you think paine and inglis reacted to the colonies breaking away from britain.
4b 29b 0 identifying bias do either paine or inglis use emotional or biased language.
cite examples.
29f 0 evaluating in your opinion which of the two writers makes the stronger argument.
explain your answer.
2 e i i lesson 3 17 vh networks e there s more online.
k j ef biography k thomas paine h ef graphic organizer dedarationof independence et map the siege of boston ef primary source battles of lexington and concord reaction to declaration of independence sf self check quiz slideshow the committee of five video common sense inhabitants o r america.
oa ik subject.
lesson 4 declaring independence l question teks texas essential knowledge and skills 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including colonization revolution drafting of the declaration of independence creation and ratification of the constitution religious revivals such as the second great awakening early republic the age of jackson westward expansion reform movements sectionalism civil war and reconstruction and describe their causes and effects.
1c explain the significance of the following dates 1607 founding of jamestown 1620 arrival of the pilgrims and signing of the mayflower compact 1776 adoption of the declaration of independence 1787 writing of the u s constitution 1803 louisiana purchase and 1861 1865 civil war.
4a analyze causes of the american revolution including the proclamation of 1763 the intolerable acts the stamp act mercantilism lack of representation in parliament and british economic policies following the french and indian war.
4c explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including declaring independence writing the articles of confederation fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
it matters because the decision to declare independence came only after all other options had been exhausted.
the second continental congress guidlngquestlon howdid individuals and events impact efforts for independence.
in 1774 the continental congress agreed to meet again it the british did not address their complaints.
in fact as the battles at lexington and concord in 1775 showed the dispute between the british and the colonies had worsened.
distinguished leaders the second continental congress met on may 10 1775.
the delegates included some of the greatest leaders in the colonies.
among them were john and samuel adams patrick henry richard henry lee and george washington all delegates to the first continental congress.
several new delegates came as well.
benjamin franklin one of the most respected men in the colonies had been a leader in the pennsylvania legislature.
in 1765 he represented the colonies in london and helped win repeal of the stamp act.
john hancock of massachusetts was a wealthy merchant.
he funded many patriot groups including the sons of liberty.
the delegates chose hancock to be president of the second continental congress.
thomas jefferson only 32 was also a delegate.
he served in the virginia legislature.
jefferson was already known as a brilliant thinker and writer.
reading helpdesk taking notes organizing as you read use a diagram like this one to describe the parts of the declaration of independence.
declaration of independence part 1 t part 2 1 1 part 3 1 f part 4 1 content vocabulary petition preamble the spirit of independence the delegates at the second continental congress had much to discuss.
though american and british blood had been spilled they were not ready to vote for a break from britain.
it would be another year before jefferson would write the declaration of independence.
key actions the continental congress did take steps to begin governing the colonies.
it authorized the printing of money and set up a post office with franklin in charge.
the congress also formed committees to handle relations with native americans and foreign countries.
most important it created the continental army.
unlike local militias such a force could form and carry out an overall strategy for fighting the british.
the congress unanimously chose george washington to command this army.
washington was an experienced soldier and a respected southern planter.
he left philadelphia at once to take charge of the forces in boston.
the delegates then offered britain a last chance to avoid war.
they sent a petition or formal request to george iii.
called the olive branch petition it assured the king that the colonists wanted peace.
it asked him to protect the colonists rights.
the king rejected the petition.
instead he prepared for war.
he hired more than 30 000 german troops called hessians heh shuhnz to fight alongside british troops.
15c identify colonial grievances listed in the declaration of independence and explain how those grievances were addressed in the u s constitution and the bill of rights.
19a define and give examples of unalienable rights.
20a explain the role of significant individuals such as thomas hooker charles de montesquieu john locke william blackstone and william penn in the development of self government in colonial america.
29d identify points of view from the historical context surrounding an event and the frame of reference which influenced the participants.
petition a formal request geography connection when washington placed troops on dorchester heights in march 1776 british forces left boston.
movement in which direction did british forces retreat.
critical thinking analyzing visuals why would british general howe have been concerned about patriot cannons on nook s hill.
lesson 4 179 general george washington commanded the continental army in their battles with the british.
thomas paine s common sense had a great influence on public opinion in the colonies.
common sense inhabitants o f a m e r r c a oo the tetensfog e c t s smt c.
f s v a the war heats up congress learned that british troops in canada were planning to invade new york.
the americans decided to strike first.
a unit of patriots marched north from fort ticonderoga and captured montreal.
however an american attack on quebec led by benedict arnold failed.
washington reached the boston area in july 1775 a few weeks after the battle of bunker hill.
the british held boston but patriot militia ringed the city.
although the size of the colonial force grew every day washington realized that the men were disorganized and lacked discipline the ability to follow strict rules and procedures.
washington began the task of turning armed civilians into soldiers.
washington also needed weapons.
he arranged to have dozens of cannons hauled 300 miles 483 km from fort ticonderoga.
moving the heavy guns was a huge effort.
in march 1776 washington believed his army was ready to fight.
under the cover of darkness he moved soldiers and cannons into position overlooking boston while the redcoats slept.
the move surprised the british who realized they were now within easy reach of washingtons big guns.
british general william howe commanded his soldiers to hoard ships and withdraw from boston.
on march 17 washington led his jubilant troops into the city.
they watched as the british troops sailed away to halifax nova scotia a part of canada.
moving toward independence many colonists held on to hope that the colonies could remain part of great britain.
still support for independence was growing it was inspired in no small part by writer thomas paine.
paine arrived in the colonies from england in 1774.
he soon caught the revolutionary spirit.
in january 1776 he published a pamphlet called common sense.
in bold language paine called for a complete break with british rule.
primary source reading helpdesk every thing that is right or reasonable pleads for separation.
the blood of the slain the weeping voice of nature cries tis time to part.
99 from common sense w academic vocabulary discipline the ability to follow strict rules and procedures debate a discussion of opposing points of view 180 the spirit of independence common sense listed powerful reasons why americans would be better off free from great britain.
the pamphlet greatly influenced opinions throughout the colonies.
h reading progress check explaining what was the significance of the olive branch petition.
declaring independence guidingquestion why did the american colonies declare independence.
the second continental congress was filled with spirited debate should the colonies declare themselves an independent nation or stay under british rule.
in june 1776 virginias richard henry lee offered a bold resolution primary source that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states and that all political connection between them and the state of great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved.
99 richard henry lee resolution for independence 1776 the congress debated lees resolution.
some delegates still thought the colonies should not form a separate nation.
others argued that war had already begun and they should be free from great britain.
still others feared britains power to crush the rebellion.
writing the declaration while delegates debated congress chose a committee to write a declaration of independence.
john adams benjamin franklin thomas jefferson robert livingston and roger sherman formed the committee.
adams asked jefferson to write the first draft.
jefferson hesitated but adams persuaded him saying committee members benjamin franklin john adams and thomas jefferson examine jefferson s changes to his draft of the declaration.
4 primary source m reason first you are a virginian and a virginian ought to appear at the head of this business.
reason second i am obnoxious suspected and unpopular.
you are very much otherwise.
reason third you can write ten times better than i can.
99 from the writings of thomas jefferson 1822 jefferson agreed that he would do the writing for the great project.
he drew on ideas from english philosopher john locke to explain why the thirteen colonies were proclaiming their freedom.
r j jefferson and the rest of the committee present the completed declaration of independence to the second continental congress.
preamble the introduction to a formal document that often tells why the document was written in the 1690s locke had expressed the idea that people are born with certain natural rights to life liberty and property.
locke wrote that people form governments to protect those rights and that a government interfering with those rights could rightfully be overthrown.
jefferson and other patriots agreed with locke.
on july 2 1776 the second continental congress voted on lees resolution for independence.
twelve colonies voted for independence.
new york did not vote but later announced its support.
next the delegates discussed jeffersons draft ol the declaration of independence.
after making some changes delegates approved the document on july 4 1776.
john hancock signed the declaration first.
he remarked that he wrote his name large enough for king george to read without his glasses.
eventually 56 delegates signed the document announcing the birth of the united states.
copies of the declaration of independence were printed and sent out to people in the newly declared independent states.
george washington had the declaration read to his troops in new york city on july 9.
in worcester massachusetts a public reading of the declaration of independence led to repeated cheers firing of musketry and cannon bonfires and other demonstrations of joy the declaration of independence the declaration has four major sections.
the preamble or introduction states that people who wish to form a new country should explain their reasons for doing so.
the next two sections of the declaration list the rights that the colonists believed they should have and their complaints against great britain.
the final section proclaims the existence of the new nation.
john adams expected the day congress voted on lees resolution for independence to be celebrated as a national academic vocabulary status rank or place as compared to others reading helpdesk tie spirit of independence holiday.
he wrote the second day of july 1776 ought to be solemnized with pomp and parade and illuminations from one end of this continent to the other instead july 4 the date the delegates actually adopted the declaration of independence is celebrated as independence day.
the declaration of independence states what jefferson and many americans thought were universal principles that is principles that apply to all people in all situations.
it begins by describing what had long been viewed as basic english rights primary source m we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable not to be denied rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness declaration of independence 1776 the declaration states that government exists to protect these rights.
if government fails it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it and to institute new government the document goes on to list grievances against the king and parliament.
these include cutting off our trade with all parts of the world and imposing taxes on us without our consent americans had petitioned for redress of these grievances.
the british had ignored or rejected these petitions.
finally the declaration announces americas new status stay tuhs.
pledging to each other our lives our fortunes and our sacred honor the americans declared themselves a new nation.
the struggle for independence the american revolution had begun.
h reading progress check summarizing according to john locke what is the purpose of government.
lesson 4 review review vocabulary 1.
use the term petition in a sentence about the colonists struggles with britain.
use preamble in a sentence that helps explain its meaning.
3oa 3ob answer the guiding questions 3.
describing what were the political contributions of thomas jefferson and richard henry lee.
22b skills practice before you read a section of text use the visuals bold faced terms and headings to make predictions about content.
when you come to these features as you read check to see if your predictions are correct.
foldables study organizer include this lesson s information in your foldable o 0 0 revolution declaration of independence lesson 4 183 4.
explaining what is the significance ofthe year 1776 in the nation s history.
identifying who was chosen to write the first draft of the declaration of independence.
if the government does not protect the basic rights ofthe people it governs what did the declaration say that people have the right to do.
300 persuasive writing who did the most to promote the cause of independence george washington thomas jefferson or thomas paine.
give reasons for your choice.
4b 30d activities directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
o use your oe32i03 to explore the essential questions.
expository writing explain the issues and events leading up to the declaration of independence.
use examples from the chapter to support your answer isc 3od social studies skills identifying bias analyze this poster which was created after the boston massacre.
create an alternative version that describes the event from the british point of view.
write a brief explanation of how your poster differs from the one shown here.
ask what words or images in your poster show bias.
29f 3od americans scab in remembrance the horrid massacre perpetrated in king fttcet.
new england.
on the evening of march the fifth 1770.
when five of your fellow countrymen gray maverick caldwell.
attucks and carr.
lay wallowing in their gore being bvfety and moft inhumanly murdered an i uv xx t thinking like a historian drawing conclusions what three unalienable rights are identified in the declaration of independence.
what happens when one person s actions infringe on another person s unalienable rights.
write your response in a paragraph.
29b 3od visual literacy interpreting images this 1774 cartoon shows patriots pouring tea down the throat of a british tax collector.
what clues help you identify the time period or era of the cartoon.
how do the patriots seem to feel toward the tax collector.
what reaction would a loyalist have on seeing the cartoon.
7 spirit of independence assessment directions write your answers using standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
checking for understanding explain the role that each of the following individuals played during the american revolution.
4b a john adams b benjamin franklin c crispus attucks d king george iii e thomas jefferson f thomas paine review the guiding questions explaining how did women such as mercy otis warren encourage colonists to oppose britain s policies.
4b critical thinking analyzing describe in your own words what no taxation without representation means.
how did the issue of representation contribute to the start of the american revolution.
ia 4a identifying ifgovernment does not protect the basic rights of the people what did the declaration of independence say that people had the right to do.
analyzing why did the tea act anger the colonists.
how did the colonists show their anger.
analyzing what was the stamp act.
how did it contribute to the start of the american revolution.
4a drawing inferences what factors led to the boston tea party.
how did this incident represent an act of civil disobedience.
20c 29b analyzing what part did the intolerable acts play in bringing about the american revolution.
4a explaining why did british troops march on the towns of lexington and concord.
how do these events mark the start of the american revolution.
4 explaining what happened at concord in april 1775 and why was it significant.
4c identifying points of view richard henry lee s resolution called for the colonists to form a separate nation.
why did some members of congress hesitate to declare independence.
ia 29d describing why did the second continental congress draft the declaration of independence.
ia identifying what policies of king george iii did the colonists condemn in the declaration of independence.
identify at least three of their grievances isc making connections read the declaration of natural rights in the declaration of independence.
select what you think is the most important idea and explain in a paragraph how this idea affects your life today.
300 drawing inferences the declaration of independence lists many complaints against king george iii.
one states that the king prevents the colonists from trading with all parts of the world.
why was the opportunity to trade voluntarily with other nations important to the colonists.
4b 29b speculating what role did benedict arnold play in the battle of fort ticonderoga.
why do you think he later became a traitor to the patriot cause.
290 interpreting why do you think the poet ralph waldo emerson described the americans at lexington and concord as having fired the shot heard round the world.
drawing conclusions what was the olive branch petition.
how did king george react to it.
did his reaction move the colonists farther away from or closer to declaring independence.
29b evaluating sources based on language many selections are written with a specific audience in mind.
review the writings of thomas paine and charles inglis in the chapter feature.
what are the authors motives.
are they writing for a specific audience king george and parliament.
patriots loyalists or others.
29c i j i need extra help.
ifyou ve missed question o 0 review lesson 1 2 3 4 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 4 1 4 2 4 4 3 3 4 3 185.
assessment continued dbq short response british writer samuel johnson said in his 1775 pamphlet taxation no tyranny.
primary source he who goes voluntarily to america cannot complain of losing what he leaves in europe by his own choice he has left a country wheie he had a vote and little property for another where he has great property hut no cote.
the works of samuel johnson speculating how might colonists respond to johnson s statement.
290 interpreting what complaint does johnson s statement appear to address.
4a extended response descriptive writing it is 1774 and you are visiting the colonies from a country other than great britain.
in a letter to a friend who lives in your home country write about the boston tea party and the british response.
describe the mood of the colonists and predict what will happen next.
are the colonists angry or fearful.
is armed conflict sure to come.
20c 2 d jod standardized test practice analyzing documents dbq drawing conclusions according to the map the battles at lexington and concord were fought 29b 29c a three days apart.
b at the same location.
c on the same day.
d in new york.
identifying based on the map who traveled in a southeasterly direction to the battle at concord.
29c f loyalists g british troops h colonial messengers i colonial troops need extra help.
if you ve missed question review lesson 1 1 3 3 3 186 the spirit of independence the declaration of independence in congress july 4 1776.
the unanimous declaration of the thirteen united states of america preamble when in the course of human events it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another and to assume among the powers of the earth the separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and of nature s god entitle them a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
declaration of natural rights we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it and to institute new government laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness.
prudence indeed will dictate that governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes and accordingly all experience hath shown that mankind are more disposed to suffer while evils are sufferable than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed.
but when a long train of abuses and usurpations pursuing invariably the same object evinces a design to reduce them under absolute despotism it is their right it is their duty to throw off such government and to provide new guards for their future security.
list of grievances such has been the patient sufferance of these colonies and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former systems of government.
the history of the present king of great britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over these states.
to prove this let facts be submitted to a candid world.
words are spelled as originally written.
the preamble the declaration of independence has four parts.
the preamble explains why the continental congress drew up the declaration.
natural rights the second part the declaration of natural rights lists the rights of the citizens.
it goes on to explain that in a republic people form a government to protect their rights.
impel force endowed provided usurpations unjust uses of power despotism unlimited power list of grievances the third part of the declaration lists the colonists complaints against the british government.
notice that king george iii is singled out for blame.
the declaration of independence 187 relinquish give up inestimable priceless he has refused his assent to laws the most wholesome and necessary for the public good.
he has forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing importance unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be obtained and when so suspended he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
he has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of people unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the legislature a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only.
he has called together legislative bodies at places unusual uncomfortable and distant from the depository of their public records for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.
he has dissolved representative houses repeatedly for opposing with manly firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.
he has refused for a long time after such dissolutions to cause others to be elected whereby the legislative powers incapable of annihilation have returned to the people at large for their exercise the state remaining in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without and convulsions within.
he has endeavoured to prevent the population of these states for that purpose obstructing the laws for naturalization of foreigners refusing to pass others to encourage their migrations hither and raising the conditions of new appropriations of lands.
he has obstructed the administration of justice by refusing his assent to laws for establishing judiciary powers.
he has made judges dependent on his will alone for the tenure of their offices and the amount and payment of their salaries.
he has erected a multitude of new offices and sent hither swarms of officers to harass our people and eat out their he has kept among us in times of peace standing armies without the consent of our legislature.
he has affected to render the military independent of and superior to the civil power.
he has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution and unacknowledged by our laws giving his assent to their acts of pretended legislation for quartering large bodies of troops among us for protecting them by a mock trial from punishment for any murders which they should commit on the inhabitants of these states for cutting off our trade with all parts ofthe world for imposing taxes on us without our consent for depriving us in many cases of the benefits of trial by jury for transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offences for abolishing the free system of english laws in a neighbouring province establishing therein an arbitrary government and enlarging its boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these colonies for taking away our charters abolishing our most valuable laws and altering fundamentally the forms of our governments for suspending our own legislature and declaring themselves invested with power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
he has abdicated government here by declaring us out of his protection and waging war against us.
he has plundered our seas ravaged our coasts burnt our towns and destroyed the lives of our people.
he is at this time transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to compleat the works of death desolation and tyranny already begun with circumstances of cruelty perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.
he has constrained our fellow citizens taken captive on the high seas to bear arms against their country to become the executioners of their friends and brethren or to fall themselves by their hands.
he has excited domestic insurrections amongst us and has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless indian savages whose known rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages sexes and conditions.
in every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in the most humble terms our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated injury.
a prince whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a tyrant is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
nor have we been wanting in attention to our british brethren.
we have warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us.
we have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here.
we have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these usurpations which would inevitably interrupt our connections and correspondence.
they too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity.
render make abdicated given up perfidy violation of trust insurrections rebellions petitioned for redress asked formally for a correction of wrongs unwarrantable jurisdiction unjustified authority consanguinity originating from the same ancestor the declaration of independence 189 resolution of independence the final section declares that the colonies are free and independent states with the full power to make war to form alliances and to trade with other countries.
rectitude rightness we must therefore acquiesce in the necessity which denounces our separation and hold them as we hold the rest of mankind enemies in war in peace friends.
resolution of independence by the united states j we therefore the representatives of the united states of j america in general congress assembled appealing to the supreme judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions do in the name and by authority of the good people of these colonies solemnly publish and declare that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states that they are absolved from all allegiance to the british crown and that all political connection between them and the state of great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved and that as free and independent states they have full power to levy war conclude peace contract alliances establish commerce and to do all other acts and things which independent states may of right do.
and for the support of this declaration with a firm reliance on the protection of divine providence we mutually pledge to each other our lives our fortunes and our sacred honor.
signers of the declaration the signers as representatives of the american people declared the colonies independent from great britain.
most members signed the document on august 2 1776.
john hancock presiden t fro m massachusetts georgia button gwinnett lyman hall george walton north carolina william hooper joseph hewes john penn south carolina edward rutledge thomas heyward jr thomas lynch jr arthur middleton maryland samuel chase william paca thomas stone charles carroll of carrollton virginia george wythe richard henry lee thomas jefferson benjamin harrison thomas nelson jr francis lightfoot lee carter braxton pennsylvania robert morris benjamin rush benjamin franklin john morton george clymer james smith george taylor james wilson george ross delaware caesar rodney george read thomas mckean new york william floyd philip livingston francis lewis lewis morris new jersey richard stockton john witherspoon francis hopkinton john hart abraham clark new hampshire josiah bartlett william whipple matthew thornton massachusetts samuel adams john adams robert treat paine elbridge gerry rhode island stephen hopkins william ellery connecticut samuel huntington william williams oliver wolcott roger sherman 190 the declaration of independence the american revolution 1776 1783 networks there s more online about the challenges facing americans during the revolutionary war era.
chapter 7 lesson 1 the war for independence lesson 2 the war continues lesson 3 battlegrounds shift lesson 4 the final years the story matters.
it is december 25 1776.
general george washington is preparing to lead 2 400 troops across the delaware river to launch a surprise attack on the british troops stationed in trenton.
the river is filled with huge chunks of ice.
the weather is terrible and hurricane force winds pound at washington s troops.
after crossing the delaware river general washington and his troops will have to march 9 miles 14 km to meet their enemy.
the young united states is in desperate need of some battlefield success in its war against the british.
go to the foldables library in the back of your book to make a foldable that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
the american revolution q beginning 1776 1777 middle 1770 1779 ending 1780 1783 general george washington led the continental army in the war for independence.
samuel king the bridgeman art library getty images samuel king the bridgeman art library getty images 191 assessment continued in 1541 the spanish priest bartolome de las casas wrote primary source the pattern established at the outset has remained unchanged to this day and the spaniards still do nothing save tear the natives to shreds murder them and inflict upon them untold misery suffering and distress tormenting and persecuting them mercilessly.
a short account of the destruction of the indies by bartolome de las casas analyzing what does this passage suggest about spanish attitudes toward the native americans they encountered.
290 identifying bias why do you suppose the spanish treated the native americans the way las casas describes.
29f extended response j persuasive writing imagine you are a friend of christopher columbus.
he is frustrated by his failure to fund a voyage to find a water route around the world to asia.
columbus asks you to write a letter to king ferdinand and queen isabella of spain.
in the letter explain why it is important for columbus to make this voyage.
2a 29d 3od standardized test practice dbq analyzing documents identifying according to the map where is st augustine located.
new spain b.
new granada c peru d rio de la plata identifying spanish settlements in north america include f lima.
h santiago.
i santa fe.
need extra help.
if you ve missed question review lesson 3 3 2 3 3 106 exploring the americas colonial america 1587 1770 networks there s more online about the people and events of early colonial america.
9sb sential questions how does geography influence the way people live.
do boh ideas change the way people live.
lesson 1 roanoke and jamestown lesson 2 the new england colonies lesson 3 the middle colonies lesson 4 the southern colonies the story matters she is born matoaka daughter of the chief of the powhatan people.
yet she is such a fun loving child that she is called pocahontas or playful one.
in 1607 bold pocahontas not yet a teenager befriends some english colonists who settle nearby.
she convinces her father to aid these colonists.
with this help the struggling colonists at jamestown are able to survive.
si goto the foldables library in the back of your book to make a foldable that will help you take notes while reading this chapter.
1585 nevv england colonies 1589 middle colonies 1607 southern colonies j i pocahontas played a key role in the early history of colonial virginia.
w langdon kihn national geographic society corbis 107 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 what were some of the main ideas of the enlightenment.
african americans in the colonial era p 77 what forces contributed to the growth of the african american population of colonial america.
immigration regional economies and inequality p 83 what role did economic forces play in the emergence of distinctive regional cultures in eighteenthcentury america.
war and the contest over empire p 87 how did the french and indian war transform the map of north america.
life in the seventeenth century american colonies even for the wealthiest was crude and primitive.
beginning in the eighteenth century however a more cosmopolitan and refined culture began to emerge.
prosperous colonists sought out the latest british and european consumer goods such as finely woven turkish or english carpets tea sets and pattern books of english architectural and furniture styles.
captain archibald macpheadris a fur trader in portsmouth new hampshire built an elegant new house in 1716 complete with beautifully executed wall murals signifying his wealth and refinement.
one of the most striking murals depicted two mohawk indian chiefs.
the unknown painter copied these images from an engraving of a group of indians who had traveled to london to meet with queen anne r 1703 1714.
the engraver and the painter included authentic elements such as the tomahawk wielded by the indian on the right.
yet the image of the indians also reflected the conventions of european painting the position of the mohawk indian kings hands at their hip resembled a common aristocratic pose found in english portraits from this period.
books newspapers and letters all were part of the expanding commerce of the atlantic world this economy included a lively exchange of ideas on a wide array of subjects including architecture fashion politics religion science and philosophy.
one highly influential set of ideas was associated with the enlightenment and its ideals of reason and social progress.
these ideas fostered new social experiments such as the founding of the colony of georgia.
religious ideas also crossed the atlantic.
the english evangelical minister george whitefield crisscrossed the colonies from new hampshire to georgia.
his tour helped spread the ideas of the religious revival movement known as the great awakening.
enlightenment ideals of liberty human dignity and progress and new religious ideas led some americans to question the institution of slavery despite its growing importance to the colonial economy.
the stark contrast between the wealthy planters and wretchedly housed slaves was not the only divide in american life.
as the overall wealth of the colonies increased so did the disparity between the wealthy and the poor.
land itself became scarce by the mid eighteenth century.
expansion westward was hampered by the appalachian mountains and the french and a host of indian tribes controlled the rich lands of what is now americas midwest.
ultimately the balance of power in north america was decided by the french and indian war.
in 1740 i dont remember seeing such a thing as a turkish carpet in the country.
now nothing are so common as turkish or english carpets the whole furniture of the roomes elegant every appearance of opulence john wayles future father in law of thomas jefferson 1766 chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 culture and society in the eighteenth century as trade expanded with britain colonists strove to emulate the culture and sophistication of the mother country.
new and grander houses filled with the latest european style furnishings testified to the growing sophistication of the colonies.
yet while the colonies were striving to become more british they were also developing their own distinctly american political culture and institutions.
a native born elite emerged an american gentry class whose wealth confidence and education inspired them to become leaders in the colonial assemblies.
a distinctive american style of politics had begun to take shape.
the refinement of america at the end of the seventeenth century even the homes of the most prosperous families in colonial america had few imported luxury goods.
the sparse furnishing of the hart room 3 1 now in the metropolitan museum of art in new york city capture the primitive nature of late seventeenth century american homes.
thomas hart a landowner in ipswich massachusetts built his house in 1639 and furnished it in the ensuing decades.
this parlor the best room in the house usually served as both a bedroom and a communal living space.
information from probates a list of goods assembled as part of a will suggests that homeowners furnished even the best parlor rooms sparsely with simple tables and cupboards.
the furnitures simplicity and boxy look reflected prevailing styles and the scarcity of skilled craftsmen in the colonies at the time.
the walls were generally whitewashed with no ornamentation the post and beams used to support the walls and the roof were clearly visible.
colonial culture began to change with the expansion of commerce at the start of the eighteenth century.
america became more 3 1 the hart room metropolitan museum of art the simple whitewashed walls and exposed beams in this prosperous seventeenth century room and the simple boxy style of its furniture were typical of the lack of ornamentation in this era.
define anglicization and give an example of an aspect of colonial life transformed by this process.
fully integrated into the atlantic economy a huge triangle that stretched from scotland to africa to the interior of the british mainland colonies 3 2.
trade in the atlantic world involved a staggering array of goods.
scottish merchants purchased virginia tobacco which was sold throughout europe.
another side of the triangle tied new england merchants to west indian sugar planters.
west indian sugar was distilled into rum by new englanders.
some of this alcohol was traded to indians in the lucrative beaver trade in upstate new york.
these beaver furs were often used in hats and sometimes ended up in london or on the european continent.
by the early eighteenth century expanding trade with the british empire increased the number of wealthy colonists and brought a flood of new luxury goods into affluent american homes.
culture and society in the eighteenth century u g o fa od ctu s r ed acquiring such goods allowed individuals and british families to demonstrate that they were not simple isles provincials they were part of a wider cosmopolitan u re d euro pe world.
rather than eat with simple earthenware u fa c t man goods ceramics as their forebears had the wealthiest n orth americans now aspired to dine on fine porcelain a me r ica s ial imported from england or holland.
refined taste te r a m an w was proof of gentility a term that became synonym ra mous with the attributes associated with wealth and sophistication.
american society underwent a f r i c a atlantic a process of anglicization as colonists emulated english society including its tastes in furniture ocean foods clothing and customs.
sla nothing better captured the rise of gentility and ve s the increasing anglicization of colonial america than the rage for imported tea.
as the consumption of tea increased dramatically between the end s ou th pacific of the seventeenth century and the dawn of the a me r ica ocean eighteenth the rituals of serving tea became more refined and complicated.
serving tea to ones guests became essential.
although tea drinking started among the wealthy it gradually spread to all levels of american society.
by the mid eighteenth cenmany specialized pieces of furniture likely to have 3 2 the triangle trade tury tea drinking had evolved from a luxury to a adorned a prosperous home in the mid eighteenth the atlantic necessity so much so that inmates in the philadelcentury.
the verplanks coldens and other genteel economy can be phia poorhouse demanded that their meager rafamilies would each have owned an imported china visualized as a triangle.
goods from tions include tea.
set and tea table as well.
were sold or the verplank room 3 3 in the metropolitan changes in furnishing provide insights into deeper europe traded in america museum of art contains furniture from the new changes in colonial society.
the rising popularity of or africa.
raw materials from the york city townhouse of samuel verplank and the writing desks and drop leaf bookcases with writing americas were sold country house of cadwallader colden jr in orange surfaces see detail in 3 3 reflected the expansion in europe.
european new york.
in contrast to the simple whitewashed of trade networks in the british empire.
merchants goods were sold or traded for african walls of the seventeenth century hart room the needed to keep better track of a variety of written slaves who were verplank room has painted wood paneling.
the documents as they broadened the range of their then shipped to elegant card table in the verplank room is one of correspondence on business and political matters.
the americas.
3 3 the verplank room metropolitan museum of art the highly specialized furniture reflected the growing wealth of many colonists and the anglicization of colonial culture.
in the inset image of a secretary bookcase note the dropleaf writing surface and cubbyholes that made this piece of furniture well adapted to the needs of merchants.
view the closer look images as history a portrait of colonial aspiration why did new pieces of furniture like drop leaf bookcases become popular in the eighteenth century.
chapter 3 3 4 eliza pinckneys dress silk produced on pinckneys plantation was sent to england to be spun into fine fabric dyed and sewn into a dress that reflected the latest london fashions.
3 5 westover plantation the doorway of byrds mansion was crafted in england and included the latest architectural details.
note the carved pineapple above the door.
growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 an insight into the range of this far flung commerce comes from the extensive correspondence of charleston merchant robert pringle with business associates throughout the atlantic world from lisbon portugal to london and barbados to boston.
the entrepreneurial pringle experimented with a variety of desirable agricultural imports including pistachios seville oranges and olives hoping that they might be produced in the carolinas.
none of these imports took hold but south carolina did provide europe with two important products rice and indigo.
for wealthy colonists nothing was more effective at communicating ones riches and gentility than a formal portrait in the latest english style.
following the conventions of european portraits men and women struck standard aristocratic poses elegant ladies dressed in flowing gowns mimicking the style of their monarch queen anne.
men and even young boys were painted wearing elegant outfits that reflected their wealth status and power.
the portrait of the young henry darnall iii one of the earliest done in the american south testifies to the growing wealth and refinement of the colonial elite see images as history a portrait of colonial aspirations.
eliza lucas pinckney an affluent south carolinian exemplified the new ideal of refined female gentility.
born into a prosperous family of rice planters eliza helped introduce the profitable dye plant indigo into south carolina 1738 1744 which became the colonies second most important export crop in the eighteenth century.
she eagerly consumed british fashions and ideas and aspired to create a lifestyle that a visitor from london would have easily recognized.
she studied french was conversant in the ideas of the english philosopher john locke and participated in the management of her familys plantation.
her social life was equally busy.
she regularly attended teas dances and concerts.
elizas beautiful gold silk dress 3 4 was woven from silk produced on her own plantation.
after the silk was harvested she sent it to england to be dyed and woven into a fabric suitable for a gown that might be worn to the most elegant party in either london or charleston.
for women the new customs of gentility were a mixed blessing.
a wealthy woman might have servants or slaves to help her entertain in a suitable style but it took additional time and effort to supervise these activities.
most women did not enjoy the luxury of additional help and had to handle these new responsibilities themselves.
more english yet more american the exteriors of american houses also underwent a process of anglicization.
english style manor houses such as william byrds westover 1730 1734 3 5 borrowed ideas from english pattern books architectural guidebooks of the latest styles 3 6.
the main entrance of this elegant red brick mansion took guests through an impressive doorway that byrd imported from england.
the model for the door and its frame came from a london design.
the classical columns and the swan shaped broken pediment at the top of the doorframe include a carved pineapple.
this exotic west indian fruit created a sensation among the wealthy on both sides of the atlantic as both a culinary delicacy and a symbol of affluent hospitality.
the pineapple soon became a common architectural motif in the mansions of wealthy americans.
3 6 english pattern book byrd used this picture from an influential london design book when selecting a style for his doorway.
how does did the westover pennsylvania plantation stateillustrate house reflect the the anglicization of the colonies william byrd ii diary an american gentleman 1709 read the document growing wealth of the colonies.
culture and society in the eighteenth century images as history a portrait of colonial aspirations justus engelhardt khns portrait of the young henry darnall iii 1710 reveals how the aspirations of colonists continued to exceed the bounds of the possible.
although the darnalls lived a life of luxury compared with most colonists surrounding themselves with goods that earlier generations of colonists would have envied they did not quite live up to the standards of the typical british aristocrat.
the scene behind darnall is pure fantasy.
an elegant stone balustrade overlooking an elaborate formal garden projects an image of wealth refinement and power.
yet neither the fancy garden nor the stone balcony would have existed anywhere in the colonies at the time.
khns decision to include these imaginary elements in the background reflected the aspirations rather than the realities of life in the colonies.
the picture symbolized the wealth power and gentility that the darnalls sought to achieve not their actual condition.
the work is also the first known painting of an african american in the colonies.
darnalls slave wears a silver yoke around his neck a symbol of his inferior status.
although much younger darnall towers over his slave.
the imaginary garden in the background represents the darnalls desires but this level of grandeur was not yet attainable in the colonies.
the slave silver shackle around his neck is situated below his master and looks up at him adoringly.
the image of the docile slave clearly reflected the slave owners point of view not the slaves.
darnalls elegant suit testifies to his familys wealth and cosmopolitan taste.
henry darnall iii as a child by justus engelhardt khn how is slavery represented in this portrait.
chapter 3 3 7 pennsylvania state house the new pennsylvania state house reflected the anglicization of american tastes and the growing wealth of colonial pennsylvania.
growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 anglicization transformed churches and public architecture as well.
some of the grandest buildings erected in the colonies during the first half of the eighteenth century were public structures such as the pennsylvania state house in philadelphia where pennsylvanias assembly met.
constructed between 1732 and 1756 the state houses twoand half story red brick structure dominated the philadelphia skyline.
built in the palladian style also known as georgian in honor of the british monarch king george i r 1714 1727 the pennsylvania state house captured two seemingly opposing trends in the evolution of american society in the eighteenth century.
its architecture testified to the powerful influence of anglicization.
with its beautiful windows and impressive red brick exterior the state house visibly symbolized the colonists esteem for and knowledge of the latest english architectural styles 3 7.
the actions inside the state house however the debates and votes of the pennsylvania assembly were emblematic of the growing power and assertiveness of an american born colonial elite.
the building was later renamed independence hall reflecting its close association with the signing of the declaration of independence and the drafting of the u s constitution.
what does the design of the pennsylvania state house reveal about colonial society.
strong assemblies and weak governors the pennsylvania state house was a potent visual reminder of the power of the colonial assembly.
the assemblies had become the preeminent political institutions in the colonies.
american ideas about legislative power drew support from seventeenth century english whig ideas that triumphed during englands glorious revolution in 1688 see chapter 2.
several developments in american colonial history helped reinforce the growth of legislative power.
although voting in america remained restricted to adult white male landholders the percentage of such individuals in the colonies was larger than it was in britain.
the larger voting population meant that a higher percentage of americans were politically active than britons.
additionally none of the colonies had anything like an upper house comparable to parliaments house of lords.
the governors councils the closest thing to a colonial upper house had little power.
americas nativeborn elites were not a titled british aristocracy with a distinct legislative body the house of lords to guard their privileges and powers.
ambitious young americans from good families like the young thomas jefferson expected to enter politics by election to the lower house of the colonial assembly not by inheriting a place in an aristocratic upper house.
culture and society in the eighteenth century in part the actions of colonial assemblies filled a void that the structure of the empire had created.
in an age in which a letter could take months to travel from london to the colonies it was imperative that local assemblies have the authority to deal with a host of governmental responsibilities from organizing the militia to providing for the poor.
although colonists had gained the right to legislate on local matters they were also part of the larger british empire.
most colonies had agents who represented their interests in london and lobbied parliament.
apart from these agents the colonies had no actual representation in parliament no member of parliament was elected from the colonies or watched over their interests.
in this regard the american colonies were no worse off than were other british colonies including barbados and jamaica.
even within britain newer cities such as manchester and birmingham had no representation in parliament and at least one town dunwich continued to send two members to parliament even though the town to take a more active role in managing the empire and collecting greater revenues in the 1760s the colonial practices and british theory collided.
royal governors repeatedly complained that the colonial assemblies had exercised authority that did not belong to them and frustrated their plans.
the royal governors dependence on the assemblies for their salaries weakened their position with regard to the legislature.
by controlling the power of the purse colonial assemblies were able to frustrate the plans of the most ambitious royal governors if they wished to collect their salaries the governors dared not anger the assemblies.
colonial assemblies came to act like and think of themselves as mini parliaments with full legislative power over local matters.
in 1728 the massachusetts legislature reminded the governor that it was the undoubted right of all english men.
to raise and dispose of moneys for the publick service of their own free accord without any compulsion my lord cornbury has and dos still make use of an unfortunate custom of dressing himself in womens cloaths and of exposing himself in that garb upon the ramparts to the view of the public in that dress he draws a world of spectators about him and consequently as many censures letter spreading rumors of lord cornburys cross dressing 1709 had literally crumbled into the north sea.
to cast their votes legal residents of dunwich had to row out to the location of the former town hall which was submerged.
according to traditional whig political theory members of parliament were expected to represent the whole nation not a particular locality.
rather than speak for any local interest representatives were supposed to act in the larger public good.
by the 1760s the differences between american and british practices had become so great that they prompted a new theoretical defense.
thus champions of the traditional british practice argued that all britons including the colonists had virtual representation in parliament even if they had no actual representatives to guard their interests.
as long as parliament did not meddle much in colonial affairs a policy of salutary neglect this theory caused few problems.
when parliament began colonial politics could be nasty and most royal governors lacked the power to tame their legislatures.
no governor was more ineffective and despised than lord cornbury royal governor of new york and new jersey the two colonies shared the same royal governor until 1738.
enemies of cornbury accused him of parading around the ramparts of new yorks forts in womens clothing and used these rumors to undermine his authority a strategy that was extremely effective.
sir danvers osborne another new york governor became so despondent over dealings with the colonial assembly that he hanged himself.
to avoid the fate of cornbury or osborne savvy royal governors understood the necessity of making strategic alliances with members of the assembly.
the give and take between the governors and the assembly defined colonial politics for much of the eighteenth century.
why were colonial governors so weak.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 enlightenment and awakenings 3 8 the gaols committee of the house of commons in william hogarths painting members of parliament involved in prison reform including james oglethorpe second from the left examine a prisoner.
his tattered clothes and shackles reveal the inhumanity of britains prisons.
by mid century a british traveler to philadelphia the largest city in america would have been impressed by the fine houses elegant coaches and other signs of americas refinement and gentility.
the visitor would also have been struck by the signs of enlightenment in the city a fine lending library the american philosophical society and a new college.
the city hosted scientists of international renown such as benjamin franklin the man who had tamed lightning.
a visitor to the colonies might also have encountered the great evangelist george whitefield on one of his tours.
even if one missed hearing the peddler in divinity one could read about his exploits in the expanding press.
the religious revival movement known as the great awakening attacked traditional styles of worship in favor of a more emotional style of devotion.
communities across america were divided into those who favored the new style of religion and those opposed to it.
how did georgia reflect enlightenment ideals.
enlightenment and awakenings georgias utopian experiment one of the most ambitious enlightenment endeavors was the new colony of georgia founded as an experiment to reform criminals and the poor by transplanting them from england to a more wholesome environment in america.
james oglethorpe a spokesman in parliament for humanitarian causes secured parliamentary support for his plan to use colonization as an alternative to imprisonment.
georgia named for king george ii r 1727 1760 was strategically located as a buffer between the carolinas and spanish florida.
life in british prisons in the eighteenth century was harsh.
at least half of the prisoners were debtors whose crime was failing to pay their bills.
oglethorpe became a leading champion for prison reform and was appointed to a parliamentary committee charged with investigating the nations jails.
the committees work attracted the interest of artist and social critic william hogarth.
in this painting of oglethorpes committee hogarth presents a stark contrast between the elegantly dressed members of parliament and a prisoner in rags who was clamped in irons a painful form of physical restraint commonly used in british prisons 3 8.
for oglethorpe removing prisoners from debtors prison and sending them to a colony in america meshed perfectly with his vision for dealing with crime and poverty in britain.
in america the poor would have a fresh opportunity to earn a living and avoid the impoverishment they faced in england.
oglethorpes vision for georgia reflected the views of enlightenment thinkers such as john locke who rejected the notion that humans were born depraved and could not be rehabilitated if placed in a healthier environment.
the 1732 charter granted oglethorpe and the trustees of the colony of georgia enormous power.
to prevent the colony from becoming just another slave society in which a few enjoyed great wealth and the majority were poor the trustees banned slavery.
to promote sobriety the trustees also prohibited the importation of rum.
oglethorpe and the trustees soon confronted the same types of problems that earlier proprietary colonies had experienced see chapter 2.
settlers demanded a greater say in their affairs including the right to import slaves.
by 1738 the colony had abandoned much of its original vision including its ban on importing both slaves and rum.
having begun as something of a utopian experiment georgia became another slave society in the lower south.
although enlightenment ideals helped shape the early history of georgia defense was never far from oglethorpes mind.
his plan for the city of savannah drew on the ideals of renaissance city planning that had inspired the design of many other towns in the americas see chapter 1.
reflecting the citys position on the frontier of spanish america the plan looked like a design for a military encampment a model stretching back to ancient rome 3 9.
oglethorpe had dreamed of using georgia as the launching point for the conquest of spanish america but his attack on the spanish town of st augustine in florida in 1740 failed.
two years later when the spanish retaliated oglethorpe repelled them.
georgia did not become a staging ground to root out the spanish but it was an effective barrier protecting the colonies from spanish attack.
american champions of the enlightenment the enlightenment championed the work of sir isaac newton the great english scientist and mathematician who explored the laws of motion optics and gravity.
the newtonian universe was radically different from the world that had produced the salem witchcraft accusations see chapter 2.
rather than looking primarily to the invisible world of the supernatural newtonianism view the closer look competing visions slavery and georgia 3 9 savannah georgia the layout of savannah resembled a roman military garrison reflecting its strategic importance as a frontier outpost protecting the british colonies from spanish america.
military function didof georgia serve.
what what was the newtonian view the universe.
chapter 3 3 10 benjamin franklin and electricity this contemporary painting of franklin links him with his work on electricity.
in the background lightning destroys one building while another to which franklins lightning rod is attached survives a strike.
growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 focused on the visible world of nature which functioned according to the rules discerned by observation and interpreted by reason.
newtonianism was not antithetical to religion but the god of the newtonian universe was different from the traditional christian notion of god as a patriarch or king.
in the newtonian vision god was the great clockmaker who fashioned the universe to run according to predictable natural laws.
in contrast to newtons grand theorizing the enlightenment in america took a distinctly practical approach.
no figure in america more closely approximated this ideal than benjamin franklin.
printer scientist reformer and statesman franklin became a symbol of the american enlightenment on both sides of the atlantic.
his international fame derived from his scientific experiments with lightning and electricity which he published in 1751.
franklin coined the terms positive and negative to describe the nature of how does this portrait of franklin reflect his reputation as a champion of the enlightenment.
electrical current and theorized the possibility of creating a battery to store an electrical charge.
franklin also demonstrated that lightning was a form of electrical discharge.
this insight led the practical minded franklin to develop the lightning rod.
the device was designed to attract lightning and then conduct the current safely away from a building.
american homes were generally built of wood a plentiful material in most parts of the colonies that was extremely susceptible to damage by lightning.
in a tribute to franklin john adams wrote nothing perhaps that ever occurred upon this earth was so well calculated to give any man an extensive and universal celebrity as the discovery of.
lightning rods franklins close association with electricity in general and the lightning rod in particular was captured in this 1762 painting 3 10 which depicts franklin at his desk with a lightning storm raging in the background and a lightning rod prominently positioned on a building visible through a window.
franklin helped found the american philosophical society 1743 a learned society committed to the advancement of knowledge the college of philadelphia 1751 later the university of pennsylvania and the library company a private lending library.
in addition to these institutions that reflected the enlightenments emphasis on education and the spread of knowledge franklin helped found organizations dedicated to improving the lives of philadelphians including a fire company and the first public hospital in the colonies.
although franklin owned slaves as did many in philadelphia he eventually came to regard slavery as a great evil and vigorously opposed it.
awakening revivalism and american society from 1730 to 1770 the colonies experienced a series of religious revivals that historians group together as the great awakening.
the resulting religious conflict divided families split churches and fragmented communities forever altering the religious landscape of colonial america.
one of the early leaders of the revival movement gilbert tennent a new jersey minister attacked ministers for preaching an empty dead form of religion only by accepting the reality of sin and opening ones heart to grace could one hope to achieve salvation.
tennent also took aim read the document profiles benjamin franklin enlightenment and awakenings at americas expanding consumer society and the covetousness that society had encouraged.
the leading intellectual champion of the awakening was new england minister jonathan edwards who captured the spirit of this movement when he wrote that our people do not so much need to have their heads filled as much as have their hearts touched edwardss fiery sermon sinners in the hands of an angry god 1741 offered his parishioners a vision of the eternal fires of hell that awaited the unconverted.
to shake his parishioners out of their complacency and remind them of the necessity of grace for salvation edwards compared their fate to that of a spider dangling above the pit of eternal damnation with only gods mercy preventing them from falling in.
in 1757 edwards became the president of the college of new jersey which became princeton university one of several new colleges founded by supporters of the awakening to train a new generation of ministers.
princeton allied to the presbyterian church also had close ties to scottish universities that were leading centers of enlightenment thought.
rhode island college brown university was founded by the baptists in 1764 queens college later rutgers by the dutch reformed church in 1766.
dartmouth college was founded by the congregationalist eleazar wheelock in 1769 originally as an indian mission school.
edwardss account of his own massachusetts revival inspired the english anglican minister george whitefield to take his evangelical crusade to the colonies.
whitefields 1739 1740 tour was americas first genuinely inter colonial event.
the energetic english preacher traversed most of the eastern seaboard from new hampshire to georgia.
his tour took advantage of improved roads and the expansion of inter colonial shipping routes.
he traveled the same routes as the merchants who hawked the latest english wares and his gift for selling the gospel prompted one critic to describe him and other evangelical ministers as peddlers in divinity whitefield attracted such large crowds that much of his preaching was outdoors because few churches were big enough to hold his audience.
the great awakening changed american society.
the evangelical methods employed by gifted preachers implicitly challenged the hierarchical assumptions of colonial society about gender race and social status.
individuals exercised greater choice many choosing to leave their own congregations and find one that better suited their spiritual needs.
for some the awakening provided opportunities to step forward as lay preachers.
for the first time in american religious history ordinary people were given a significant public voice.
for those whose voices were seldom heard in public women blacks artisans or poor folk the opportunity to testify about their spiritual life often to mixed crowds that included people like themselves or even their social betters challenged traditional ideas about hierarchy.
mary cooper a resident of long island noted in her diary that she heard an astonishing assortment of individuals preach including a quaker woman a black man and even two indian preachers.
by giving a voice to many groups previously excluded from traditional preaching the great awakening contributed to the growth of a more democratic culture.
the god that holds you over the pit of hell much as one holds a spider or some loathsome insect over the fire abhors you and is dreadfully provoked his wrath towards you burns like fire he looks upon you as worthy of nothing else but to be cast into the fire jonathan edwards 1741 in a few cases women touched by the spirit began preaching an action that prompted their own ministers to denounce them for flouting the accepted roles assigned to women in colonial society.
testifying to ones religious experiences was one thing but assuming the role of preacher a role traditionally reserved for men was simply too radical.
after bathsheba kingsley stole a horse and rode from community to community preaching the gospel jonathan edwards denounced her for perverting the spirit of revival.
edwards wed to traditional ideas about womens roles was horrified that kingsley interpreted the awakenings message as an invitation to become a gospel preacher.
not all ministers approved of the ideas and methods of the revivalist preachers.
opponents of the revival dubbed old lights attacked the revivalists or new lights for their excessive emotionalism.
old light ministers ridiculed the revivalists for telling their congregants that they were damned.
damned rather than read the document benjamin franklin on george whitefield what aspects of the great awakening encouraged democratization.
chapter 3 3 11 lamentation moravian painting of christ depictions of the blood of the savior in images such as this made them highly effective tools for moravian missionaries.
here the artist highlights physical pain and stoic endurance two traits that appealed strongly to american indian men.
growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 adopt the new more emotional style old lights continued to favor sermons based on learned explications of biblical texts.
in response to this backlash against the awakening gilbert tennent accused his opponents of lacking the courage or honesty to thrust the nail of terror into sleeping souls one new light preacher james davenport took the emphasis on emotionalism to an extreme urging that books and sermons written by old light ministers be burned.
as congregations divided between new lights and old lights many communities were pulled apart.
indian revivals the great awakening also spilled over into indian country.
indians won over by evangelical efforts often served as cultural mediators between their communities and the colonists.
the moravians german speaking evangelical protestants were particularly effective at evangelizing among indian tribes.
in 1740 many german moravians migrated to pennsylvania where they settled in a town they named bethlehem.
moravians also established communities in the carolinas and georgia.
unlike the calvinist faith of many english colonists which shunned the use of images in their churches the moravians were lutherans and why was moravian art so helpful to missionaries interested in converting american indians.
embraced art as a means of promoting the gospels see chapters 1 and 2.
in particular moravians focused on the redemptive power of christs suffering as the foundation for religious salvation.
their most renowned artist in america john valentine haidt was well schooled in european styles of religious painting and used these techniques to translate the moravians christian vision into visually rich images 3 11.
the idea of christs suffering resonated with indian converts and the moravians displayed images of the crucifixion to bring the gospel to the indians.
after viewing such pictures in the home of a moravian missionary two visiting indians commented on how many wounds he has how much blood flows forth for american indians moravian religious imagery of jesus suggested a brave spiritual warrior an ideal that resonated in the minds of young male indians whose conception of masculinity was based on a martial ideal of physical strength bravery and the endurance of pain and suffering.
although the great awakening touched a small but influential group of indians a different type of native religious renewal movement had an even greater impact on american indians.
as early as 1737 reports began filtering back from indian country the broad swath of territory from western pennsylvania to french controlled land in illinois that indian religious leaders were preaching the need for a return to traditional ways and a complete separation from colonists.
the alcohol that europeans traded with indians had contributed to rising levels of alcoholism among indians.
in the 1760s the delaware indian prophet neolin championed the revival of traditional beliefs and the rejection of european influences.
he urged his people to learn to live without any trade or connections with white people in place of dependency and trade he counseled clothing and supporting themselves as their forefathers did neolin and other prophets of indian revitalization traveled as itinerants through indian territory preaching their message.
indian revivalists attacked indian involvement with and dependence on the world of trade and commerce with europeans.
african americans in the colonial era african americans in the colonial era by the eighteenth century racial slavery had become a central feature of the atlantic world with firm roots in british north america.
the greatest demand for slaves came from the sugar producing regions of brazil and the caribbean.
an additional 300 000 slaves arrived in the british mainland colonies with the greatest demand for their labor in the upper and lower south.
the highest proportion of slaves lived in the lower south where africans actually outnumbered europeans.
slavery in british north america was not an exclusively southern phenomenon.
slaves were an important part of urban life in new york philadelphia and boston.
slavery was also significant in the economies of the mid atlantic and new england.
slavery was a brutal and exploitative labor system but the experience of individual slaves varied greatly from region to region.
regardless of where they were and under what circumstances they lived slaves found ways to resist their masters domination.
occasionally they turned to violent resistance but more often they used economic sabotage pretending sickness destroying tools mutilating livestock or running away to undermine the profitability of slavery.
perhaps even more significant were the slaves attempts to assert their humanity and create lives beyond the reach of the masters dominion.
establishing families despite the ever present threat of being torn from ones loved ones and sold building a viable community and practicing their own religion gave slaves the cultural resources to survive and denied their masters complete control over their lives.
the atlantic slave trade slaves had been traded internally within africa for centuries indeed it took hundreds of years for the atlantic slave trade to surpass the internal african slave trade.
the demand for agricultural labor in the atlantic world created a strong market for african slaves and led to a dramatic increase in the transatlantic slave trade in the late 1600s.
the leading participants in the international slave trade in the seventeenth century had been spain portugal and holland but by the eighteenth century britain had become the preeminent slave trading nation in the atlantic world.
as the graphs and figures presented in envisioning evidence the eighteenth century atlantic slave trade show most slaves in the atlantic trade ended up in one of the sugar colonies.
portuguese sugar production was centered in brazil while dutch french and british sugar production was centered in the caribbean.
less than 10 percent of the slaves imported from africa were transported to the american colonies but the significance of slavery to the british mainland american colonies was enormous.
the brutality of slavery began far from the atlantic coast of africa in the inland regions where slave catchers acquired most slaves.
the captive slaves were then bound by ropes or wooden yokes and marched to the coast where they were housed in pens.
to prevent communication among captives and reduce the chances of slaves organizing themselves to escape or challenge their captors the slave catchers often separated individuals from the same ethnic or language groups.
they also routinely separated family the stench of the hold.
became pestilential.
the closeness of the place and the heat of the climate added to the number in the ship which was so crowded that each had scarcely room to turn himself almost suffocated us olaudah equiano the life of olaudah equiano london 1789 which regions of the atlantic world imported the greatest number of slaves.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 envisioning evidence the eighteenth century atlantic slave trade in the eighteenth century the slave trade was the economic cornerstone of the atlantic economy.
it supplied indispensable labor necessary to produce plantation cash crops such as sugar and tobacco in the new world and transporting slaves provided huge profits for those engaged in the brutal forced migration of africans to the americas.
the data presented in this map and the accompanying graph bring into focus an important fact about the atlantic slave trade most of the slaves transported to the americas ended up in the sugar islands of the caribbean or in brazil.
less than 10 percent of the slaves went to british north america.
the experience of the middle passage was horrific a fact underscored by the mortality rates depicted in the pie chart above.
where did most slaves end up and how high were mortality rates during the middle passage.
14 86 e urop e mortality rates for atlantic slave trade 1701 1800 n o rt h amer i ca percent of slaves who died en route to the americas 14 percent of slaves who disembarked in the americas 86 ca a f r i c a ribbean brazil west central africa south am e rica pac i fi c at l ant i c ocean o c ean destinations of slaves imported to the new world 1701 1800 68 608 danish caribbean dutch americas 295 215 british north america 295 482 french caribbean 995 133 spanish america 145 533 portuguese brazil 1 989 017 british caribbean 1 813 323 500 000 1 000 000 1 500 000 2 000 000 number of slaves source adapted from estimates in voyages the trans atlantic slave trade database available at which european nations were most heavily involved in the international slave trade.
view the closer look african slave trade 1451 1870 african americans in the colonial era members.
slaves might remain housed in these inhumane conditions for months before being boarded on slave ships bound for the americas.
the voyage across the atlantic from africa to the americas known as the middle passage was horrific.
the cramped conditions on these voyages depicted in this antislavery petition barely convey the ordeal 3 12.
typically their captors forced the slaves to remain in shackles during the voyage.
slaves endured meager rations and unsanitary conditions a situation that led those who preferred death to such a life of misery to drown themselves.
mortality rates during the middle passage exceeded 10 percent.
in the seventeenth century most slaves bound for the british mainland colonies in america came first to the caribbean where they were seasoned a process of physical and psychological adjustment to the rigors of slavery.
afterward they would make the final leg of the voyage to the american mainland.
this pattern changed in the eighteenth century when the demand for slave labor increased dramatically and many traders chose to bypass the seasoning process.
thus most slaves arriving in british north america in the eighteenth century were saltwater slaves coming directly from africa.
most slaves arrived at sullivans island in charleston harbor leading scholars to describe it as black americas ellis island page 500.
after being unloaded and quarantined on sullivans island slaves were typically transported for sale in the slave markets of the major ports and cities.
this was often the last time family members would see each other.
after being subjected to a humiliating inspection similar to that used by livestock buyers slaves were auctioned off to their new masters.
even if family members had managed to remain together they now faced permanent separation from their loved ones.
thus the experience of the auction block further traumatized slaves who had already suffered a multitude of horrors on their perilous journey from africa to america.
southern slavery the two regional subcultures in the colonial south the lower and upper south had distinctive slave labor systems and cultures.
slavery in the lower south parts of the carolina and georgia low country had evolved as the region evolved from a frontier settlement to an integrated part of the atlantic slave economy.
in the upper south slavery had gradually replaced indentured servitude p 83 as the main source of labor by 1700.
3 12 tight packing this abolitionist depiction of tight packing shows the cramped conditions on slave ships which maximized the number of bodies carried with no concern for the health of the slaves transported.
the lower south began as a colony of a colony.
carolina was first conceived as a base for supplying food to the caribbean sugar islands.
the colony also traded captured indian slaves and deer hides.
in the 1690s rice was introduced into this region and eventually became its most profitable export.
many slaves had learned to cultivate rice in africa and their knowledge contributed to the increase in rice production from 10 000 pounds in 1698 to 20 million pounds in 1730.
in the 1740s another important cash crop indigo was introduced into the region.
by the 1730s when the carolinas had been divided into north and south carolina two thirds of the regions population were african slaves.
most blacks worked under a task system that gave them considerable autonomy over their work.
once their tasks were completed slaves might use the remaining time to hunt fish or tend their own gardens to supplement their meager diets.
what was tight packing.
chapter 3 3 13 slave quarters mulberry plantation south carolina the conical design of these slave cabins including their thatched roofs drew on west african architectural influences.
growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 the swampy regions of the carolina low country were fertile breeding grounds for tropical diseases including malaria.
africans had developed partial immunity to this disease but whites of european descent were extremely susceptible.
given the unhealthy environment of the coastal lowlands wealthy planters preferred to spend much of the year at their charleston homes.
the many white absentees and the continuous influx of slaves from africa helped blacks living in this region preserve aspects of their african heritage despite the deprivations of slave life.
the conical shaped thatched roofed huts in the slave quarters on mulberry plantation 3 13 south carolina reflect the influence of african architectural styles.
slavery in the upper south the chesapeake region differed markedly from its practice in the low country carolinas.
while the task system worked for rice cultivation growing tobacco the dominant crop in the chesapeake demanded more oversight.
the plants were easily damaged if not properly tended so planters preferred to organize their slaves into gangs that worked together under the watchful eye of a white overseer or a black slave driver chosen by the master.
slaves in the chesapeake were a minority and they lived on plantations typically smaller than those in the lower south.
although slaves in this region preserved elements of traditional african culture their smaller numbers and wider distribution made it more difficult to preserve their african cultural heritage.
what were the main differences between the task system and the gang system of labor.
northern slavery and free blacks although slavery was less vital to the colonial economy outside of the south it was important in some areas.
for example in parts of new york and new jersey the slave population might range from 15 to 30 percent.
typically slaves in the rural north worked as field hands on small family farms.
there were also many urban slaves in the north who generally worked as domestics in wealthier homes.
in seaports slaves worked in maritime occupations.
in pennsylvania slaves were so essential to iron manufacturing that their masters petitioned the assembly to lower tariffs on slave imports so that they could continue to produce iron.
a small community of free blacks emerged and settled in northern cities such as philadelphia new york and boston.
slaves gained their freedom by several means.
some were freed by masters who recognized the evil of slavery.
one of the earliest groups to condemn slavery was the quakers.
other slaves particularly those who had learned a skill such as carpentry might be able to strike a bargain with their owners and gain the right to work for themselves part time eventually saving enough money to buy their freedom.
although a few freed slaves became farmers many ended up in one of the thriving seaports where economic opportunities were greater.
urban settings also provided african americans in the north with many cultural opportunities.
in both new york city and albany the african american communities adapted the dutch religious holiday of pentecost and turned it into a carnivallike festival they named pinkster the holiday was presided over by an african american figure king charles who acted as the political leader of african americans in the colonial era his community during the holiday.
during pinkster african americans participated in music dancing and festive meals they also paraded as part of their african different nations an explicit demonstration of their african roots.
the great awakening helped spread christianity to slaves across america and among free blacks in the north.
the moravians were particularly aggressive in preaching the gospel to slaves in north carolina.
jonathan edwards himself a slave owner reported that slaves in his own community had embraced the revival.
evangelical groups such as the methodists encouraged free blacks to attend their revival meetings.
the new more emotional style favored by so many awakening preachers appealed to african americans because it more closely resembled traditional african styles of religious practice.
slave resistance and rebellion the growth of slavery in the late 1600s led colonial governments to ensure that african slaves remained subservient to their white masters see chapter 2.
slave codes gave masters almost unlimited authority over their slaves.
the codes also legally defined as slaves children born to slave mothers even when fathered by free whites.
although deprived of any legal means to protect themselves slaves developed strategies for coping with the horrors of slavery and escaping the domination of their masters.
stealing shirking responsibility feigning illness or breaking tools all of these actions deliberately slowed the pace of their work and provided temporary relief.
some slaves ran away simply hiding in the woods seeking refuge with a family on nearby plantations in the slave quarters.
avoiding the white patrols that were always on the lookout for runaways made this a risky option.
in those parts of the south closer to indian country or spanish territory including parts of the carolinas and georgia slaves might try to find refuge in a territory beyond the control of the english colonists.
slaves who took part in south carolinas stono rebellion of 1739 took advantage of the colonies proximity to spanish florida.
the rebels broke into a storehouse and seized arms murdered whites and torched the homes of slave owners.
the rebels hoped that other slaves would rally to their standard and some slaves from the many of the white people in these provinces take little or no care of negro marriages.
they often part men from their wives by selling them far asunder john woolman journal 1774 surrounding countryside did join the rebellion whose numbers rose to around 150.
the slave rebels hoped to find refuge in spanish florida.
but the carolina militia intercepted the rebels before they could reach it and the better organized and armed militia routed the stono rebels slaughtering them by the dozens and executing those who survived.
in response to the stono rebellion south carolina passed harsher slave codes and temporarily blocked importation of slaves into the region a ban that was soon lifted because of the economic importance of slave labor.
the stono rebellion was the largest african american uprising in the colonial era but it would not be the last in the history of american slavery.
an african american culture emerges under slavery most slaves did not adopt rebellion as their primary strategy for challenging the authority of their masters.
simply establishing families building an african american community and practicing their own religion were more realistic goals for most slaves but all were difficult to achieve given the constraints imposed by slavery.
forming a family under slavery was not easy.
for one thing the sex ratio among slaves during much of the colonial period was sharply skewed with many more males than females.
during the early years of the slave trade slave owners preferred males for the backbreaking agricultural work required to produce rice tobacco or sugarcane.
so most slaves imported into the americas were male the odds of a male slave finding a wife were slim.
during the eighteenth century as more slaves were born in america the sex ratio became more balanced because roughly comparable numbers of boys and girls were born.
but even if the chances of a man finding a mate increased slavery made how did slaves resist the authority of their masters.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 family formation difficult.
slave marriages had no legal standing.
so slaves faced the constant threat of separation from their spouses.
the decision to break up slave families rested entirely with the master and many children were sold from their families.
on relatively small plantations slaves usually sought a spouse on a neighboring plantation which left couples at the mercy of masters who could withhold visiting privileges and prevent husbands and wives from seeing one another.
nevertheless many slaves did manage to find partners and create stable families.
one of the many aspects of traditional african culture preserved by slaves was naming practices.
as was customary in many parts of west africa slave parents might name their children after the day of the week on which they were born.
plantation records commonly show west african names like cudjo monday for boys or cuba wednesday for girls evidence that slaves continued to honor their ancestral practices.
3 14 slaves dancing and playing banjo this image of slaves dancing in the slave quarters prominently features a banjo.
the instrument was modeled on an instrument that was well known in africa.
what evidence exists for the persistence of african cultural traits among american slaves.
slaves also drew on african traditions in shaping distinctive music and dance forms which provided an outlet for cultural expression.
using african techniques they constructed musical instruments including drums and stringed instruments.
masters typically found african styles of dancing and singing exotic and alien to their european sensibilities.
one british visitor to maryland noted that on sundays the one day that masters generally allowed slaves to rest blacks met to amuse themselves with dancing which was a most violent exercise this rare colonial era painting of slaves dancing not only illustrates the intensity of african inspired dance but also shows the importance of an african style instrument that would become a fixture in american music the banjo 3 14.
music could serve ulterior purposes as well.
shortly after the stono rebellion south carolina banned drumming fearing that slaves could drum and communicate secret messages from one plantation to another.
immigration regional economies and inequality immigration regional economies and inequality although distinctions of wealth emerged almost immediately in american society especially in the cities the relative abundance of land in the seventeenth century allowed many rural colonists to own their own land a goal almost unattainable in europe where the aristocracy owned most land.
even in cities those without a farmstead generally earned higher wages than they would have in europe because labor commanded a higher price in the colonies where skilled craftsmen were rarer.
although all of these facts contributed to the prosperity of the colonists population growth natural increase and immigration and the dwindling availability of land became serious problems by the mid eighteenth century.
in the colonies expanding cities the gulf between the rich and poor widened and in rural areas young people faced the prospect that they might not be able to obtain land for their own farms.
immigration to the colonies regional economies the population of british north america expanded rapidly in the eighteenth century.
between 1700 and 1750 the white population of the colonies rose from around 250 000 to more than a million.
in contrast to americas first predominantly english colonists who arrived in the early 1600s eighteenth century immigrants varied in national origin and ethnic identity.
as chart 3 15 illustrates the colonies attracted settlers from elsewhere in britain including scotland ireland and wales.
immigration from the european continent also included many dutch and germans.
the decision to immigrate to america was a momentous one.
the financial and personal costs of immigration could demand heavy sacrifices.
the trans atlantic crossing which could take four months meant enduring cramped conditions on a ship with few amenities.
additionally the cost of the trans atlantic passage was well beyond the yearly wages of the average englishman and even more expensive for those from the european continent.
to finance their passage many immigrants men and women alike contracted to work as indentured servants.
in exchange for having their passage paid indentured servants agreed to work for a specified number of years usually seven.
in some cases the indenture system separated family members with husband and wife indenturing themselves to different families.
by the mid eighteenth century the british had settled the eastern seaboard from georgia to new hampshire.
although each of the thirteen colonies functioned as its own separate political unit historians have grouped the colonies into five regions new england the mid atlantic the upper south the lower south and the back country reflecting their unique histories distinctive patterns of settlement and diverse economies 3 16.
race ethnicity and religious composition also lent a distinctive quality to each of the major regions of colonial america.
view the map interactive map colonial products 3 15 ancestry of the population of the british mainland colonies in the eighteenth century during the eighteenth century the number of non english immigrants increased.
immigrants from other parts of the british empire including scotland and ireland rose as well.
another major source of immigration was continental europe especially germany and holland.
source adapted from thomas l purvis the european ancestry of the united states population 1790 william and mary quarterly.
3d series 41 1984 p 98.
english and welsh 51 other european 2 african 20 dutch 3 scottish 4 german 7 scots irish 8 irish 5 how did the ethnic composition of america change in the eighteenth century.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 new france missouri r new england indian the ministerial elite continued to shape the affairs of the region but the rising merchant class became increasingly powerful during the eighteenth century.
many of the regions leaders were educated at harvard 1636 the oldest college in the colonies or yale 1701.
middle atlantic c o u n t ry r back country upper south the mid atlantic rio g miss iss ippi the mid atlantic new york pennsylvania new jersey and delaware was the atl antic most ethnically diverse region in the coloocean nies and its hubs new york and philadelphia were home to a wide range of ethnic paci fi c new spain new spain and religious groups see 3 16.
indeed as gu lf of o cean this engraving 3 17 of the eighteenthmex ico century new york skyline illustrates the spires and bell towers of the citys churches and lone synagogue proclaimed its reli3 16 map of colonial regions gious diversity for miles around.
by the mid eighteenth century colonial america had evolved into five distinctive regions philadelphia and new york became centers of new england mid atlantic upper south lower south and the back country.
commerce and finance.
each city boasted a thriving port facilitating trade with europe and coastal trade with other ports in the atlantic world.
agricultural products from rural pennsylvania and delaware were sold in the markets of philadelphia.
new england connecticut massachusetts new new yorks hudson river carried agricultural hampshire and rhode island was the most ethproducts from upriver farms and furs from northnically homogenous region in colonial british ern new york.
the mid atlantic region also had america see 3 17 overwhelmingly white and small manufacturing enterprises including flour english.
the congregational church the heir milling lumbering mining and metal foundries.
of the puritan tradition was the dominant relithe region depended on indentured servants for gion.
new england also included other protestant much of its labor.
between 1700 and 1775 about churches anglicans church of england pres100 000 servants came from the british isles and byterians quakers and baptists.
this lent some another 35 000 from german speaking regions on religious diversity to the region particularly in the european continent.
rhode island which had embraced religious tolalthough quakers were powerful in pennsyleration from its founding.
vania politics the regions merchant class was even the sea had always been central to the new more influential.
the mid atlantic region was england economy but in the eighteenth century slower to create colleges than either massachusetts its maritime economy expanded dramatically.
or virginia but by the mid eighteenth century it new england continued to supply fish to domestic boasted several new institutions of higher learning.
and foreign markets it became a major center of the following colleges were created in this region shipbuilding and its merchants carried on a lively the college of philadelphia was established in 1755 trade in a variety of commodities.
yankee trade in now the university of pennsylvania in new york spirits including the amber colored dessert wine george ii chartered kings college now columbia of madeira a portuguese island group off the coast university in 1754 the college of new jersey was of africa and rum distilled from molasses procured founded in 1746 now princeton and queens in the caribbean was vital to new englands comcollege now rutgers was established in new mercial economy.
jersey in 1766.
lower south ra nd e new england which region of colonial america was the most culturally diverse.
immigration regional economies and inequality the upper and lower south the south was most closely tied to slave labor.
actually it was two distinct regions the upper south or chesapeake region and the lower south including parts of south carolina and the georgia low country see 3 16.
each produced different cash crops and employed slave labor in different ways.
immigration into the two regions varied and the ethnic composition of the upper and lower south was also different.
although more ethnically diverse than new england the upper south those areas of virginia and maryland tied to the chesapeake drew immigrants largely from england and scotland.
the planter elite who dominated this region built great fortunes from tobacco grown on plantations with slave labor.
many of the areas wealthiest citizens were educated at the college of william and mary 1693 in virginia the nations second oldest college.
the lower south was settled later than the chesapeake and it benefited more from the growth of immigration and was more religiously diverse than the upper south.
in addition to anglicans the region included presbyterians german moravians baptists and quakers.
the damp hot climate of the low country bred diseases.
to avoid these conditions for much of the year the wealthiest planters preferred their second homes in charleston which became a major cultural and economic center of the region.
nevertheless charleston lacked an educational institution comparable to william and mary so the wealthiest carolinians typically headed to england for their education.
the back country 3 17 engraving of new york skyline this engraving of new yorks skyline lists a score of churches and one synagogue whose spires dominated the skyline of the colonial town.
in the early seventeenth century colonists had hugged the coastline.
by the eighteenth century they began pushing westward to areas such as the interior of the carolinas and western pennsylvania and virginia see 3 16.
many new immigrants headed directly for the back country.
the scots irish were particularly attracted to the back country of pennsylvania and the carolinas where they settled in large numbers.
the back country lacked many of the refinements of the older more settled regions of the colonies leading travelers to compare back country colonists with indians and describe both as savages.
whatever their similarities relations between back country whites and indians were generally strained.
rather than seek to trade with indians and learn their ways the scots irish wanted to create farmsteads which required displacing indians.
the simmering tensions between residents of the back read the document of the servants and slaves in virginia 1705 what were the main cash crops produced by slave labor in the south.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 they were as rude in their manners as the common savages and hardly a degree removed from them.
their dresses almost as loose and naked as the indians and differing in nothing save complexion minister charles woodmason observations on the back country 1766 country region and the local indians erupted into violence throughout the eighteenth century.
back country settlers farmed hunted and raised livestock for their own consumption and local trade and were less connected to the burgeoning atlantic economy.
the economic realities of life in the back country encouraged independence and a strongly egalitarian culture.
courts were rare and so were tax officials or other representatives of either the colonial or the british governments.
a visitor to this region would also have noted a lack of churches primary schools and institutions of higher education.
had more than 100 000 inhabitants by the mideighteenth century.
but the growth rates of the cities of colonial british america were impressive.
boston for example doubled in size between 1700 and 1760.
larger towns including albany new york newport rhode island and baltimore maryland became regional centers.
throughout these urban areas eighteenthcentury society became polarized along economic lines.
the percentage of wealth owned by the richest americans increased.
in boston and philadelphia 5 percent of the population had amassed almost half of their citys wealth by the last quarter of the eighteenth century.
at the same time the number of the urban poor also rose dramatically in boston new york and philadelphia.
the graph 3 18 illustrates the dramatic climb in the amount of money boston devoted to poor relief from the mid century onward.
during this same period many trades and crafts established their own mutual benefit societies to help the poor.
the stark inequality between the lives of the destitute and those of bostons wealthiest merchants who lived in fine new mansions and traveled around the city in elegant coaches grew more pronounced especially by the 1770s.
cities growth and inequality rural america although most americans lived in the countryside land becomes scarce during the eighteenth century cities were growing.
3 18 poor relief boston poverty increased in colonial boston in the late eighteenth century as did the poor relief needed to deal with this problem.
philadelphia boasted 23 000 residents by 1760 making it the largest city in the colonies.
still america was far less urban than either europe or the spanish colonies to the south.
compared to london with more than 700 000 people philadelphia was tiny and spanish america had half a dozen cities larger than philadelphia.
mexico city for example poor relief in boston 1710 1775 expenditure in pounds per 1 000 population how was american society becoming more unequal toward the end of the eighteenth century.
by the mid eighteenth century many americans living in the countryside or in small towns in most of the settled regions of the colonies confronted a scarcity of land.
the problem connecticuts colonists faced illustrates the interconnected issues of population growth and land scarcity.
between 1720 and 1760 connecticuts population more than doubled from 59 000 to 142 000.
beginning in the 1740s children faced the prospect that their parents would not have enough land to help them establish their own farms when they became adults.
many sons and daughters delayed marriage until they could acquire a farmstead and establish their own independent household.
others moved to nearby towns.
many of connecticuts young adults went as far as northern new hampshire and others headed to the most western parts of new york pennsylvania virginia or the carolinas.
finally some families simply postponed their dreams of independence working as tenants on another farmers land as they struggled to save enough money to purchase their own farm.
view the closer look expanding settlements c 1750 war and the contest over empire war and the contest over empire by mid century nearly 1 2 million people lived in the british mainland colonies making it far more densely populated than new france which numbered well under 100 000.
britain and france had been almost constantly at war since the late seventeenth century.
although these wars generally originated in europe control of north america became important to both nations.
the british were keen to eliminate french influence in canada and the great lakes.
eliminating france also appealed to american colonists who viewed the rich agricultural lands controlled by france as a means of alleviating the land shortage they faced.
the struggle between the british and the french for control of north america would dramatically alter the map of north america.
the relatively small population of new france was spread across a vast territory from quebec in the north to new orleans in the south and as far west as illinois see map 3 19.
in the great lakes region french traders lived and worked among the indians often marrying indian women.
unlike the british who sought to displace the tribes and resettle the land with small farmers the french developed a complex multiracial society that included indians.
the rise and fall of the middle ground in 1600 more than two million indians lived in communities east of the mississippi river.
lacking immunity to diseases brought by the europeans indian populations who came into contact with europeans were extremely vulnerable to infection.
tribes east of the mississippi were repeatedly devastated by epidemics that reduced their numbers to less than 250 000 by 1700.
one response to this dramatic decrease in population was mourning wars in which rival tribes raided each others villages and took prisoners to bolster their own populations.
in these wars men were often tortured and executed but women and children were typically adopted into the conquering tribes.
indians were also increasingly drawn into the trans atlantic economy exchanging furs for european goods including beads fabric alcohol metal tools and even firearms.
the growing european demand for furs and increased indian desires for european goods led to conflict among tribes for access to prime hunting and trapping grounds.
intertribal warfare changed as limited mourning wars evolved into beaver wars in which tribes fought one another for control of territory.
further west in the great lakes region france not britain was the dominant power.
here the french and indians created a middle ground a cultural and geographical region in which indians and the french negotiated with each other for goods and neither side could impose its will on the other by force.
indians traded furs for guns metal tools and cloth.
although the french colonial government had hoped to regulate and tax this lucrative trade by establishing a series of forts or outposts young fiercely independent french traders known as coureurs des bois runners of the woods established their own trading networks beyond the direct control of the french government.
many married indian women producing children who became a distinctive group called mtis or people of mixed french and indian descent.
familiar with both indian and french customs and fluent in both indian languages and french the mtis became critical intermediaries between indian and french cultures even when the gulf was difficult to bridge.
like other european societies french culture was patriarchal inheritance passed from father to son a practice that gave fathers enormous power over their sons.
thus it was natural for the french to cast themselves as fathers to their indian children in the great lakes region.
indians accepted the notion of the french as fathers but they understood the concept of fatherhood in radically different terms than europeans.
in the indian cultures of the middle ground region fathers were not powerful patriarchs.
indeed one chief tried in vain to explain read the document cadwallader colden an iroquois chief argues for his tribes property rights 1742 what made the middle ground a distinctive region of colonial america.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 go and see the forts our french father has created and you will see that the land beneath their walls is still hunting ground.
whilst the english on the contrary no sooner get possession of a country than the game is forced to leave the trees fall down before them the earth becomes bare contemporary indian account of the french and english settlement late eighteenth century to a french colonial official the different views of paternal authority in their respective cultures when you command all the french obey and go to war.
but i shall not be heeded and obeyed by my nation in such a manner although a gulf continued to exist between the two cultures intermarriage between french traders and indian women nevertheless promoted cultural exchange and mutual understanding.
the expansion of british settlement beyond the appalachian mountains threatened the middle ground created in the great lakes region.
rather than seek to preserve a middle ground the british hoped to incorporate this region into their colonial empire.
as had been true for so much of british colonization the idea was to eliminate indigenous populations transplant british agricultural practices and establish permanent settlements.
the struggle for north america the great military powers of atlantic europe britain france and spain remained locked in a struggle for political supremacy.
in 1739 european conflicts once more spilled over into north america when britain again went to war this time with spain.
british ships smuggled goods into spanish america depriving spain of valuable trade and tax revenues.
spain responded by capturing british ships seizing their crews and cargos.
british outrage over spanish policy reached a critical moment when captain robert jenkins testified before parliament that after capturing his ship the spanish placed him in custody and cut off his ear as punishment for his alleged smuggling.
jenkins presented his ear in a pickle jar to an outraged parliament.
the resulting conflict between britain and spain was dubbed the war of jenkins ear 1739 1748.
why did british expansion threaten the middle ground.
king georges war 1744 1748 a conflict in which france joined with spain against britain and the american colonies soon overshadowed the war of jenkins ear.
the most important military victory from the colonists point of view occurred at louisbourg where new englands militias achieved a stunning triumph over the french and seized the mighty fortress on cape breton island that guarded atlantic access to the gulf of st lawrence and french canada.
although the fortress was returned to the french as part of the peace treaty ending the conflict the victory became a source of colonial pride.
the conflict between france and britain occurred during a period when colonists were particularly eager to settle in the ohio valley a region controlled by the french.
the formation of the ohio company of virginia in 1747 facilitated the exploration and settlement of this region a development that prompted the french to solidify their hold on it by establishing a string of forts 3 19.
the most important of these was fort duquesne erected at a fork in the ohio river at what is now pittsburgh.
in 1754 the royal governor of virginia dispatched militiamen under the command of an ambitious young officer george washington to seize the strategic fort.
overwhelmed by french and indian warriors washington was forced to surrender.
washingtons defeat proved to be only the first skirmish in a protracted battle to control the ohio territory.
in 1755 the british dispatched general edward braddock with a larger force comprising british regular troops and colonial volunteers again including washington to take fort duquesne.
the french and their indian allies routed braddocks forces.
washington escaped but braddock was killed and his troops suffered a 70 percent casualty rate.
it was a shocking and ignominious defeat for the british and their colonial allies.
view the closer look european claims in north america 1750 and 1763 war and the contest over empire gulf of cape st lawrence breton is.
louisbourg france n ova scotia r new en halifax s t.
l aw r quebec e c port royal montreal cticut r lake champlain portsmouth conne crown point ft frontenac ft ticonderoga ft oswego ft william rio nta henry eo lak albany ft niagara atlantic ocean rie e ke boston ft presque isle la new york ft venango french settlements british settlements ft duquesne philadelphia ft cumberland british victories french forts williamsburg british forts 3 19 british conquest of new france the british and french battled one another across a huge arc of territory fighting pivotal battles at louisbourg quebec and montreal.
li ttl e ka oh land claimed by the ohio company of virginia french victories na wh io r ar.
necessity iroquois settlements the final phase of the great war for empire the seven years war what came to be known as the french and indian war in the american colonies lasted from 1756 to 1763.
in england william pitt the ambitious secretary of state appointed by george ii to oversee the war effort believed that the balance of power in europe hinged on control of america.
in 1758 the british embarked on a bold new policy to root out the french and make a direct assault on the strongholds of quebec city and montreal.
pitt promoted young talented officers including jeffery amherst and james wolfe to lead the campaign against canada.
an army of 10 000 regulars and a sizeable fleet were dispatched to north america.
defeating the french also meant taking on their indian allies as well so the conflict was known as the french and indian war.
the british suffered an early setback when the french general louis de montcalm seized fort william henry on lake george in northern new york.
although montcalm had negotiated a traditional surrender that allowed the british to retreat honorably his indian allies refused to accept these terms and sought scalps and other trophies of war.
the massacre of fort william henry alienated montcalm from his indian allies and stiffened the resolve of both the british and the colonists to defeat the french.
british fortunes began to turn when jeffery amherst captured louisbourg again in 1758.
a year later british forces captured the city of quebec.
general wolfe the british commander searched for a weakness in the citys formidable defenses and finally settled on a daring attack.
wolfe approached the city from its poorly guarded rear flank.
rather than risk a frontal assault on the heavily fortified city wolfes men scaled the heights behind the city and overpowered the small detachment of troops guarding the cliffs.
in the battle that followed wolfe and montcalm were both killed.
pennsylvania painter benjamin west commemorated the assault on quebec in the death of general wolfe 1771 3 20.
west shows the dying general cradled in the arms of one of his officers.
contemporary viewers would have recognized this arrangement from european painting and sculpture the pieta or the image of the dead jesus sprawled across the virgin marys lap after the crucifixion.
to heighten the drama in wests painting a british soldier runs toward the dying wolfe with what was william pitts new policy for north america.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 the news that the french have been defeated while an american indian a symbol of the noble warrior looks on respectfully in tribute to the heroism of the general.
next to the indian warrior west placed a figure whose clothes include elements of indian and british dress.
the figure sir william johnson played a vital role helping the british forge and preserve their alliances with indians in the region.
for more on johnsons role as a cultural and political mediator see competing visions sir william johnson and the iroquois indian visions versus british arms.
the other important population center in french canada montreal fell to the british in late 1760 ending french domination in canada.
in 1763 france and britain signed the treaty 3 20 the death of general wolfe benjamin west cast the dying wolfe in the same pose artists used to depict jesus after the crucifixion.
the messenger arriving with the news of victory enters the scene from the light filled area of the painting symbolizing the bright future of north america after the british victory.
what role does the indian figure play in wests painting.
of paris permanently altering the map of north america.
quebec remained french culturally but britain now controlled canada.
although the british had defeated the french in canada relations with indians along the frontier particularly in ohio remained tense.
in 1762 the indian revivalist prophet neolin developed a pan indian movement that rallied the tribes of the midwest against british colonial expansion.
a year later the ottawa indian chief pontiac led a pan indian force against the british garrison at fort detroit.
in what the colonists called pontiacs rebellion indian peoples across the midwest attacked weakly defended frontier garrisons in what is now michigan indiana and ohio and settler communities in western pennsylvania.
anger over the failure of the colonial war and the contest over empire competing visions sir william johnson and the iroquois indian visions versus british arms in 1762 a delegation of iroquois leaders met with the british superintendent for indian affairs sir william johnson at his impressive residence johnson hall near saratoga new york.
during the meeting an onondaga chief confronted johnson revealing a vision that a member of his tribe had received from the great spirit regarding english expansion into indian lands.
johnson dismissed indian visions and he warned the tribes that englishmen would not take such claims seriously and that english military power demonstrated that the great spirit favored the english.
what does johnsons dismissive view of indian religion reveal about anglo indian relations.
the onondaga chief testified to the assembled members of the iroquois council and sir william johnson about a recent vision to his tribe that revealed the great spirits displeasure with the british displacement of indian peoples.
the revelation contained a thinly veiled threat about the consequences of continuing this policy.
johnson curtly told the members of the iroquois council that the british would not pay attention to indian religious beliefs which he dismissed as foolish superstitions.
in response to the onondagas oblique threat johnson reminded the iroquois that british arms were superior to indian weaponry and that resistance would not be tolerated.
onondaga chief brother sir william johnson brethren one of our people lately in a vision was told by the great spirit above that when he first made the world.
he gave this large island to the indians for their use at the same time he gave other parts of the world beyond the great waters to the rest of his creating and gave them different languages that he now saw the white people squabbling and fighting for these lands which he gave the indians and that in every assembly and company of governors and great men.
he heard nothing scarce spoke or talkd of but claiming and wanting large possessions in our country.
this he said was so contrary to his intention and what he expected would be the consequence at the time when the white people first came like children among us that he was quite displeasd and would altho their numbers were ever so great punish them if they did not desist.
your romantic notions custom of dreaming and seeing visions however usual amongst you cannot but appear in a very ridiculous light to white people who will consider it only as a scheme set on foot by some designing persons to answer their purposes and i hope you cannot but be convinced that the divine being is satisfied with the justice of our cause from the great successes with he has crowned the british arms i hope therefore you will not suspect us of defrauding you of your lands.
sir william johnson presented this certificate to the iroquois for their loyalty to his britannic majesty diplomacy with indians included many ceremonial exchanges such as the one depicted in the image at the top of this document.
how did johnson react to indian demands that western expansion be halted.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 hudson bay company nova scotia e r.
me part of mass.
re nc quebec s ft edward augustus t la w nh ft michilimackinac ma boston ny albany ri ct ft niagara ft presque isle pa ft detroit new york ft.
le boeuf ft venango nj philadelphia ft st joseph ft sandusky baltimore ft pitt atlantic de ft miami md ocean ft ouiatenon va indian reserve nc by proclamation 1763 ipp i r spanish louisiana williamsburg miss iss sc acquired by britain from france ga er 1764 boundary aft charleston savannah prior british colonies as of 1763 acquired by britain but still controlled by indians west florida boundary in acquired by britain from spain spanish louisiana proclamation line 1763 new orleans g ulf of m ex ico east florida british forts seized during pontiacs rebellion in 1763 governments to protect them led to protests by western settlers.
in pennsylvania settlers from the frontier settlement of paxton sought revenge by attacking friendly indians and marching against the city of philadelphia demanding the creation of a militia to fight indians.
the march of the paxton boys might have plunged pennsylvania into widespread bloodshed but violence was averted after leading philadelphia citizens agreed to present the protesters grievances to the colonial assembly.
see choices and consequences quakers pacifism and the paxton uprising page 93.
the global struggle between britain and france the seven years war not only transformed the political map of north america it irrevocably altered the history of the region establishing british supremacy once and for all.
colonists described this conflict as the french and indian war for good reason.
for colonists british victory meant an end to french how did the proclamation of 1763 serve british interests.
3 21 proclamation of 1763 the french and indian war shifted the balance of power in north america.
the proclamation of 1763 banned colonial settlement west of the appalachian mountains.
political influence in canada and a reconfiguration of the balance of power in the vast region of the middle ground that had been a french sphere of influence for generations.
before the defeat of the french in canada western indians could count on a reliable supply of arms and ammunition from britains traditional rival france.
without this vital support the panindian alliance collapsed.
still pontiacs rebellion persuaded the british to be conciliatory toward the more powerful tribes along the frontier.
the peace treaty that was signed to end hostilities with indians not only included favorable terms for trade but also placed severe restrictions on westward expansion by colonists.
the proclamation of 1763 3 21 established a fixed line beyond which colonial expansion westward was prohibited effectively restricting colonists to territory east of the appalachian mountains.
view the map interactive map the seven years war war and the contest over empire choices and consequences quakers pacifism and the paxton uprising relations between pennsylvanians and indians had deteriorated during the eighteenth century as the white population grew.
newcomers such as the scots irish who dominated the backcountry began to challenge the quakers political power.
the violence associated with pontiacs rebellion only exacerbated these tensions.
western settlers including the paxton boys petitioned the quaker dominated colonial assembly to pass a mandatory militia law and provide arms for western settlers.
quakers however were pacifists who continued to believe that it was possible to maintain peaceful relations with their indian neighbors.
quakers in the assembly faced a difficult decision.
choices support a mandatory militia law and create a well regulated militia properly trained and armed.
continue to oppose the creation of a well regulated militia and seek peaceful non violent solutions to indian settler conflicts.
resign from elected office so that their pacifism would not prevent the assembly from creating a militia.
decision the legislature chose to continue its pacifist policies.
consequences pennsylvania was the only colony without a militia law.
this issue continued to spark controversy until the american revolution.
the 1776 pennsylvania constitution and declaration of rights not only created a militia but it became the first state to expressly protect a right to bear arms.
continuing controversies why were quakers so obstinately against creating a well regulated militia.
scholars sympathetic to the plight of the protestors view their challenge to the quaker government as an expression of the rising tide of democratic sentiment that helped bring about the american revolution.
for those more sympathetic to the indians the quaker governments policies were as exceptional as they were praiseworthy.
paxton uprising cartoon why did paxtonians demand that the quakers create a militia.
chapter 3 growth slavery and conflict colonial america 1710 1763 massachusetts battles crown over salary for the royal governor the first synagogue in british north america is built james oglethorpe founds georgia first moravian community established in america new yorks pluralistic society expands to include jews as well as christians a utopian experiment and a buffer between carolina and spanish florida georgia eventually accepted slavery and became a plantation society moravians an evangelical protestant sect from germany bring their message to america massachusetts house and the royal governor disagree over salary an important indicator of the growing power of colonial legislatures benjamin franklin founds library company chapter review americas first circulating library review questions 1.
how did changes in architecture and home furnishing reflect anglicization and the rise of gentility in colonial america.
what were the leading enlightenment ideals and what was the significance of americas role in that movement.
in what ways did the colony of georgia strive to embody enlightenment ideals.
how did the experience of slavery differ between the upper south and the lower south.
how did the french and indian war affect colonial indian relations.
what new problems did the british victory create for the empire.
key terms enlightenment an international philosophical movement that extolled the virtues of reason and science and applied these new insights to politics and social reform.
great awakening a religious revival movement that emphasized a more emotional style of religious practice.
anglicization the colonial american desire to emulate english society including english taste in foods customs and architecture.
virtual representation a theory of representation in which legislators do not serve their localities but rather the whole nation.
old lights opponents of the great awakening who favored traditional forms of religious worship.
new lights supporters of the great awakening and its more emotional style of worship.
middle passage the harrowing voyage across the atlantic from africa to the americas during which slaves endured meager rations and horrendously unsanitary conditions.
indentured servants a form of bound labor in which a number of years of service were specified as payment for passage to america.
middle ground a cultural and geographical region of the great lakes in which indians and the french negotiated with each other for goods and neither side could impose its will on the other.
chapter review y ri ft niagara ct ft presque isle pa detroit ft.
le boeuf new york ft venango nj philadelphia ft sandusky baltimore ft pitt de ft miami md.
ouiatenon va indian reserve clamation 1763 williamsburg nc 1741 1751 eliza pinckney introduces indigo to south carolina academy of philadelphia founded quebec falls proclamation of 1763 the sought after dye produced by indigo became carolinas second most important export franklin helps found the university of pennsylvania the decisive battle in the french and indian war signals the defeat of the french in canada to prevent further encroachment on indian lands and avoid future conflicts britain forbids colonial settlement beyond the appalachian mountains english preacher george whitefield arrives in america the great evangelical preacher creates an inter colonial sensation and extends the reach of the great awakening benjamin franklin publishes his experiments on electricity treaty of paris between britain and france ends french and indian war earns franklin fame and symbolizes americas contribution to the enlightenment the formal end of hostilities legally acknowledges british domination in north america myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of growth slavery and conflict.
questions for analysis 1.
in what ways did art and architecture become more english in the early decades of the eighteenth century.
view the closer look images as history a portrait of colonial aspiration p 67 other resources from this chapter read the document william byrd ii diary an american gentleman 1709 p 68 benjamin franklin on george whitefield p 75 of the servants and slaves in virginia 1705 p 85 cadwallader colden an iroquois chief argues for his tribes 2.
in what ways did benjamin franklin represent the ideals of the enlightenment.
read the document profiles benjamin franklin p 74 property rights 1742 p 87 view the closer look competing visions slavery and georgia p 73 expanding settlements c 1750 p 86 3.
which regions of the atlantic world were most heavily involved in the international slave trade.
view the closer look african slave trade 1451 1870 p 78 4.
how did french and english aims differ and how did these differences impact relations with indians.
view the closer look european claims in north america 1750 and 1763 p 88 5.
what impact did the french and indian war have on the colonies.
view the map interactive map the seven years war p 92 view the map interactive map colonial products p 83 how did british policy toward the colonies change after the french and indian war.
patriots versus loyalists p 108 chapter tightening the reins of empire p 98 hear the audio audi au dio o file file on myhi my hist stor oryl ylab ab c om watch the video vid deo crit critical itic ical al visions vis v isio ions ns chapter chap ch apte terr 4 revolutionary america change cha ange and trans transformation sformatio on 1764 1783 1764 1783 how did revolutionary events in 1775 and 1776 transform the competing visions of patriots and loyalists.
america at war p 113 what were the major battles and turning points in the war from the summer of 1776 to its conclusion.
the radicalism of the american revolution p 117 how did the revolutions ideals of liberty and equality influence american politics and society.
britains decisive britains deccisive victory in the french and and n indian war in n 1763 17663 removed remo re mo move oveed the the french fren fr encch h threat hreat to t its american empire.
but the war war had been expensive expens nsiv ivve to o wage wagge and and the the he ongoing ong ngoing oiingg costs osts off administering adm ministering and protecting north no america ne nearly ear arly ly d drained raain ined need d tthe hee b british rit ri iti tish h ttreasury.
reas re asur as urry.
to pay thesee costs britain adopted a new w set of policies for for america am ame meric ricca including iin nclu nclu nc lud ngg new ludi n neew taxes aggressive ways of collectingg them and moree severe axes more m ssev evverre methods m th me tho hod ods of enforcing en nffor orcciing ng these hese measures.
the colonists viewed these measu theese policies as an n ominous omin om in nou ous first ous firs firs fi r t step step in in a plot plo pl ott to to deprive eprivee them m of their liberty.
when king 1760 1820 british monarchism was wh hen k ing george iii r 1760 1820 0 assumed the br brit ittish h th tthrone ro rone one mo m on on naarc arcchi hism hism mw as as deeply rooted americans proud british heritage.
eeply roote ed in american culture and a mericans were pr prou ou ud off ttheir h iirr b he riiti riti tish ssh hh errittag age.
e e opposition from unjust opposi ition tto o british policy began with rrespectful espectful pleas tto o th th ki the king ng ffor or rrelief or elie el i f fr ie rom mu njjust ust us policies.
gradually decade became that was oliciess.
gra adually over the next decade e americans becam am me cconvinced onvin iin nce c d th hat at iitt wa w as no no longer british protect their rights.
resistance onger possible p to remain within the brit tish empire and pr prot otec ot e t th ec thei ir rri igh ghts.
re resi sist si stan st tan anccee to british policies colonists decided declare o briti sh po olicies stiffened and the colon nists eventually de deci c de ci ded to ded od ecla ecl ec laree iindependence n ep nd epen en nde den denc ncce ce from britain.
rom b ritain n tensions ten nsion ns between britain and the american colonies reached rea eaach ched ed d a boiling boi oili ling ng point ng poi oint n this with the th he teaa act in 1773 the theme of th his cartoon the tea tax tempest.
teate a ta at x te ta x t teempes mppes est.
t in in the the th image mage father her time displays the eventss of the american fath n revolution revo v lution on to to four four fo ur figures figgur u ess who symbolize syymbollize the four continents.
the magic lantern shows a teaa pot po ott boiling boi oili lin ngg over over er symbolizing ymbollizingg revolution while british and an nd american military millitary forces stand sta t n nd d ready rea eady dy to to face face fa ac one another.
ne ano otherr.
thee ideals ideaals of liberty and equality that thaat americans invoked invvoked in their theeirr struggle str tru ugggglle against aaggains aiins nst society.
british tyranny tyran nny changed american socie ety.
the claim that at all men are arre created crea cr eatteed equal ea eat eq qua ual l and nd that thaat every eveery person enjoyed certain inalienable iinalienable rights rights s as a americas ame meeri meri rica cas ca ss declaration decla eeccla larraati lara tion on off inde independence epend dence asserted in 1776 were radical notions for for those ttho hose who ho who ho had had ad grown gro row wn n up up in n a society socciety that that was ruled by a king and d that enthusiastically enthusiastica call llyy embraced em mbrrac aceed d the th hee idea ide ide dea of dea of aristocracy.
ristocrracy.
slavery slav very continued continued to present a problem probllem for champions champio ons off the th he revolution.
revol re revo vo olu lution tiion on.
for fo or some some so mee m slavery laveryy was incompatible incompatible with the revolutions revollutions ideals while wh hile le others oth herrs sought sougght so soug ht to to reconcile rreecco on onc ncciille the two.
new w england effectively eliminated elimin nated slavery after thee revolution.
r volu re voluti tion on n the the new th neew n ew states more tates of o the mid atlantic adopted a mor re gradual approach h to to abolishing abol ab bol o is ishi hiing slavery.
ssla lavveery la ery ry.
in n the south however he sou uth h owever where planters made mad de fortunes from crops crop op ps produced prod pr oduc duc uced ed d with wit w itth slave slav sla sl ave labor abor slaver sslavery ry remained deeply entrenched.
entrench hed.
although women womeen were were we re not not yet yett full ful ull political po p olliiti tica ica cal participants articip pants revolutionary notions of equality eq quality led them to demand deem maand d that tha hat husbands hu usb ban nds ds treat trreeat at wives as a partners parrtners in their marriage.
a new neew idea of companionate compani niio on nat atee marriage m rrrriaagee blossomed.
ma blo oss ssom med d yesterday the greatest question was decided.
and a greater question perhaps never was nor will be decided among men.
a resolution was passed without one dissenting colony that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states john adams 1776 64 chapter 4 chapter 4 life in the colonies what was life really like in the colonies.
4 1 introduction in 1723 a tired teenager stepped off a boat onto a wharf in philadelphia.
he was an odd looking sight.
not having luggage he had stuffed his pockets with extra clothes.
the young man followed a group of clean dressed people into a quaker meetinghouse where he soon fell asleep.
the sleeping teenager with the lumpy clothes was benjamin franklin.
he had recently run away from his brother jamess print shop in boston.
when he was 12 franklin had signed a contract to work for his brother for nine years.
but after enduring jamess nasty temper for five years franklin packed his pockets and left.
in philadelphia franklin quickly found work as a printers assistant.
within a few years he had saved enough money to open his own print shop.
his first success was a newspaper called the pennsylvania gazette.
in 1732 readers of the gazette saw an advertisement for poor richard s almanac.
an almanac is a book published annually that contains weather predictions planting advice for farmers and information on other useful subjects.
according to the ad poor richard s almanac was written by richard saunders and printed by b franklin.
nobody knew then that author and printer were the same person.
franklin also printed proverbs or wise sayings in his almanacs.
some like these are still remembered today a penny saved is a penny earned.
early to bed early to rise makes a man healthy wealthy and wise.
fish and visitors smell in three days.
poor richard s almanac sold so well that franklin was able to retire at age 42.
a man of many talents he spent the rest of his long life as a scientist inventor political leader diplomat and national postmaster.
franklins rise from penniless runaway to wealthy printer was one of many colonial success stories.
in this chapter you will learn what life was like for people throughout the colonies in the 1700s.
philadelphia was a thriving colonial city in the 18th century.
this painting from 1701 shows the old state house in the heart of the busy city of boston.
life in the colonies 65 i although mostfarmers lived in one room farmhouses they held out hope that they would achieve wealth like that pictured above.
4 2 life on a farm the colonists developed an economy based on farming commerce buying and selling goods and handcrafts.
nine out of ten people lived on small family farms.
most farm families raised or made nearly everything they needed.
one farmer wrote with pride about a typical year nothing to wear eat or drink was purchased as my farm provided all.
the first and hardest task facing farm families was to clear the land of trees.
the colonists had only simple basic tools.
they cut down trees with axes and saws.
then they used the same tools to cut square timbers and flat planks for building houses barns and fences.
imagine living on a colonial farm.
your home is a single large room with a fireplace at one end.
in this room your family cooks eats and sleeps.
your parents sleep in a large bed built into one corner.
your younger brothers and sisters sleep in a smaller trundle bed a bed that can slide under the big bed during the day.
at bedtime you climb a ladder next to the chimney to sleep in an attic or a loft.
as your family grows you help to build another room on the other side of the chimney.
the fireplace is the only source of heat for warmth and cooking so keeping a supply of firewood is important.
the fire is kept burning all the time because without matches it is very difficult to light a new one.
cooking is one of the most dangerous jobs on your farm.
food is cooked in heavy iron pots hung over an open fire.
while lifting or stirring these pots your mother might burn her hands scorch her clothes or strain her back.
your day on the farm starts before sunrise.
everyone wakes up early to share the work.
chores include cutting wood feeding animals clearing land tending crops building fences making furniture and ools gathering eggs spinning thread weaving cloth sewing clothes making candles and soap cooking cleaning and caring for babies.
6 chapter 4 4 3 life in cities in 1750 one colonist out of 20 lived in a city.
compared to the quiet farm life cities were exciting places.
the heart of the city was the waterfront.
there ships brought news from england as well as eagerly awaited items such as paint carpets furniture and books.
just beyond the docks a marketplace bustled with fishers selling their catch and farmers selling fresh eggs milk and cheese.
close by were taverns where food and drink were served.
people gathered there to exchange gossip and news from other colonies.
the nearby streets were lined with shops.
sparks flew from the blacksmiths block as he hammered iron into tools.
shoemakers clockmakers silversmiths tailors and other craftspeople turned out goods based on the latest designs from england.
there were barbers to cut colonists hair and wigmakers to make it look long again.
cities were noisy smelly places.
church bells rang out several times a day.
carts clattered loudly over streets paved with round cobblestones.
the air was filled with the stench of rotting garbage and open sewers but the colonists were used to it.
animals ran loose in the street.
during hot weather clouds of flies and mosquitoes swarmed about.
city homes were close together on winding streets.
most were built of wood with thatched roofs like the houses the colonists had left behind in europe.
their windows were small because glass was costly.
for lighting colonists used torches made of pine that burned l.
colonial cities were very small by today s standards.
philadelphia pictured below and boston the two largest cities had fewer than 20 000 people in 1700 brightly when they were wedged between hearthstones in the fireplace.
colonists also burned grease in metal containers called betty lamps and made candles scented with bayberries.
with torches and candles lighting homes fire was a constant danger.
colonists kept fire buckets hanging by their front doors.
when a fire broke out the whole town helped to put it out.
grabbing their buckets colonists formed a double line from the fire to a river pond or well.
they passed the buckets full of water from hand to hand up one line to the fire.
then the empty buckets went back down the opposite line to be refilled.
life in the colonies 67 rights powers or privileges that belong to people as citizens and that cannot or should not be taken away by the government magna carta an agreement made in 1215 listing the rights granted by king john to all free men of the kingdom parliament the lawmaking body of england consisting of representatives from throughout the kingdom english bill of rights an act passed by parliament in 1689 that limited the monarchs power by giving certain powers to parliament and listing specific rights of the citizens 4 4 rights of colonists colonists in america saw themselves as english citizens.
they expected the same rights that citizens enjoyed in england.
the most important of these was the right to have a voice in their government.
magna carta the english people had won the right to participate in their government only after a long struggle.
a key victory in this struggle came in 1215 when king john agreed to sign magna carta or great charter this agreement established the idea that the power of the monarch or ruler was limited.
not even the king was above the law.
the next major victory was the founding of parliament in 1265.
parliament was made up of representatives from across england.
over time it became a lawmaking body with the power to approve laws and taxes proposed by the king or queen.
in 1685 james the duke of york became king james ii.
the king did not want to share power with an elected assembly in new york.
nor did he want to share power with an elected parliament in england.
when he tried to rule without parliament james was forced off his throne.
this change in power which took place without bloodshed is known as the glorious revolution.
the english bill of rights in 1689 parliament offered the crown to prince william of orange and his wife mary.
in exchange they had to agree to an act or law known as the english bill of rights.
this act said that the power to make laws and impose taxes belonged to the peoples elected representatives in parliament and to no one else.
it also included a bill or list of rights that belonged to the people.
among these were the right to petition the king request him to change something and the right to trial by jury.
english colonists saw the glorious revolution as a victory not only for parliament but for their colonial assemblies as well.
they wanted to choose the people who made their laws and set their taxes.
after all this was a cherished right of all english citizens.
t newyork colonists established assemblies to pre mote citizen rights.
the english traditio of self government thrived in all 13 colonies.
here we see a depiction of the first colonial assembly of virginia in 161.
crime and punishment each colonial assembly passed its own laws defining crimes and punishments.
however most crimes were treated similarly in all the colonies.
certain very serious crimes could be punished by death.
these included murder treason acts of disloyalty toward the government and piracy robbery at sea.
puritans in new england added other crimes to this list based on their understanding of gods law in the bible.
in new england colonists could be put to death for denying the true god or for striking or cursing their parents.
crimes such as theft forgery and highway robbery carried harsh punishments in every colony.
for these crimes people might be jailed whipped or branded with hot irons.
lesser crimes such as drunkenness and breaking the sabbath working or traveling on sunday were punished with fines short jail terms or public humiliation.
a colonist caught breaking the sabbath for example might be locked in the town stocks.
the stocks were a heavy wooden frame with holes for a persons neck wrists and ankles.
lawbreakers were locked for hours in this device in a public place where others could ridicule them.
no group had firmer ideas about right and wrong than new englands puritans.
the puritans required everyone to attend church on sundays.
they also forbade anyone to work or play on that day.
the puritans wrote their sunday laws in books with blue paper bindings.
for this reason these rules came to be known as blue laws.
some blue laws persist to this day.
in connecticut for example it is still illegal for stores to sell alcohol on sundays.
the puritans were constantly on the watch for signs of satan believed to be an evil angel who rebelled against god.
satan was thought to work through witches.
in 1692 fear of witchcraft overtook residents of salem massachusetts when several girls were seen acting strangely in church.
the girls accused their neighbors of being witches and putting spells on them.
nineteen accused witches were put to death during the salem witch trials before calm was restored and the townspeople realized that the girls accusations were untrue.
courts like the one pictured here were important to social life in the colonies.
this painting depicts a woman being tried for witchcraft in salem massachusetts in 1692 h i i 68 chapter 4 life in the colonies 69 4 5 life for african americans slavery in the colonies began in virginia with tobacco planters.
from there it spread both north and south.
by the early 1700s enslaved africans were living in every colony.
even benjamin franklin owned slaves for a time.
but like most people in the new england and middle colonies franklin found that hiring workers when he needed them cost less than owning slaves.
in the southern colonies however slavery expanded rapidly.
from virginia to georgia slaves helped raise tobacco rice indigo and other cash crops.
the first slaves were brought to the united states in 1619 to help raise tobacco in the virginia colony.
here slaves tend tobacco while their owner relaxes feet up smoking his pipe.
the granger collection new the atlantic slave trade most of the slaves who were brought to the colonies came from west africa.
year after year slave ships filled with cloth guns and rum sailed from the colonies to the coast of west africa.
there these goods were traded for africans.
the ships then returned to the americas carrying their human cargo.
for the africans packed onto slave ships the ocean crossing known as the middle passage was a nightmare.
according to his autobiography olaudah equiano oh lau duh ek wee ah noh was just ten years old when he was put onto a slave ship.
he never forgot the closeness of the place.
which was so crowded that each had scarcely room to turn himself nor did he forget the shrieks of the women and groans of the dying the terrified boy refused to eat hoping for the last friend death to relieve me although equiano survived the voyage many africans died of sickness or despair.
even so the atlantic slave trade was very profitable.
many colonial merchants built fortunes trading in human beings.
work without hope the slaves masters in america demanded that the africans work hard.
most enslaved africans were put to work in the fields raising crops.
others worked as nurses carpenters blacksmiths drivers servants gardeners and midwives people who assist women giving birth.
unlike other colonists slaves had little hope of making a better life.
their position was fixed at the bottom of colonial society.
some slaves rebelled by refusing to work or running away.
but most adapted to their unhappy condition as best they could.
slowly and painfully they began to create a new african american way of life.
70 chapter 4 colonial society had a strong religious flavor.
here colonial citizens gather around a church on sunday.
4 6 religion religion was an important part of colonial life.
most colonists tried to lead good lives based on their faith.
children grew up reading the bible from cover to cover several times over.
puritan church services in new england the sound of a drum or horn called puritans to worship on sunday morning.
captains of the watch made sure everyone was a sabbath keeper sometimes houses were searched to ensure that everyone was at church.
church services were held in the town meetinghouse.
this was the most important building in the community and was used for all public meetings.
inside were rows of wooden benches called pews and a pulpit a platform where the preacher stood.
a seating committee carefully assigned seats with the best ones going to older wealthy people.
services could last as long as five hours.
at midday villagers would go to noon houses near the church to warm themselves by a fire eat and socialize.
then they returned to church for the long afternoon sermon.
the great awakening beginning in the 1730s a religious movement known as the great awakening swept through the colonies.
this movement was spurred by a feeling that people had lost their religious faith.
the forms of religion were kept up a puritan observed but there was little of the power of god in it.
to revive peoples religious spirit preachers traveled from town to town holding outdoor revival meetings.
there they delivered fiery sermons to huge crowds.
their words touched the hearts and souls of many colonists.
benjamin franklin wrote about the change he observed in philadelphia it seemed as if all the world were growing religious so that one could not walk through the town in an evening without hearing psalms bible songs sung in different families of every street the great awakening had a powerful effect on the colonies.
it helped spread the idea that all people are equal in the eyes of god.
ordinary people could understand gods will if they had an open heart and a desire to know gods truth.
by encouraging ideas of liberty equality and self reliance the great awakening helped pave the way for the american revolution.
great awakening a revival of religious feeling and belief in the american colonies that began in the 1730s life in the colonies 71 4 7 education i children gather with their teacher in a colonial school.
these children were among a minority of children who received formal education.
most children did not go to school beyond the elementary level.
except in new england most children in the colonies received little formal education.
neither the middle nor the southern colonies had public schools.
in the southern colonies most families were spread out along rivers.
a few neighbors might get together to hire a teacher for their children.
wealthy planters often hired tutors to educate younger children at home.
older children were sent to schools in distant cities or even england to complete their education.
in the middle colonies religious differences among quakers catholics jews baptists and other religious groups slowed the growth of public education.
each religious group or family had to decide for itself how to educate its children.
some groups built church schools.
others were content to have parents teach their children at home.
only in new england were towns required to provide public schools.
the puritans support for education was inspired by their religious faith.
they wanted their children to be able to read the bible.
to encourage education massachusetts passed a law in 1647 that required every town with 50 families or more to hire an instructor to teach their children to read and write.
towns with more than 100 families were required to build a school.
similar laws were passed in other new england colonies.
wiv adivcu lu contribute whatever they could to the village school.
contributions might be money vegetables firewood or anything else the school needed.
often land was set aside as school meadows or school fields this land was then rented out to raise money for teachers salaries.
schools were one room buildings with a chimney and fireplace ii the center.
there were no boards to write on or maps.
pencils and pa per were scarce.
students shouted out spelling words and wrote sum in ink on pieces of bark.
there was usually one book the new engl primer which was used to teach the alphabet syllables and prayers.
i 72 chapter 4 most colonists believed that boys needed more education than girls.
female education in the best families wrote first lady abigail adams went no further than writing and arithmetic in some few and rare instances music and dancing 4 8 colonial families the concept of family has changed often throughout history.
today most people think of a family as being made up of parents and their children.
in colonial times however families might include grandparents aunts and uncles cousins and stepchildren.
marriage colonial men and women generally married in their early to mid 20s.
those who arrived in america as indentured servants were not allowed to marry until they had gained their freedom.
men outnumbered women throughout the colonies.
as a result almost every woman was assured of receiving a marriage proposal.
maid servants of good honest stock family wrote a colonist could choose their husbands out of the better sort of people for a young woman though life as a wife and mother often proved to be even harder than life as an indentured servant.
large families colonial families were generally large.
most families had between seven and ten children.
benjamin franklin had 16 brothers and sisters.
farm families in particular needed all the hands they could get to help with chores.
religious and cultural backgrounds influenced colonists ideas about raising children.
but almost everywhere in the colonies children were expected to be productive members of the family.
married women gave birth many times but nearly half of all children died before they reached adulthood.
childhood deaths were especially high in the middle and southern colonies where the deadly disease of malaria raged.
adults often died young as well.
after the death of a wife or husband men and women usually remarried quickly.
thus households often swelled with stepchildren as well as adopted orphans children whose parents had died.
whether colonists lived in cities in villages or on isolated farms their lives focused on their families.
family members took care of one another because there was no one else to do so.
young families often welcomed elderly grandparents aunts uncles and cousins into their homes when they could no longer care for themselves.
it didnt matter if there was barely enough room for everyone.
no one would turn away a needy relative.
family life was atthe center of colonial society.
this family is gathered around a fire on a wintry evening.
a mother and grandmother work while the father relaxes and the children play.
life in the colonies 73 here dutch settlers play a spirited game of bowls in new amsterdam.
below colonists enjoy a form of billiards called trock.
4 9 leisure while most colonists worked hard they enjoyed their periods of leisure time away from work.
they also took advantage of gatherings such as town meetings and sunday services to talk with neighbors and make friends.
bees and frolics when possible colonists combined work and play by organizing bees and frolics.
new settlers might hold a chopping bee in which all the neighbors helped clear the trees off their land.
other frolics included corn husking bees for men and quilting bees for women.
sharing the work made it faster and more fun.
the germans introduced house and barn raisings to the colonies.
at these events neighbors joined together to build the frame of a house or barn in one day.
the men assembled the four walls flat on the ground and then raised them into place.
meanwhile the women prepared a huge feast.
at the end of the day everyone danced on the barns new floor.
the granger collection new york toys and sports colonial children had a few simple toys such as dolls marbles and tops.
they played tag blindmans bluff and stoolball which was related to the english game of cricket a game like baseball.
children in new england also enjoyed coasting down snowy hills on sleds.
adults must have thought coasting was dangerous because several communities forbade it.
adults enjoyed several sports.
almost every village had a bowling green.
here men rolled egg shaped balls down a lane of grass toward a white ball called a jack.
colonists also played a game similar to backgammon called tick tack and a form of billiards pool called trock.
in the southern colonies fox hunting with horses and hounds was a popular sport.
card playing was another favorite pastime one that new england puritans disapproved of strongly.
horse racing cockfighting and bull baiting were also popular in the south.
fairs were held throughout the colonies.
at these events colonists competed in contests of skill and artistry.
there were footraces wrestling matches dance contests and wild scrambles to see who could win a prize by catching a greased pig or climbing a greased pole.
74 chapter 4 chapter summary in this chapter you read about various aspects of life in the american colonies during the early 1700s.
farms and cities the colonists developed an economy based on farming commerce and crafts.
farm families produced most of what they needed for themselves.
in the villages and cities many trades and crafts developed.
rights of colonists american colonists expected to enjoy all the rights of english citizens especially the right to have a voice in their own government.
colonial assemblies defined crimes and punishments.
punishments were often harsh but for most of the 1700s the colonists were content to be ruled by english laws.
life for african americans enslaved african americans had almost no rights or even hope for liberty.
after being brought to america in chains they faced a life of forced obedience and toil.
religion religion was very important to the colonists.
the great awakening revived religious feeling and helped spread the idea that all people are equal.
education most colonial children received little education except in new england.
instead they were expected to contribute to the work of the farm or home.
family and leisure most colonial families were large.
they often included many relatives in addition to parents and their children.
much of colonial life was hard work but colonists also found time to enjoy sports and games.
this panorama of philadelphia in 1702 reveals a number of aspects of colonial life.
government buildings colonial homes roads and ships are all evident in the painting.
life in the colonies 75 reading further churches often in the center of town were central to colonial life.
here churchgoers sing as they waitto enter their church.
a great awakening in the 1730s and 1740s the great awakening shook up the english colonies.
this religious movement caused an outpouring of christian faith.
it also prompted new ways of thinking about the church and society.
as a result it helped lay the foundations for political changes to come.
nathan cole was working on his farm on the morning of october 23 1740 when he heard the news.
george whitefield was coming.
a famous preacher whitefield was known for his powerful sermons.
he had traveled all over the colonies drawing huge crowds wherever he went.
now he was in connecticut.
in fact he was preaching in nearby middletown that very morning.
cole knew he had to move fast.
i dropped my tool.
and ran to my pasture for my horse with all my might fearing that i should be too late to hear him.
i brought my horse home and soon mounted and took my wife up and went forward as fast as i thought the horse could bear.
and when we came within about half a mile i from the main road.
i saw before me a cloud or fog rising.
i first thought it came from the great river but as i came nearer.
i heard a noise something like a low rumbling thunder and presently found it was the noise of horses feet coming down the road and this cloud was a cloud of dust.
as i drew nearer it seemed like a steady stream of horses and their riders.
every horse seemed to go with all his might to carry his rider to hear news from heaven for the saving of souls.
nathan cole in george leon walker some aspects of religious life in new england 1897 thousands of people were rushing to middletown to hear white field speak.
i saw no man at work in his field cole wrote but all seemed to be gone when cole and his wife reached the town they found a large crowd gathered there.
the mood was electric as they waited for whitefield to appear.
what was behind all this excitement.
why would a preachers arrival cause a commotion like that of a rock star or a hollywood celebrity today.
in fact whitefield was a superstar of his time.
he was the most amous gure in a religious revival that was sweeping the colonies eop e were seeking a deep spiritual experience and a direct connec n o o.
they found that connection in preachers like whitefield 76 chapter 4 origins of the awakening religion played a major role in the lives of colonists in the early 1700s.
most people attended church regularly.
there were a number of different churches but most provided a similar experience.
they emphasized traditional religious teachings.
their ministers were educated men who valued reason over emotion.
the atmosphere in church was calm and orderly.
some ministers however believed that the church had lost its way.
they feared that religion had become a collection of formal empty rituals.
they wanted to wake people up and renew their faith.
in their sermons they offered an emotional message of sin and salvation that was aimed at the heart not the head.
by the 1730s a split was developing between old line ministers and those favoring a new way.
these two groups became known as the old lights and the new lights.
the old lights stressed tradition and respect for authority.
the new lights called for a more individual personal form of worship.
they wanted people to feel the spirit of god for themselves.
george whitefield was the best known personality of the revival movement.
his powerful sermons awakened religious belief in his listeners.
whitefield and other new light ministers often preached at open air revivals.
they depicted the glories of heaven and the miseries of hell.
hearing these highly charged sermons many people were seized by feelings of great joy or despair.
they would weep moan and fall to the ground.
as news of the revivals spread the movement gained strength.
jonathan edwards was one of the first revival preachers.
though he was not as dramatic as whitefield his words still carried great weight.
leading lights whitefield and edwards a number of ministers played key roles in the great awakening.
the leading figures however were george whitefield and jonathan edwards.
if whitefield was the star of the movement edwards was its most important thinker.
whitefield was a young anglican minister in england when he joined the revival movement.
in 1739 he defied church authorities by holding revival meetings across the country.
that same year he traveled to the colonies where he caused a sensation.
whitefield was a magnificent speaker with a beautiful voice and the skills of an accomplished actor.
his words and gestures could lift audiences into an emotional frenzy.
he toured from maine to georgia appearing in towns and cities along the way.
in boston some 20 000 people gathered to hear him speak.
he was the most celebrated man in america.
whitefield was pleased with his success.
but he was also troubled by the wealth and vanity he saw in the colonies.
noting the fine clothing worn by wealthy citizens he argued that christians should dress simply and plainly.
in boston he was disturbed to see young children dressed in fancy clothes the little infants who were brought to baptism were wrapped up in such fine things.
that one would think they were brought thither there to be initiated into rather than to renounce the pomps and vanities of this wicked world.
while in massachusetts whitefield visited jonathan edwards at his home in northampton.
edwards had helped start the revival movement and had been a great influence on whitefield.
edwards in turn recognized that whitefield had given new life to the movement.
he decided to increase his own efforts to win converts.
in this way he said he hoped to make new england a kind of heaven upon earth 78 chapter 4 edwards began to preach in neighboring towns.
in 1741 he gave his most famous sermon in enfield connecticut.
called sinners in the hands of an angry god this sermon was directed at a congregation that had resisted the revival message.
edwards told them that they had angered god with their sinful ways.
god held them in his hand he said and could cast them into hell at any moment.
the god that holds you over the pit of hell much as one holds a spider is dreadfully provoked his wrath towards you burns like fire tis nothing but his hand that holds you from falling into the fire oh sinner.
consider the fearful danger you are in and now you have an extraordinary opportunity a day wherein christ has flung the door of mercy wide open and stands in the door calling and crying with a loud voice to poor sinners many that were very lately in the same miserable condition you are in are in now a happy state rejoicing in the hope of the glory of god.
how awful is it to be left behind at such a day.
these words had a devastating effect.
the congregation began to wail and beg for mercy.
the shrieks and cries were piercing wrote one witness.
the uproar was so great that edwards could not even finish his sermon.
sm s i n nf.
in the angry god.
sermon preached at enfield july 8th 1741.
at a time of great awakenings and attended with remarkable imprefiions on many of the hearers ill by jonathamvewajtds am paftor of the church of christ b northampton amos is.
though they dig hit heli thence jbalf mine hand teihe them ihtugh they cthnb uy te heaven thence vji f f bring them d um.
had thsugh they hide themfedves in the t p carmet i mid fiarch and take them cut thence t and though they he hid frem my sight in the settem ef the sea thence i vdtt command the serycnt and hejhatt bite them re printed by particular defire boston printed new york re printed and sold by john holt at the exchange.
f the impact of the awakening over the next few years such incidents became more common.
at the same time the split between old light and new light ministers grew wider.
churches were breaking apart.
for the sake of unity both sides agreed to make peace and heal their divisions.
by the late 1740s the great awakening was over.
the impact of the movement was deep and ongoing however.
new light preachers had encouraged people to think for themselves and to make their own choices about religious faith.
as a result the church no longer had absolute authority in religious matters.
preachers also taught that everyone was equal in the eyes of god.
as one preacher said the common people.
claim as good a right to judge and act for themselves as civil rulers or the learned clergy by encouraging people to act independently and defy authority the great awakening helped lay the groundwork for rebellion against british rule.
in sinners in the hands of an angry god edwards spoke of hell as a real place that awaited those who sinned against god.
this was a common theme in revival sermons.
life in the colonies 79 unit 1 timeline challenge our colonial heritage 10 000 or more years ago humans reach north america the first humans likely siberian hunter families reach the americas by crossing a wide bridge of land between asia and north america called beringia.
1492 columbus sails to the americas christopher columbus sails to the americas and explores the islands in what is now called the caribbean sea.
1215 magna carta king john of england signs magna carta limiting his power and giving more rights to the english people.
1400s american indian culture flourishes one to two million american indians live in north america north of mexico.
american indian groups have distinct beliefs customs foods dwellings and clothing.
unit 1 1500s slave trade as part of the atlantic slave trade africans are brought to the americas and sold into slavery.
slavery becomes a way of life in many american colonies.
1636 providence founded roger williams breaks from the puritans and establishes the settlement of providence which eventually becomes part of the colony of rhode island.
1607 jamestown founded jamestown becomes the first permanent english colony in north america.
despite initial hardships the colony survives and flourishes 1689 english bill of rights prince william and his wife mary sign the english bill of rights strengthening the rights of the english people and the power of colonial assemblies.
1800 1620 mayflower compact pilgrims from england sail to the americas seeking to establish a perfect society.
during their voyage they sign the mayflower compact which describes how they will govern themselves.
1681 pennsylvania founded seeking religious freedom for the quakers william penn establishes the colony of pennsylvania and promises that people of all faiths will be treated equally.
1692 salem witch trials fear of witchcraft erupts among the puritans in salem massachusetts.
nineteen young women are put on trial and executed.
1730s and 1740s great awakening the great awakening revives religion in the colonies and spreadsthe ideas of liberty and equality.
our colonial heritage 81 unit 2 setting the stage 75 vv revolution in the colonies in this unit you will learn why some colonists wanted to replace british rule with an independent government.
you will also learn about the long difficult struggle to gain that independence.
in the 1760s great britain began passing new trade and tax laws for the colonies and enforcing old laws passed years before.
picture a southern rice farmer who is required by law to sell his crop only to england even if he might get a higher price elsewhere.
or think of a northern merchant having to pay a new tax on paper a tax imposed by a distant government in which he had no representation.
how do you think they felt about such laws and taxes.
colonists who supported great britain s policies and british rule were known as loyalists.
those who resisted called themselves patriots.
when the colonies declared independence patriots were opposed by many loyalists as well as british troops.
the map on the opposite page shows the physical geography of the 13 colonies.
knowing the land was one advantage patriot forces had over british troops in the american revolution.
the maps below show left where colonists lived in 1775 and right where loyalist support was strong.
these settlement patterns along with the colonies physical geography and regions of loyalist strength helped to shape the military strategies of the revolution.
population density of the thirteen colonies loyalist support in the thirteen colonies revolution in the colonies 85 chapter 3 the british atlantic world 1660 1750 chapter 4 growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 by 1660 the patterns of colonial enterprise in the americas were becoming clear.
for the colonies of england which became britain after the 1707 act of union with scotland the period from 1660 to 1763 was one of growth and diversification.
slave imports to plantation colonies exploded while a wide array of european peoples coming from ireland and continental europe as well as england wales and scotland jostled together in rapidly growing regions of neo european settlement.
yet a coherent imperial vision for these american holdings emerged slowly and the colonies remained largely independent of crown control.
after 1689 europe plunged into a century of warfare that had an enormous impact on the americas.
as wars spilled over into north america british french and spanish colonies all engaged more deeply with neighboring indians whom they often sought to employ as allies in their struggles to control north american territory.
native american polities were undergoing dramatic transformations in these same years reshaping themselves to function more effectively in relation to their european neighbors.
at the same time warfare immigration and trade laid the foundation for more intensive interactions across the atlantic.
these interactions and the cultural movements they supported helped to knit together the increasingly diverse colonies of british north america.
part 2 addresses these developments giving particular attention to the following three main concepts the diversification of british north america rise of the british atlantic world the american colonies of the various european nations gradually diverged from each other in character.
the tribute based societies at the core of spains empire developed into complex multiracial societies portuguese brazil was dominated by its plantation and mining enterprises the dutch largely withdrew their energies from the americas except for a few plantation colonies the french too developed several important plantation colonies in the west indies but struggled to populate their vast north american holdings.
the population of britains colonies by contrast grew and diversified after 1660.
britain came to dominate the atlantic slave trade and brought more than two million slaves to its american colonies.
the great majority went to jamaica barbados and the other sugar islands but half a million found their way to the mainland where by 1763 they constituted nearly 20 percent of the mainland colonies populations.
slavery was a growing and thriving institution in british north america.
non english europeans also crossed the atlantic in very large numbers.
the ethnic landscape of britains mainland colonies was dramatically altered by 115 000 migrants from ireland most of them scots irish presbyterians and 100 000 germans.
most immigrated to pennsylvania which soon had the most ethnically diverse population of europeans on the continent.
relations among these groups were often divisive as each struggled to maintain its identity and autonomy in a rapidly changing landscape.
these population movements were part of the larger growth and development of the atlantic world a phrase historians use to refer to the quickening pace of contacts and exchanges connecting europe africa and the americas.
the rise of the british atlantic was a layered phenomenon that began with the strength of britains transatlantic shipping networks which in turn laid the foundation for large scale population flows rising economic productivity and dramatic cultural transformations.
the growing power of its navy merchant marine and manufacturing sector allowed britain to dominate the eighteenth century atlantic.
much of the cultural impact of its maritime power derived from two further developments the print revolution which brought a vast array of ideas into circulation and the consumer revolution which flooded the atlantic world with a wide array of newly available merchandise.
the british atlantic world gave rise to four critically important cultural developments.
it spread enlightenment ideas and helped to create a transatlantic community of literati interested in science and rationalism it supported communities of pietists who promoted the revival and expansion of christianity it gave wellto do colonists access to genteel values and the finery needed to put them into action and by making such an abundance of consumer goods available it encouraged colonists to go further into debt than they ever had before.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 contact and conflict thematic understanding alongside the diversification of colonial populations and the rise of the british atlantic the eighteenth century was shaped by contact and conflict between colonies and their native american neighbors and also among rival european empires.
in europe the period after 1689 has sometimes been called the second hundred years war when britain france and their european allies went to war against each other repeatedly.
as these conflicts came to the north american theater they decisively influenced indian relations.
native american populations shrank dramatically or disappeared altogether during the seventeenth century devastated by the effects of the columbian exchange chapter 2.
the rise of imperial warfare encouraged the process of tribalization whereby indians regrouped into political structures called tribes by europeans that could deal more effectively with their colonial neighbors and strike alliances in times of war.
europeans in turn employed indian allies as proxy warriors in their conflicts over north american territory.
this pattern culminated in the great war for empire which began in the north american backcountry engaged thousands of provincial soldiers and native american warriors and reshaped the map of north america.
the treaty of paris of 1763 gave britain control of the entire continent east of the mississippi.
events would soon show what a mixed blessing that outcome would turn out to be.
this timeline organizes some of the important developments of this period into themes.
how did the demographic changes outlined under the theme peopling impact the developments that are listed under work exchange and technology.
work exchange technology peopling politics power south atlantic system links plantation and neo european colonies the middle passage shapes africans experiences of arrival mercantilist legislation in england navigation acts 1651 1660 1663 indian slave trade emerges in south carolina new york inherits hudson river valley manors from the dutch carolina proprietors try but fail to institute a manorial system first mennonites arrive in pennsylvania 1683 dominion of new england 1686 1689 glorious revolution 1688 1689 war of the league of augsburg 1689 1697 ideas beliefs culture identity collapse of the puritan commonwealth leads to toleration in england restoration makes england a monarchy again royalist revival isaac newton publishes principia mathematica 1687 the glorious revolution makes england a constitutional monarchy massachusetts loses its charter 1684 and gains a new one 1691 founding of the restoration colonies the carolinas 1663 new york 1664 pennsylvania 1681 migrants to pennsylvania seek freehold lands rapid expansion of african slave imports undergirds sugar tobacco and rice plantation systems new england shipbuilding industry and merchant community come to dominate the coastal trade agricultural labor and artisanal skills in high demand in the middle colonies quakers emigrate to pennsylvania and new jersey second wave of germans arrives in pennsylvania shenandoah valley parliament creates board of trade 1696 war of the spanish succession 1702 1713 the price of wheat rises doubles in philadelphia 1720 1770 scots irish begin migrating to pennsylvania c 1720 british trade dominates the atlantic parliament charters georgia 1732 opportunity and inequality in the middle colonies penns make walking purchase from the delawares 1737 freehold society in crisis in new england half of middle colonies white men landless conflicts over western lands and political power 1750 1775 british industry being mechanized colonial debt crisis colonists gain autonomy in the post glorious revolution era rise of toleration among colonial protestants tribalization developing among native american peoples print revolution begins robert walpole is prime minister 1720 1742 stono rebellion 1739 war of jenkinss ear 1739 1741 war of the austrian succession 1740 1748 george whitefields visit to america sparks the great awakening 1739 benjamin franklin founds american philosophical society 1743 new colleges newspapers magazines ohio company of virginia receives 200 000 acres 1749 john locke publishes two treatises on government 1690 40 000 germans and swiss emigrate to pennsylvania 1749 1756 anglo americans pushing onto backcountry lands french and indian war seven years war 1754 1763 at least twelve religious denominations in philadelphia the albany congress 1754 neolin promotes nativist revival among ohio indians 1763 the treaty of paris 1763 african american community forms in the chesapeake planter aristocracy emerges in the chesapeake and south carolina culture of gentility spreads among wellto do victory in the great war for empire sparks pro british pride in the colonies desire for political autonomy and economic independence strong pontiacs rebellion 1763 part 1 part 2 thematic timeline 1660 1763 transformations of north america 1450 1700 the british atlantic world 1660 1750 c h a p t e r colonies to empire 1660 1713 the restoration colonies and imperial expansion from mercantilism to imperial dominion the glorious revolution in england and america imperial wars and native peoples tribalization indian goals the imperial slave economy the south atlantic system africa africans and the slave trade slavery in the chesapeake and south carolina an african american community emerges the rise of the southern gentry the northern maritime economy the urban economy urban society the new politics of empire 1713 1750 the rise of colonial assemblies salutary neglect protecting the mercantile system mercantilism and the american colonies f or two weeks in june 1744 the identify the big idea town of lancaster pennsylvania how did the south atlantic system hosted more than 250 iroquois men create an interconnected atlantic women and children for a diplomatic conworld and how did this system ference with representatives from pennsylimpact development in the british vania maryland and virginia.
crowds of colonies.
curious observers thronged lancasters streets and courthouse.
the conference grew out of a diplomatic system between the colonies and the iroquois designed to air grievances and resolve conflict the covenant chain.
participants welcomed each other exchanged speeches and negotiated agreements in public ceremonies whose minutes became part of the official record of the colonies.
at lancaster the colonies had much to ask of their iroquois allies.
for one thing they wanted them to confirm a land agreement.
the iroquois often began such conferences by resisting land deals as the cayuga orator gachradodon said you know very well when the white people came first here they were poor but now they have got our lands and are by them become rich and we are now poor what little we have had for the land goes soon away but the land lasts forever in the end however they had little choice but to accept merchandise in exchange for land since colonial officials were unwilling to take no for an answer.
the colonists also announced that britain was once again going to war with france and they requested military support from their iroquois allies.
canassatego a tall commanding onondaga orator about sixty years old renowned for his eloquence replied we shall never forget that you and we have but one heart one head one eye one ear and one hand.
we shall have all your country under our eye and to see a longer excerpt of the canassatego take all the care we can to document along with other primary sources from prevent any enemy from this period see sources for americas history.
coming into it the lancaster conference and dozens of others like it that occurred between 1660 and 1750 demonstrates that the british colonies like those of france and spain relied ever more heavily on alliances with native americans as they sought to extend their power in north america.
indian nations remade themselves in these same years creating political structures called tribes by europeans that allowed them to regroup in the face of population decline and function more effectively alongside neighboring colonies.
the colonies meanwhile were drawn together into an integrated economic sphere the south atlantic system that brought prosperity to british north america while they achieved a measure of political autonomy that became essential to their understanding of what it meant to be british subjects.
english tobacco label c 1700 this label which was used to advertise virginia tobacco to london consumers illustrates the growth of plantation economies in north america.
three well to do planters bewigged and dressed in fashionable colorful coats take their ease with pipes of tobacco and glasses of liquor while slaves labor for them in the fields.
the products name londons virginia highlights the relationship between production on colonial plantations and consumption in the english metropolis.
the granger collection new york.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 colonies to empire 1660 1713 before 1660 england governed its new england and chesapeake colonies haphazardly.
taking advantage of that laxness and the english civil war local big men puritan magistrates and tobacco planters ran their societies as they wished.
following the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 royal bureaucrats tried to impose order on the unruly settlements and enlisting the aid of indian allies warred with rival european powers.
the restoration colonies and imperial expansion charles ii r 1660 1685 expanded english power in asia and america.
in 1662 he married the portuguese princess catherine of braganza whose dowry included the islands of bombay present day mumbai.
then in 1663 charles initiated new outposts in america by authorizing eight loyal noblemen to settle carolina an area that had long been claimed by spain and populated by thousands of indians.
the following year he awarded the just conquered dutch colony of new netherland to his brother james the duke of york who renamed the colony new york and then regranted a portion of it called new jersey to another group of proprietors.
finally in 1681 charles granted a vast track to william penn pennsylvania or penns woods in a great land grab england had ousted the dutch from north america intruded into spains northern empire and claimed all the land in between.
the carolinas in 1660 english settlement was concentrated in new england and the chesapeake.
five corporate colonies coexisted in new england massachusetts bay plymouth connecticut new haven and rhode island.
connecticut absorbed new haven in 1662 while massachusetts bay became a royal colony and absorbed plymouth in 1692.
in the chesapeake virginia was controlled by the crown while maryland was in the hands of a lord proprietor.
like lord baltimores maryland the new settlements in carolina new york new jersey and pennsylvania the restoration colonies as historians call them were proprietorships the carolina and jersey grantees the duke of york and william penn owned all the land in their new colonies and could rule them as they wished provided that their laws conformed broadly to those of england table 3 1.
indeed in new york james ii refused to allow an elective assembly and ruled by decree.
the carolina proprietors envisioned a traditional european society there the fundamental constitutions of carolina 1669 legally established the church of england and prescribed a manorial system with a mass of serfs governed by a handful of powerful nobles.
the manorial system proved a fantasy.
the first north carolina settlers were a mixture of poor families and runaway servants from virginia and english quakers an equality minded protestant sect also known as the society of friends.
quakers think there is no difference between a gentleman and a labourer complained an anglican clergyman.
refusing to work on large manors the settlers raised corn hogs and tobacco on modest family farms.
inspired by bacons rebellion they rebelled in 1677 against taxes on tobacco and again in 1708 against taxes to support the anglican church.
through their stubborn independence residents forced the proprietors to abandon their dreams of a feudal society.
in south carolina the colonists also went their own way.
the leading white settlers there were migrants from overcrowded barbados.
hoping to re create that islands hierarchical slave society they used enslaved workers both africans and native americans to raise cattle and food crops for export to the west indies.
carolina merchants opened a lucrative trade in deerskins and indian slaves with neighboring peoples.
then around 1700 south carolina planters hit upon rice cultivation.
the swampy estuaries of the coastal low country could be modified with sluices floodgates and check dams to create ideal rice growing conditions and slaves could do the backbreaking work.
by 1708 white carolinians relied upon a few thousand slaves to work their coastal plantations thereafter the african population exploded.
blacks outnumbered whites by 1710 and constituted two thirds of the population by 1740.
william penn and pennsylvania in contrast to the carolinas which languished for decades with proprietors and colonists at odds william penns colony was marked by unity of purpose all who came hoped to create a prosperous neo european settlement that approximated the social and economic systems they knew at home.
in 1681 charles ii bestowed pennsylvania which included present day delaware on william penn as payment for a large debt owed to penns father.
the younger penn though born to wealth he owned substantial estates in ireland and england and lived lavishly joined the quakers who condemned extravagance.
penn designed pennsylvania as a refuge for his fellow quakers who were persecuted in england because they refused to serve in the military or pay taxes to support the church of england.
penn chapter 3 the british atlantic world 1660 1750 table 3 1 english colonies established in north america 1660 1750 chief export economic activity colony date original colony type carolina proprietary north farming naval stores south rice indigo new jersey proprietary church of england royal wheat new york proprietary church of england royal wheat pennsylvania proprietary quaker proprietary wheat georgia trustees church of england royal rice royal mixed farming lumber naval stores royal fishing mixed farming naval stores new hampshire separated from massachusetts nova scotia royal royal religion status in 1775 church of england royal congregationalist church of england himself had spent more than two years in jail in england for preaching his beliefs.
like the puritans the quakers sought to restore christianity to its early simple spirituality.
but they rejected the puritans pessimistic calvinist doctrines which restricted salvation to a small elect.
the quakers followed the teachings of two english visionaries george fox and margaret fell who argued that god had imbued all men and women with an inner light of grace or understanding.
reflecting the sects emphasis on gender equality 350 quaker women would serve as ministers in the colonies.
mindful of the catastrophic history of indian relations in the chesapeake and new england penn exhorted colonists to sit downe lovingly alongside the native american inhabitants of the delaware and susquehanna valleys.
he wrote a letter to the leaders of the iroquois confederacy alerting them to his intention to settle a colony and in 1682 he arranged a public treaty with the delaware indians to purchase the lands that philadelphia and the surrounding settlements would soon occupy.
penns frame of government 1681 applied the quakers radical beliefs to politics.
it ensured religious freedom by prohibiting a legally established church and it promoted political equality by allowing all property owning men to vote and hold office.
cheered by these provisions thousands of quakers mostly yeoman families from the northwest midland region of england flocked to pennsylvania.
to attract european protestants penn published pamphlets in germany promising cheap land and religious toleration.
in 1683 migrants from saxony founded germantown just outside philadelphia and thousands of other germans soon followed.
ethnic diversity pacifism and freedom of conscience made pennsylvania the most open and democratic of the restoration colonies.
from mercantilism to imperial dominion as charles ii distributed american land his ministers devised policies to keep colonial trade in english hands.
since the 1560s the english crown had pursued mercantilist policies using government subsidies and charters to stimulate english manufacturing and foreign trade.
now it extended these mercantilist strategies to the american settlements through the navigation acts table 3 2.
the navigation acts believing they had to control trade with the colonies to reap their economic benefits english ministers wanted agricultural goods and raw materials to be carried to english ports in english part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 william penns treaty with the indians 1771 benjamin west executed this famous picture of william penns 1683 meeting with the lenni lenapes who called themselves the common people.
a quaker pacifist penn refused to seize indian lands by force and negotiated their purchase.
but his son thomas penn probably had a political purpose when he commissioned the painting in 1771.
by evoking a peaceful past wests work reinforced the penn familys proprietary claims which were under strong attack by the pennsylvania assembly.
pennsylvania academy of the fine arts philadelphia usa the bridgeman art library.
in reality dutch and french shippers were often buying sugar and other colonial products from english colonies and carrying them directly into foreign markets.
to counter this practice the navigation act of 1651 required that goods be carried on ships owned by english or colonial merchants.
new parliamentary acts in 1660 and 1663 strengthened the ban on foreign traders colonists could export sugar and tobacco only to england and import european goods only through england moreover three quarters of the crew on english vessels had place events in to be english.
to pay the cuscontext toms officials who enforced these how did the ambitions of laws the revenue act of 1673 charles ii and james ii imposed a plantation duty on remake english north american exports of sugar and america.
the english government backed these policies with military force.
in three wars between 1652 and 1674 the english navy drove the dutch from new netherland and contested hollands control of the atlantic slave trade by attacking dutch forts and ships along the west african coast.
meanwhile english merchants expanded their fleets which increased in capacity from 150 000 tons in 1640 to 340 000 tons in 1690.
this growth occurred on both sides of the atlantic by 1702 only london and bristol had more ships registered in port than did the town of boston.
though colonial ports benefitted from the growth of english shipping many colonists violated the navigation acts.
planters continued to trade with dutch shippers and new england merchants imported sugar and molasses from the french west indies.
the massachusetts bay assembly boldly declared the laws of chapter 3 the british atlantic world 1660 1750 table 3 2 navigation acts 1651 1751 purpose compliance act of 1651 cut dutch trade mostly ignored act of 1660 ban foreign shipping enumerate goods that go only to england partially obeyed act of 1663 allow european imports only through england partially obeyed staple act 1673 ensure enumerated goods go only to england mostly obeyed act of 1696 prevent frauds create vice admiralty courts mostly obeyed woolen act 1699 prevent export or intercolonial sale of textiles partially obeyed hat act 1732 prevent export or intercolonial sale of hats partially obeyed molasses act 1733 cut american imports of molasses from french west indies extensively violated iron act 1750 prevent manufacture of finished iron products extensively violated currency act 1751 end use of paper currency as legal tender in new england mostly obeyed maine part of mass.
er nc re lake ontario n d hudson r new york maryland massachusetts boston w bay plymouth r i connecticut new york pennsylvania philadelphia the dominion of new england the puritans troubles had only begun thanks to the accession of king james ii r 1685 1688 an aggressive and inflexible ruler.
during the reign of oliver cromwell james had grown up in exile in france and he admired its authoritarian king louis xiv.
james wanted stricter control over the colonies and targeted new england for his reforms.
in 1686 the lords of trade revoked the charters of connecticut and rhode island and merged them with massachusetts bay and plymouth to form a new royal province the dominion of new england.
as governor of the dominion james ii appointed sir edmund andros a hard edged former military officer.
two years later james ii added new york and new jersey to the dominion creating a vast colony that stretched from maine to pennsylvania map 3 1.
fran ce connecticu t r st la w n e w re r wa ela england are bounded within the seas surrounding it and do not reach america outraged by this insolence customs official edward randolph called for troops to reduce massachusetts to obedience instead the lords of trade the administrative body charged with colonial affairs chose a less violent but no less confrontational strategy.
in 1679 it denied the claim of massachusetts bay to new hampshire and eventually established a separate royal colony there.
then in 1684 the lords of trade persuaded an english court to annul the massachusetts bay charter by charging the puritan government with violating the navigation acts and virtually outlawing the church of england.
east jersey s a t la n t i c o c ea n west jersey e 100 miles 100 kilometers dominion of new england royal colonies virginia st marys city proprietary colonies political revolts in 1689 boston overthrow of governor andros new york leislers rebellion maryland protestant association map 3 1 the dominion of new england 1686 1689 in the dominion james ii created a vast royal colony that stretched nearly 500 miles along the atlantic coast.
during the glorious revolution in england politicians and ministers in boston and new york city led revolts that ousted dominion officials and repudiated their authority.
king william and queen mary replaced the dominion with governments that balanced the power held by imperial authorities and local political institutions.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 the dominion extended to america the authoritarian model of colonial rule that the english government had imposed on catholic ireland.
james ii ordered governor andros to abolish the existing legislative assemblies.
in massachusetts andros banned town meetings angering villagers who prized local self rule and advocated public worship in the church of england offending puritan congregationalists.
even worse from the colonists perspective the governor invalidated all land titles granted under the original massachusetts bay charter.
andros offered to provide new deeds but only if the colonists would pay an annual fee.
the glorious revolution in england and america fortunately for the colonists james ii angered english political leaders as much as andros alienated colonists.
the king revoked the charters of english towns rejected the advice of parliament and aroused popular opposition by openly practicing roman catholicism.
then in 1688 jamess spanish catholic wife gave birth to a son.
to forestall the outcome of having a catholic heir to the english throne protestant bishops and parliamentary leaders in the whig party invited william of orange a staunchly protestant dutch prince who was married to jamess protestant daughter mary stuart to come to england at the head of an invading army.
with their support william led a quick and nearly bloodless coup and king james ii was overthrown in an event dubbed the glorious revolution by its supporters.
whig politicians forced king william and queen mary to accept the declaration of rights creating a constitutional monarchy that enhanced the powers of the house of commons at the expense of the crown.
the whigs wanted political power especially the power to levy taxes to reside in the hands of the gentry merchants and other substantial property owners.
to justify their coup the members of parliament relied on political philosopher john locke.
in his two treatises on government 1690 locke rejected the divine right monarchy celebrated by james ii arguing that the legitimacy of government rests on the consent of the governed and that individuals have inalienable natural rights to life liberty and property.
lockes celebration of individual rights and representative government had a lasting influence in america where many political leaders wanted to expand the powers of the colonial assemblies.
rebellions in america the glorious revolution sparked rebellions by protestant colonists in massachusetts maryland and new york.
when news of the coup reached boston in april 1689 puritan leaders and 2 000 militiamen seized governor andros and shipped him back to england.
heeding american complaints of authoritarian rule the new monarchs broke up the dominion of new england.
however they refused to restore the old puritan dominated government of massachusetts bay instead creating in 1692 a new royal colony which included plymouth and maine.
the new charter empowered the king to the leviathan absolutist state this detail from the title page engraving of thomas hobbess leviathan 1651 conveys hobbess belief that peace and security required submission to a powerful sovereign.
in this image a giant king looms over his domain his staff and sword symbolizing his civil and religious powers.
he is the head of a body made up of the multitudes of his faceless and voiceless subjects as they carry out his commands.
what hobbes celebrated a majority of english politicians and people rejected.
fearing the claims of absolute power by stuart kings they revolted twice executing charles i in 1649 and deposing james ii in 1688.
title page from the first edition of thomas hobbess leviathan published in 1651.
chapter 3 appoint the governor and customs officials gave the vote to all male property owners not just puritan church members and eliminated puritan restrictions on the church of england.
in maryland the uprising had economic as well as religious causes.
since 1660 falling tobacco prices had hurt poorer farmers who were overwhelmingly protestant while taxes and fees paid to mostly catholic proprietary officials continued to rise.
when parliament ousted james ii a protestant association mustered 700 men and forcibly removed the catholic governor.
the lords of trade supported this protestant initiative they suspended lord baltimores proprietorship imposed royal government and made the church of england the legal religion in the colony.
this arrangement lasted until 1715 when benedict calvert the fourth lord baltimore converted to the anglican faith and the king restored the proprietorship to the calvert family.
in new york a dutchman named jacob leisler led the rebellion against the dominion of new england.
king william iii and mary ii rejecting hobbess vision of leviathan and james iis attempts to impose absolutism a group of englands most powerful politicians invited william of orange a prince of the dutch republic to invade england depose james ii and occupy the throne jointly with his wife mary.
williams army quickly overthrew james in the so called glorious revolution of 1688 an event that reverberated across the atlantic in rebellions in massachusetts maryland and new york.
this portrait from the guild book of the barber surgeons of york was probably painted to celebrate the coronation of william and mary in 1689.
hip art resource ny.
the british atlantic world 1660 1750 initially he enjoyed broad supexplain port but he soon alienated many consequences english speaking new yorkers how did the glorious and well to do dutch residents.
revolution affect relations leislers heavy handed tactics between england and its made him vulnerable when colonies.
william and mary appointed henry sloughter as governor in 1691 leisler was indicted for treason hanged and decapitated an act of ethnic vengeance that corrupted new york politics for a generation.
the glorious revolution of 1688 1689 began a new era in the politics of both england and its american colonies.
in england william and mary ruled as constitutional monarchs overseas they promoted an empire based on commerce.
they accepted the overthrow of jamess disastrous dominion of new england and allowed massachusetts under its new charter and new york to resume self government.
in 1696 parliament created a new body the board of trade to oversee part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 colonial affairs.
while the board of trade continued to pursue the mercantilist policies that made the colonies economically beneficial otherwise it permitted local elites to maintain a strong hand in colonial affairs.
as england plunged into a new era of european warfare its leaders had little choice but to allow its colonies substantial autonomy.
alliances with neighboring native americans who tried to turn the fighting to their own advantage.
although war brought money to the american colonies in the form of war contracts it also placed new demands on colonial governments to support the increasingly militant british empire.
to win wars in western europe the caribbean and far flung oceans british leaders created a powerful central state that spent three quarters of its revenue on military and naval expenses.
imperial wars and native peoples tribalization the price that england paid for bringing william of orange to the throne was a new commitment to warfare on the continent.
england wanted william because of his unambiguous protestant commitments william wanted england because of the resources it could bring to bear in european wars.
beginning with the war of the league of augsburg in 1689 england embarked on an era sometimes called the second hundred years war which lasted until the defeat of napoleon at waterloo in 1815.
in that time england britain after 1707 fought in seven major wars the longest era of peace lasted only twenty six years table 3 3.
imperial wars transformed north america.
prior to 1689 american affairs were distant from those of europe but the recurrent wars of the eighteenth century spilled over repeatedly into the colonies.
governments were forced to arm themselves and create new for native americans the rise of war intersected with a process scholars have called tribalization the adaptation of stateless peoples to the demands imposed on them by neighboring states.
in north america tribalization occurred in catastrophic circumstances.
eurasian diseases rapidly killed off broad swaths of native communities disproportionately victimizing the old and the very young.
in oral cultures old people were irreplaceable repositories of knowledge while the young were quite literally the future.
with populations in free fall many polities disappeared altogether.
by the eighteenth century the groups that survived had all been transformed.
many were polyglot peoples some new tribes like the catawbas had not existed before and were pieced together from remnants of formerly large groups.
other nations like the iroquois declined in numbers but sustained themselves by adopting many table 3 3 english wars 1650 1750 war date purpose result anglo dutch 1652 1654 control markets and african slave trade stalemate anglo dutch markets conquest england takes new amsterdam anglo dutch commercial markets england makes maritime gains king williams 1689 1697 maintain european balance of power stalemate in north america queen annes 1702 1713 maintain european balance of power british acquire hudson bay and nova scotia jenkinss ear 1739 1741 expand markets in spanish america english merchants expand influence king georges 1740 1748 maintain european balance of power capture and return of louisbourg chapter 3 war captives.
in the carolina borderlands a large number of muskogean speaking communities came together as a nation known to the british as the creek indians so named because some of them lived on ochese creek.
similarly the cherokees the delawares and other groups that were culturally linked but politically fragmented became coherent tribes to deal more effectively with their european neighbors.
the rise of imperial warfare exposed native american communities to danger but it also gave them newfound leverage.
the iroquois were radically endangered by imperial conflict a promised english alliance failed them and in 1693 a combined force of french soldiers militiamen and their indian allies burned all three mohawk villages to the ground.
thereafter the iroquois devised a strategy for playing french and english interests off against each other.
in 1701 they made alliances with both empires declaring their intention to remain neutral in future conflicts between the four indian kings in london 1710 after a failed invasion of canada in 1709 a colonial delegation went to london to ask the queen to try again.
they brought four indians with them three mohawks and a mahican and presented them in london as the four indian kings of the iroquois.
the four kings met queen anne dined with nobility attended the theater and toured the sites.
they sat for several portraits which were engraved for prints like this one.
the queen agreed to make another try for canada but the 1711 invasion failed again.
albany institute of history and art gift of the estate of cornelia cogswell mrs henry m sage 1972 65 7.
the british atlantic world 1660 1750 them.
this did not mean that the iroquois stayed on the sideline iroquois warriors often participated in raids during wartime and iroquois spokesmen met regularly with representatives of new york and new france to affirm their alliances and receive diplomatic gifts that included guns powder lead clothing and rum from the british or brandy from the french.
their neutrality paradoxically made them more sought after as allies.
for example their alliance with new york known as the covenant chain soon became a model for relations between the british empire and other native american peoples.
imperial warfare also reshaped indian relations in the southeast.
during the war of the spanish succession 1702 1713 which pitted britain against france and spain english settlers in the carolinas armed the creeks whose 15 000 members farmed the fertile lands along the present day border of georgia and alabama.
a joint english creek expedition attacked spanish part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 florida burning the town of st augustine but failing to capture the fort.
to protect havana in nearby cuba the spanish reinforced st augustine and unsuccessfully attacked charleston south carolina.
of gibraltar at the entrance to the mediterranean and a thirty year contract to supply slaves to spanish america.
these gains advanced britains quest for commercial supremacy and brought peace to eastern north america for a generation map 3 2.
indian goals the creeks had their own agenda to become the dominant tribe in the region they needed to vanquish their longtime enemies the pro french choctaws to the west and the spanish allied apalachees to the south.
beginning in 1704 a force of creek and yamasee warriors destroyed the remaining franciscan missions in northern florida attacked the spanish settlement at pensacola and captured a thousand apalachees whom they sold to south carolinian slave traders for sale in the west indies.
simultaneously a carolina supported creek expedition attacked the iroquois speaking tuscarora people of north carolina killing hundreds executing 160 male captives and sending 400 women and children into slavery.
the surviving tuscaroras joined the iroquois in new york who now became the six nations of the iroquois.
the carolinians having used the creeks to kill spaniards now died at the hands of their former allies when english traders demanded payment for trade debts in 1715 the creeks and yamasees revolted killing 400 colonists before being overwhelmed by the carolinians and their new indian allies the cherokees.
native americans also joined in the warfare between french understand points catholics in canada and english of view protestants in new england.
what did native americans with french aid catholic have to gain by participatmohawk and abenaki warriors ing in imperial wars.
took revenge on their puritan enemies.
they destroyed english settlements in maine and in 1704 attacked the western massachusetts town of deerfield where they killed 48 residents and carried 112 into captivity.
in response new england militia attacked french settlements and in 1710 joined with british naval forces to seize port royal in french acadia nova scotia.
however a major british new england expedition against the french stronghold at quebec inspired in part by the visit of four indian kings to london failed miserably.
stalemated militarily in america britain won major territorial and commercial concessions through its victories in europe.
in the treaty of utrecht 1713 britain obtained newfoundland acadia and the hudson bay region of northern canada from france as well as access through albany to the western indian trade.
from spain britain acquired the strategic fortress the imperial slave economy britains focus on america reflected the growth of a new agricultural and commercial order the south atlantic system that produced sugar tobacco rice and other tropical and subtropical products for an international market.
its plantation societies were ruled by european planter merchants and worked by hundreds of thousands of enslaved africans figure 3 1.
the south atlantic system the south atlantic system had its center in brazil and the west indies and sugar was its primary product.
before 1500 there were few sweet foods in europe mostly honey and fruits so when european planters developed vast sugarcane plantations in america they found a ready market for their crop.
the craving for the potent new sweet food was so intense that by 1900 sugar accounted for an astonishing 20 percent of the calories consumed by the worlds people.
european merchants investors and planters garnered the profits of the south atlantic system.
following mercantilist principles they provided the plantations with tools and equipment to grow and process the sugarcane and ships to carry it to europe.
but it was the atlantic slave trade that made the system run.
between 1520 and 1650 portuguese traders carried about 820 000 africans across the atlantic about 4 000 slaves a year before 1600 and 10 000 annually thereafter.
over the next half century the dutch dominated the atlantic slave trade then between 1700 and 1800 the british transported about 2 5 million of the total of 6 1 million africans carried to the americas.
england and the west indies england was a latecomer to the plantation economy but from the beginning the prospect of a lucrative cash crop drew large numbers of migrants.
on st kitts nevis montserrat and barbados most early settlers were small scale english farmers and their indentured servants who exported tobacco and livestock hides on this basis they created small but thriving colonies.
in 1650 there were more english residents in the west indies some 44 000 than in the chesapeake 20 000 and new england 23 000 colonies combined.
chapter 3 the british atlantic world 1660 1750 the date of the map is important.
the treaty of utrecht which ended queen annes war in 1713 transferred acadia nova scotia and newfoundland from france to britain.
an df ran ce hudson bay nd hudsons bay company me clai i cla mexico b e s sh d an west indian islands southern mainland northern mainland corporate 27 000 114 000 177 000 exports per white shillings 700 000 220 000 135 000 122 000 37 000 3 000 538s.
20 shillings 1 1 english pound 1 in 1715 about 400 in 2010 ti nd gla proprietary population average annual white black exports 1698 1717 ni c an fr e ed m british colonies comparisons royal nova scotia co w n ye e ri e newfoundland claimed by england and france b n la c n a r g en lo f y db this map has three main elements.
first it shows the geographic extent of britains american possessions.
next it provides a table showing the racial composition and value of exports of the three main regions.
third it depicts the form of government in the various colonies.
claimed by england and spain florida sp.
ba h a at l a n t i c ocean m as gulf of mexico r b santo domingo n sp.
guadeloupe cuba fr.
belize jamaica st dominique br.
caribbean sea fr.
puerto rico sp.
s barbados br.
sugar and slavery are key to a full understanding of this map.
they explain the high value of exports produced by the tiny caribbean islands.
e w martinique 500 miles 500 kilometers map 3 2 britains american empire 1713 many of britains possessions in the west indies were tiny islands mere dots on the caribbean sea.
however in 1713 these small pieces of land were by far the most valuable parts of the empire.
their sugar crops brought wealth to english merchants commerce to the northern colonies and a brutal life and early death to the hundreds of thousands of african slaves working on the plantations.
after 1650 sugar transformed barbados and the other islands into slave based plantation societies a change facilitated by english capital combined with the knowledge and experience of dutch merchants.
by 1680 an elite group of 175 planters described by one antislavery writer of the time as inhumane and barbarous dominated barbadoss economy they owned more than half of the island thousands of indentured servants and half of its more than 50 000 slaves.
in 1692 exploited irish servants and island born african slaves staged a major uprising which was brutally suppressed.
the leading principle in a slave society declared one west indian planter was to instill fear among workers and a commitment to absolute coercive force among masters.
as social inequality and racial conflict increased hundreds of english farmers fled to south carolina and the large island of jamaica.
but the days of caribbean smallholders were numbered.
english sugar merchants soon invested heavily in jamaica by 1750 it had seven hundred large sugar plantations worked by more than 105 000 slaves and had become the wealthiest british colony.
sugar was a rich mans crop because it could be produced most efficiently on large plantations.
scores of slaves planted and cut the sugarcane which was then processed by expensive equipment crushing mills part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 number of africans arriving alive in the americas and europe 9 645 000 british north america 500 000 europe 175 000 dutch america 500 000 west indies spanish central america 1 500 000 portuguese brazil british 1 660 000 french 1 660 000 3 650 000 approx.
14 died on slave ships figure 3 1 the transit of africans to the americas though approximately 11 million enslaved africans boarded ships to the americas about 1 5 million 14 percent of them died en route.
two thirds of the survivors ended up in brazil 3 65 million and the west indies 3 32 million where they worked primarily on sugar plantations.
half a million arrived directly from africa in the present day united states while many thousands more were traded to the mainland from the west indies.
boiling houses distilling apparatus into raw sugar molasses and rum.
the affluent planter merchants who controlled the sugar industry drew annual profits of more than 10 percent on their investment.
as scottish economist adam smith noted in his famous treatise the wealth of nations 1776 sugar was the most profitable crop grown in america or europe.
the impact on britain the south atlantic system brought wealth to the entire british and european economy and helped europeans achieve world economic leadership.
most british west indian plantations belonged to absentee owners who lived in england where they spent their profits and formed a powerful sugar lobby.
the explain navigation acts kept the british consequences sugar trade in the hands of how did the south atlantic british merchants who exported system affect the british it to foreign markets and by 1750 economy.
reshipments of american sugar and tobacco to europe accounted for half of british exports.
enormous profits also flowed into britain from the slave trade.
the value of the guns iron rum and cloth that were used to buy slaves was only about one tenth in the 1680s to one third by the 1780s of the value of the crops those slaves produced in america allowing english traders to sell slaves in the west indies for three to five times what they paid for them in africa.
these massive profits drove the slave trade.
at its height in the 1790s britain annually exported three hundred thousand guns to africa and a british ship carrying 300 to 350 slaves left an african port every other day.
this commerce stimulated the entire british economy.
english scottish and american shipyards built hundreds of vessels and thousands of people worked in trade related industries building port facilities and warehouses refining sugar and tobacco distilling rum from molasses and manufacturing textiles and iron products for the growing markets in africa and america.
more than one thousand british merchant ships were plying the atlantic by 1750 providing a supply of experienced sailors and laying the foundation for the supremacy of the royal navy.
africa africans and the slave trade as the south atlantic system enhanced european prosperity it imposed enormous costs on west and central africa.
between 1550 and 1870 the atlantic slave trade uprooted 11 million africans draining lands south of the sahara of people and wealth and changing african society map 3 3.
by directing commerce away from the savannas and the islamic world on the other side of the sahara the atlantic slave trade changed the economic and religious dynamics of the african interior.
it also fostered militaristic centralized states in the coastal areas.
africans and the slave trade warfare and slaving had been part of african life for centuries but the south atlantic system made slaving a favorite tactic of ambitious kings and plundering warlords.
whenever the king of barsally wants goods or brandy an observer noted the king goes and ransacks some of his enemies towns seizing the people and selling them supplying slaves became a way of life in the west african state of dahomey where the royal house monopolized the sale of slaves and used european guns to create a military despotism.
dahomeys army which included a contingent of 5 000 women raided the interior for captives between 1680 and 1730 dahomey annually exported 20 000 slaves from the chapter 3 trarza timbuktu rr.
map area white.
lta r vo r ger ni b l ac k borgu asante empire wh hausa mahi old oyo r nue be yoruba dahomey tiv.
allada benin arochukwu.
lagos v e sla.
calabar coast.
s bight of do ss.
bonny a c benin f or bra ah yd susu sherbro.
mende ca kumasi w pe.
a in gola c dw ax elm coa cra kru i i ar m na st.
110 000 little sestos d.
y coast gol t t ivor s coa numbers denote slaves shipped 1700 1810 hausa mossi r volta les de los.
1 1 million bance is.
ge ghana fula sierra leone.
ni senegal r brakna st louis.
walo cape verde cayor wolof baol jolof 110 000.
sine serer salum wuli gore dakar bundu manding the british atlantic world 1660 1750 bobangi i r ang ub bight of biafra 500 000 1 5 million r congo so tom new spain united states of america charleston loango loango.
bay malemba.
cabinda 1 5 million 1 5 million new orleans atlantic ocean luanda 1 5 million mexico city o ngo r.
teke k as a c i r luanda kongo.
kasanje ndongo mbundu new granada benguela ovimbundu recife pacific ocean tropical rain forest savanna desert major slave depots.
ghana kingdoms kongo important suppliers hausa peoples brazil peru n rio de janeiro slave importation areas in the new world c 1800.
w rio de la plata buenos aires e s 1 000 miles 500 1 000 kilometers 600 miles 600 kilometers map 3 3 africa and the atlantic slave trade 1700 1810 the tropical rain forest of west africa was home to scores of peoples and dozens of kingdoms.
with the rise of the slave trade some of these kingdoms became aggressive slavers.
dahomeys army for example seized tens of thousands of captives in wars with neighboring peoples and sold them to european traders.
about 14 percent of the captives died during the grueling middle passage the transatlantic voyage between africa and the americas.
most of the survivors labored on sugar plantations in brazil and the british and french west indies.
ports of allada and whydah.
the asante kings likewise used slaving to conquer states along the gold coast as well as muslim kingdoms in the savanna.
by the 1720s they had created a prosperous empire of 3 to 5 million people.
yet participation in the transatlantic slave trade remained a choice for africans not a necessity.
the powerful kingdom of benin famous for its cast bronzes and carved ivory prohibited for decades the export of all slaves male and female.
other africans atoned for their guilt for selling neighbors into slavery by building hidden shrines often in the household granary.
the trade in humans produced untold misery.
hundreds of thousands of young africans died and millions more endured a brutal life in the americas.
in part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 africa itself class divisions hardened as people of noble birth enslaved and sold those of lesser status.
gender relations shifted as well.
two thirds of the slaves sent across the atlantic were men partly because european planters paid more for men and stout men boys and partly because africans sold enslaved women locally and across the sahara as agricultural workers house servants and concubines.
the resulting sexual imbalance prompted african men to take several wives changing the meaning of marriage.
finally the expansion of the atlantic slave trade increased the extent of slavery in africa.
sultan mawlay ismail of morocco r 1672 1727 owned 150 000 black slaves obtained by trade in timbuktu and in wars he waged in senegal.
in africa as in the americas slavery eroded the dignity of human life.
the middle passage and beyond africans sold into the south atlantic system suffered the bleakest fate.
torn from their villages they were marched in chains to coastal ports their first passage in slavery.
then they endured the perilous middle passage to the new world in hideously overcrowded ships.
the captives had little to eat or drink and some died from dehydration.
the feces urine and vomit belowdecks prompted outbreaks of dysentery which took more lives.
i was so overcome by the heat stench and foul air that i nearly fainted reported a european doctor.
two views of the middle passage an 1846 watercolor on the right shows the cargo hold of a slave ship en route to brazil which imported large numbers of african slaves until the 1860s.
painted by a ships officer the work minimizes the brutality of the middle passage none of the slaves are in chains and captures the africans humanity and dignity.
the illustration on the left which was printed by englands abolitionist society shows the plan of a liverpool slave ship designed to hold 482 africans packed in with no more respect than that given to hogsheads of sugar and tobacco.
records indicate that the ship actually carried as many as 609 africans at once.
private collection michael graham stewart the bridgeman art library national maritime museum london.
america c o m pa r e d olaudah equiano the brutal middle passage olaudah equiano claimed to have been born in igboland present day southern nigeria.
but vincent carretta of the university of maryland has discovered strong evidence that equiano was born in south carolina.
he suggests that equiano drew on conversations with african born slaves to create a fictitious account of his kidnapping at the age of eleven and a traumatic passage across the atlantic.
after being purchased by an english sea captain equiano bought his freedom in 1766.
in london he became an antislavery activist and in 1789 he published the memoir from which the following selections are drawn.
my father besides many slaves had a numerous family.
i was trained up from my earliest years in the art of war.
and my mother adorned me with emblems after the manner of our greatest warriors.
one day when all our people were gone out to their works as usual and only i and my dear sister were left to mind the house two men and a woman got over our walls and in a moment seized us both.
sold and carried through a number of places till.
at the end of six or seven months after i had been kidnapped i arrived at the sea coast.
i now saw myself deprived of all chance of returning to my native country.
i was soon put down under the decks and there i received such a salutation in my nostrils as i had never experienced in my life so that with the loathsomeness of the stench and crying together i became so sick and low that i was not able to eat nor had i the least desire to taste anything.
i now wished for the last friend death to relieve me but soon to my grief two of the white men offered me eatables and on my refusing to eat one of them held me fast by the hands and.
tied my feet while the other flogged me severely.
i had never experienced anything of this kind before and.
could i have got over the nettings i would have jumped over some slaves jumped overboard to drown rather than endure more suffering.
others staged violent shipboard revolts.
slave uprisings occurred on two thousand voyages roughly one of every ten atlantic passages.
nearly 100 000 slaves died in these insurrections and nearly 1 5 million others about 14 percent of those who were transported died of disease or illness on the month long journey america compared above.
for those who survived the atlantic crossing things only got worse as they passed into endless slavery.
life on the sugar plantations of northwestern brazil and the west indies was one of relentless the side.
one day when we had a smooth sea and moderate wind two of my wearied countrymen who were chained together.
preferring death to such a life of misery somehow made it through the nettings and jumped into the sea.
at last we came in sight of the island of barbados the white people got some old slaves from the land to pacify us.
they told us we were not to be eaten but to work and were soon to go on land where we should see many of our country people.
this report eased us much and sure enough soon after we were landed there came to us africans of all languages.
source the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano or gustavus vassa the african written by himself london 1789 15 22 23 28 29.
questions for analysis 1.
what elements of equianos account might explain the average slave mortality rate of about 14 percent during the atlantic crossing.
assuming that carretta is correct and equiano was not born in africa why do you think he composed this fictitious narrative of his childhood instead of describing his own childhood in slavery.
exploitation.
slaves worked ten hours a day under the hot tropical sun slept in flimsy huts and lived on a starchy diet of corn yams and dried fish.
they were subjected to brutal discipline the fear of punishment is the principle we use.
to keep them in awe and order one planter declared.
when punishments came they were brutal.
flogging was commonplace some planters rubbed salt lemon juice or urine into the resulting wounds.
planters often took advantage of their power by raping enslaved women.
sexual exploitation was a largely unacknowledged but ubiquitous feature of part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 master slave relations something that many slave masters considered to be an unquestioned privilege of their position.
it was almost a constant practice with our clerks and other whites olaudah equiano wrote to commit violent depredations on the chastity of the female slaves thomas thistlewood was a jamaica planter who kept an unusually detailed journal in which he noted every act of sexual exploitation he committed.
in thirty seven years as a jamaica planter thistlewood recorded 3 852 sex acts with 138 enslaved women.
with sugar prices high and the cost of slaves low many planters simply worked their slaves to death and then bought more.
between 1708 and 1735 british planters on barbados imported about 85 000 africans however in that same time the islands black population increased by only 4 000 from 42 000 to 46 000.
the constant influx of new slaves kept the population thoroughly african in its languages religions and culture.
here wrote a jamaican observer each different nation of africa meet and dance after the manner of their own country.
and retain most of their native customs slavery in the chesapeake and south carolina west indian style slavery came to virginia and maryland following bacons rebellion.
taking advantage of the expansion of the british slave trade following the end of the royal african companys monopoly in 1698 elite planter politicians led a tobacco revolution and bought more africans putting these slaves to work on ever larger plantations.
by 1720 africans made up 20 percent of the chesapeake population by 1740 nearly 40 percent.
slavery had become a core institution no longer just one of several forms of unfree labor.
moreover slavery was now defined in racial terms.
virginia legislators prohibited sexual intercourse between english and africans and defined virtually all resident africans as slaves all servants imported or brought into this country by sea or land who were not christians in their native country shall be accounted and be slaves on the mainland as in the islands slavery was a system of brutal exploitation.
violence was common and the threat of violence always hung over masterslave relationships.
in 1669 virginias house of burgesses decreed that a master who killed a slave in the process of correcting him could not be charged with a felony since it would be irrational to destroy his own property.
from that point forward even the most extreme punishments were permitted by law.
slaves could not carry weapons or gather in large numbers.
slaveholders were especially concerned to discourage slaves from running away.
punishments for runaways commonly included not only brutal whipping but also branding or scarring to make recalcitrant slaves easier to identify.
virginia laws spelled out the procedures for capturing and returning runaway slaves in detail.
if a runaway slave was killed in the process of recapturing him the county would reimburse the slaves owner for his full value.
in some cases slave owners could choose to put runaway slaves up for trial if they were found guilty and executed the owner would be compensated for his loss thinking like a historian p 98.
despite the inherent brutality of the institution slaves in virginia and maryland worked under better conditions than those in the west indies.
many lived relatively long lives.
unlike sugar and rice which were killer crops that demanded strenuous labor in a tropical climate tobacco cultivation required steadier and less demanding labor in a more temperate environment.
workers planted young tobacco seedlings in spring hoed and weeded the crop in summer and in fall picked and hung the leaves to cure over the winter.
nor did diseases spread as easily in the chesapeake because plantation quarters were less crowded and more dispersed than those in the west indies.
finally because tobacco profits were lower than those from sugar planters treated their slaves less harshly than west indian planters did.
many tobacco planters increased their workforce by buying female slaves and encouraging them to have children.
in 1720 women made up more than onethird of the africans in maryland and the black population had begun to increase naturally.
be kind and indulgent to the breeding wenches one slave owner told his overseer and do not force them when with child upon any service or hardship that will be injurious to them by midcentury more than three quarters of the enslaved workers in the chesapeake were american born.
slaves in south carolina labored under much more oppressive conditions.
the colony grew slowly until 1700 when planters began to plant and export rice to southern europe where it was in great demand.
between 1720 and 1750 rice production increased fivefold.
to expand production planters imported thousands of africans some of them from rice growing societies.
by 1710 africans formed a majority of the total population eventually rising to 80 percent in ricegrowing areas figure 3 2.
most rice plantations lay in inland swamps and the work was dangerous and exhausting.
slaves planted weeded and harvested the rice in ankle deep mud.
chapter 3 40 000 blacks whites 30 000 black majority 20 000 10 000 figure 3 2 a black majority emerges in south carolina 1700 1740 between disease and the toll taken by the indian wars south carolinas white population hardly grew at all between 1690 and 1720.
but white planters imported thousands of enslaved africans to grow rice an extremely profitable plantation crop.
as early as 1705 the colony had a black majority which allowed the development among slaves of a strongly african influenced language and culture.
pools of stagnant water bred mosquitoes which transmitted diseases that claimed hundreds of african lives.
other slaves forced to move tons of dirt to build irrigation works died from exhaustion.
the labour required for growing rice is only fit for slaves a scottish traveler remarked and i think the hardest work i have seen them engaged in in south carolina as in the west indies and brazil there were many slave deaths and few births and the arrival of new slaves continually re africanized the black population.
an african american community emerges slaves came from many peoples in west africa and the central african regions of kongo and angola.
white planters welcomed ethnic diversity to deter slave revolts.
the safety of the plantations declared a widely read english pamphlet depends upon having negroes from all parts of guiny who do not understand each others languages and customs and cannot agree to rebel by accident or design most plantations drew laborers of many languages including kwa mande and kikongo.
among africans imported after the british atlantic world 1660 1750 1730 into the upper james river region of virginia 41 percent came from ethnic groups in present day nigeria and another 25 percent from west central africa.
the rest hailed from the windward and gold coasts senegambia and sierra leone.
in south carolina plantation owners preferred laborers from the gold coast and gambia who had a reputation as hardworking farmers.
but as african sources of slaves shifted southward after 1730 more than 30 percent of the colonys workers later came from kongo and angola.
initially the slaves did not think of themselves as africans or blacks but as members of a specific family clan or people wolof hausa ibo yoruba teke ngola and they sought out those who shared their language and customs.
in the upper james river region ibo men and women arrived in equal numbers married each other and maintained their ibo culture.
in most places though this was impossible.
slaves from varying backgrounds were thrown together and only gradually discovered common ground.
building community through painful trial and error slaves eventually discovered what limited freedoms their owners would allow them.
those who were not too rebellious or too recalcitrant were able to carve out precarious family lives though they were always in danger of being disrupted by sale or life threatening punishment and build the rudiments of a slave community.
one key to the development of families and communities was a more or less balanced sex ratio that encouraged marriage and family formation.
in south carolina the high death rate among slaves undermined ties of family and kinship but in the chesapeake after 1725 some slaves especially on larger plantations were able to create strong nuclear families and extended kin relations.
on one of charles carrolls estates in maryland 98 of the 128 slaves were members of two extended families.
these african american kin groups passed on family names traditions and knowledge to the next generation and thus a distinct culture gradually developed.
as one observer suggested blacks had created a separate world a nation within a nation as the slaves forged a new identity they carried on certain african practices but let others go.
many africans arrived in america with ritual scars that white compare and planters called country mark contrast ings these signs of ethnic iden how did the experiences of slaves in the chesatity fell into disuse on culturally peake differ from their diverse plantations.
ironically experiences in south on some plantations these afri carolina.
can markings were replaced by thinking like a historian servitude and slavery britains american colonies relied heavily on bound labor.
two forms predominated indentured servitude and african slavery.
the idea of being bound to a master is alien to most of us today the following texts allow us to glimpse some aspects of the experience.
in what ways were these two institutions similar and how did they differ.
slave advertisement from charlestown virginia july 24 1769.
a poor unhappy transported felons sorrowful account of his fourteen years transportation at virginia in america 1680.
at last to my new masters house i came at the town of wicocc o moco calld by name where my europian clothes were took from me which never after i again could see.
a canvas shirt and trowsers then they gave with a hop sack frock in which i was to slave no shoes nor stockings had i for to wear nor hat nor cap both head and feet were bare.
thus dressd into the field i nex t must go amongst tobacco plants all day to hoe at day break in the morn our work began and so held to the setting of the sun.
my fellow slaves were just five transports more with eighteen negroes which is twenty four.
we and the negroes both alike did fare of work and food we had an equal share.
source courtesy american antiquarian society.
mechanisms used to control slaves from thomas branagan the penitential tyrant or slave trader reformed 1807.
the shackles and spurs lower left were intended to prevent escape the faceguard with spiked collar top and lower right kept its wearer from either eating or lying down.
indentured servant advertisement from the pennsylvania gazette 1770.
this advertisement offers to sell the remainder of a servant girls indenture.
to be sold a healthy servant girls time about 17 years old who has between 3 and 4 years to serve.
she is sold for no other reason only there being more servants than are needful in the family where she is.
she has had the small pox can wash and do all sorts of housework.
enquire of the printers.
poem by james revel c 1680.
james revel was an englishman convicted of theft and transported to virginia where he served fourteen years as an indentured servant.
upon returning he published source library of congress.
court deposition of joseph mulders july 31 1649.
in a court case in lower norfolk county virginia indentured servant joseph mulders testified that his mistress deborah fernehaugh brutally beat her maidservant charity dallen.
mulders testified that deborah fernehaugh the mistress of this deponent did beate her mayd sarvant in the quartering house before the dresser more liken a dogge then a christian and that at a certaine time i felt her head which was beaten as soft as a sponge in one place and that as there shee was a weeding shee complained and sayd her backe bone as shee thought was broken with beating and that i did see the mayds arme naked which was full of blacke and blew bruises and pinches and her necke likewise and that after wards i tould my mistress of it and said that two or three blowes could not make her in such a case and after this my speeches shee chidge i e chided the said mayd for shewing her body to the men and very often afterwards she the maid would have shoen mee how shee had been beaten but i refused to have seene it saying it concernes me not i will doe my worke and if my mistress abuse you you may complaine and about 8 dayes since being about the time shee last went to complaine i knew of her goeing but would not tell my mistress of it although shee asked mee and sayd i could not chuse but know of it.
runaway slave advertisement chestertown maryland march 12 1755.
absconding from their masters was a common method of resistance for both slaves and servants and masters frequently posted runaway advertisements in local newspapers.
chestertown maryland march 12 1755.
ten pistoles reward.
ran away last night from james ringgold of eastern neck in kent county in the province of maryland the two following servant men one named james francis an indented servant for five years a middle sizd young fellow about 26 years of age of a smooth fair complexion his hair cut off is an englishman and speaks a little in the west country dialect was brought up to farming and husbandry had on a country kersey jacket and breeches blue fearnought jacket and an old dark colourd coat.
the other a lusty young mulatto fellow named toby a slave about the same age he is a well set clean limbd stout fellow neither a very bright or very dark mulatto has large nostrils is a likely fellow and when he talks drawls his words out in a very slow manner is no other way remarkable he had on the same sort of clothes with the other servant and one of them has a check or striped green and red everlasting jacket on or with them and perhaps the mulatto may set up for a cooper or carpenter having work at both those business and also understands plantation affairs.
whoever takes up and secures the above persons and gives notice so as their master gets them again shall have four pistoles reward for the white servant and six pistoles for the mulatto.
that this slave should runaway and attempt getting his liberty is very alarming as he has always been too kindly used if any thing by his master and one in whom his master has put great confidence and depended on him to overlook the rest of his slaves and he had no kind of provocation to go off.
it seems to be the interest at least of every gentleman that has slaves to be active in the beginning of these attempts.
thomas ringgold.
sources 2 pennsylvania gazette may 3 1770 3 john melville jennings ed the virginia magazine of history and biography 56 april 1948 187 194 5 second to none a documentary history of american women vol.
1 university of nebraska press 1993 67 68 6 pennsylvania gazette march 12 1755.
analyzing the evidence 1.
what information do the traders in sources 1 and 2 want to convey to prospective buyers and why.
what similarities and differences do you see in the way sellers might choose to market servants and slaves.
what aspects of servitude did james revel object to source 3.
how did he compare the experiences of servants and slaves.
source 4 appeared in an abolitionist work published in new york in 1807.
how does that fact influence your interpretation of the images.
how does mulders grapple with his position as a fellow servant as he testifies against his mistress source 5.
based on mulderss testimony the court removed dallen from fernehaughs household.
how might things have worked differently if either mulders or dallen had been a slave.
in source 6 what characteristics of each man does the ad emphasize.
how does ringgold view himself as a master and what does his special plea to other slaveholders tell us about slaveholding culture.
putting it all together using the sources above along with what you learned in class and in chapter 3 write a short essay that compares servitude and slavery.
in what ways did african slavery in the british colonies grow out of servitude and bear close similarities to it and in what ways were slaves set apart and treated fundamentally differently than their servant counterparts.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 hulling rice in west africa and georgia cultural practices often extend over time and space.
the eighteenth century engraving on the left shows west african women using huge wooden mortars and pestles to strip the tough outer hull from rice kernels.
in the photo on the right taken a century and a half later african american women in georgia use similar tools to prepare rice for their families.
library of congress.
courtesy georgia vanishing archives collection sap093.
brands or scars that identified them with their owners.
but other tangible markers of african heritage persisted including hairstyles motifs used in wood carvings and pottery the large wooden mortars and pestles used to hull rice and the design of houses in which rooms were arranged from front to back in a distinctive i pattern not side by side as was common in english dwellings.
musical instruments especially drums gourd rattles and a stringed instrument called a molo forerunner to the banjo helped africans preserve cultural traditions and eventually shape american musical styles.
african values also persisted.
some slaves passed down muslim beliefs and many more told their children of the spiritual powers of conjurers called obeah or ifa who knew the ways of the african gods.
enslaved yorubas consulted orunmila the god of fate and other africans a jamaican planter noted relied on obeah to revenge injuries and insults discover and punish thieves and adulterers and to predict the future resistance and accommodation slaves freedom of action was always dramatically circumscribed.
it became illegal to teach slaves to read and write and most slaves owned no property of their own.
because the institution of slavery rested on fear planters had to learn a ferocious form of cruelty.
slaves might be whipped restrained or maimed for any infraction large or small.
a female cook in a virginia household was cruelly loaded with various kinds of iron machines she had one particularly on her head which locked her mouth so fast that she could scarcely speak and could not eat nor drink thomas jefferson who witnessed such punishments on his fathers virginia plantation noted that each generation of whites was nursed educated and daily exercised in tyranny and he concluded that the relationship between master and slave is a perpetual exercise of the most unremitting despotism on the one part and degrading submission on the other a fellow virginian planter george mason agreed every master is born a petty tyrant chapter 3 the british atlantic world 1660 1750 virginian luxuries c 1810 this painting by an unknown artist depicts the brutality and sexual exploitation inherent in a slave society.
on the right an owner chastises a male slave by beating him with a cane on the left a white master asserts his sexual prerogative with a female slave.
abby aldrich rockefeller folk art museum williamsburg va.
the extent of white violence often depended on the size and density of the slave population.
as virginia planter william byrd ii complained of his slaves in 1736 numbers make them insolent in the northern colonies where slaves were few white violence was sporadic.
but plantation owners and overseers in the sugar and rice growing areas where africans outnumbered europeans eight or more to one routinely whipped assertive slaves.
they also prohibited their workers from leaving the plantation without special passes and called on their poor white neighbors to patrol the countryside at night.
despite the constant threat of violence some slaves ran away a very small number of them successfully.
in some parts of the americas for example in jamaica runaway slaves were able to form large independent maroon communities.
but on the mainland planters had the resources necessary to reclaim runaways and such communities were unusual and precarious.
more often slaves who spoke english and possessed artisanal skills fled to colonial towns where they tried to pass as free occasionally they succeeded.
slaves who did not run away were engaged in a constant tug of war with their owners over the terms of their enslavement.
some blacks bartered extra work for better food and clothes others seized a small privilege and dared the master to revoke it.
in this way sundays gradually became a day of rest asserted as a right rather than granted as a privilege.
when bargaining failed slaves protested silently by working slowly or stealing.
slave owners greatest fear trace change over was that their regime of terror time would fail and slaves would rise how much autonomy up to murder them in their could slaves attain and beds.
occasionally that fear was what did slave owners do realized.
in the 1760s in amherst to control them.
county virginia a slave killed four whites in elizabeth city county eight slaves strangled their master in bed.
but the circumstances of slavery made any larger scale uprising all but impossible.
to rebel against their masters slaves would have to be able to communicate secretly but effectively across long distances choose leaders they could trust formulate and disseminate strategy accumulate large numbers of weapons and ensure that no one betrayed their plans.
this was all but impossible in plantation slavery the preponderance of force was on the side of the slave owners and blacks who chose to rise up did so at their peril.
the stono rebellion the largest slave uprising in the mainland colonies south carolinas stono rebellion of 1739 illustrates the impossibility of success.
the catholic governor of spanish florida instigated the revolt by promising freedom to fugitive slaves.
by february 1739 at least 69 slaves had escaped to st augustine and rumors circulated that a conspiracy was formed by negroes in carolina to rise and make their way out of the province when war between england and spain broke out in september 75 africans rose in revolt and killed a number of whites near the part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 stono river.
according to one account some of the rebels were portuguese speaking catholics from the kingdom of kongo who hoped to escape to florida.
displaying their skills as soldiers decades of brutal slave raiding in kongo had militarized the society there the rebels marched toward florida with colours displayed and two drums beating though their numbers and organization were impressive the stono rebels were soon met by a wellarmed mounted force of south carolina militia.
in the ensuing battle 44 slaves were killed and the rebellion was suppressed preventing any general uprising.
in response frightened south carolinians cut slave imports and tightened plantation discipline.
the rise of the southern gentry as the southern colonies became full fledged slave societies life changed for whites as well as for blacks.
consider the career of william byrd ii 1674 1744.
byrds father a successful planter merchant in virginia hoped to marry his children into the english gentry.
to smooth his sons entry into landed society byrd sent him to england for his education.
but his statusconscious classmates shunned young byrd calling him a colonial a first bitter taste of the gradations of rank in english society.
other english rejections followed.
lacking aristocratic conidentify causes nections byrd was denied a how did the planter elite post with the board of trade maintain alliances with their smallholder passed over three times for the neighbors.
royal governorship of virginia and rejected as a suitor by a rich englishwoman.
in 1726 at age fifty two byrd finally gave up and moved back to virginia where he sometimes felt he was being buried alive accepting his lesser destiny as a member of the colonys elite byrd built an elegant brick mansion on the familys estate at westover sat in the best pew in the church and won an appointment to the governors council.
william byrd iis experience mirrored that of many planter merchants trapped in virginia and south carolina by their inferior colonial status.
they used their wealth to rule over white yeomen families and tenant farmers and relied on violence to exploit enslaved blacks.
planters used africans to grow food as well as tobacco to build houses wagons and tobacco casks and to make shoes and clothes.
by making their plantations self sufficient the chesapeake elite survived the depressed tobacco market between 1670 and 1720.
white identity and equality to prevent uprisings like bacons rebellion the chesapeake gentry found ways to assist middling and poor whites.
they gradually lowered taxes in virginia for example the annual head tax on each adult man fell from 45 pounds of tobacco in 1675 to just 5 pounds in 1750.
they also encouraged smallholders to improve their economic lot by using slave labor and many did so.
by 1770 60 percent of english families in the chesapeake owned at least one slave.
on the political front planters now allowed poor yeomen and some tenants to vote.
the strategy of the leading families the carters lees randolphs and robinsons was to bribe these voters with rum money and the promise of minor offices in county governments.
in return they expected the yeomen and tenants to elect them to office and defer to their rule.
this horse trading solidified the authority of the planter elite which used its control of the house of burgesses to limit the power of the royal governor.
hundreds of yeomen farmers benefitted as well tasting political power and garnering substantial fees and salaries as deputy sheriffs road surveyors estate appraisers and grand jurymen.
even as wealthy chesapeake gentlemen formed political ties with smallholders they took measures to set themselves apart culturally.
as late as the 1720s leading planters were boisterous aggressive men who lived much like the common folk hunting drinking gambling on horse races and demonstrating their manly prowess by forcing themselves on female servants and slaves.
as time passed however the planters began like william byrd ii to model themselves on the english aristocracy remaining sexual predators but learning from advice books how to act like gentlemen in other regards i must not sit in others places nor sneeze nor cough in peoples faces.
nor with my fingers pick my nose nor wipe my hands upon my clothes cultivating gentility a refined but elaborate lifestyle they replaced their modest wooden houses with mansions of brick and mortar.
planters educated their sons in london as lawyers and gentlemen.
but unlike byrds father they expected them to return to america marry local heiresses and assume their fathers roles managing plantations socializing with fellow gentry and running the political system.
wealthy chesapeake and south carolina women likewise emulated the english elite.
they read english newspapers and fashionable magazines wore the finest english clothes and dined in the english fashion including an elaborate afternoon tea.
to enhance their daughters gentility and improve their marriage prospects parents hired english tutors.
once married chapter 3 planter women deferred to their husbands reared pious children and maintained elaborate social networks in time creating a new ideal the southern gentlewoman.
using the profits generated by enslaved africans in the south atlantic system of commerce wealthy planters formed an increasingly well educated refined and stable ruling class.
the northern maritime economy the south atlantic system had a broad geographical reach.
as early as the 1640s new england farmers supplied the sugar islands with bread lumber fish and meat.
as a west indian explained planters had rather buy foode at very deare rates than produce it by labour soe infinite is the profitt of sugar works by 1700 the economies of the west indies and new england were closely interwoven.
soon farmers and merchants in new york new jersey and pennsylvania were also shipping wheat corn and bread to the caribbean.
by the 1750s about two thirds of new englands exports and half of those from the middle atlantic colonies went to the british and french sugar islands.
the sugar economy linked britains entire atlantic empire.
in return for the sugar they sent to england west indian planters received credit in the form of bills of exchange from london merchants.
the planters used these bills to buy slaves from africa and to pay north american farmers and merchants for their provisions and shipping services.
the mainland colonists then exchanged the bills for british manufactures primarily textiles and iron goods.
the urban economy the west indian trade created the first american merchant fortunes and the first urban industries.
merchants in boston newport providence philadelphia and new york invested their profits in new ships some set up manufacturing enterprises including twenty six refineries that processed raw sugar into finished loaves.
mainland distilleries turned west indian molasses into rum producing more than 2 5 million gallons in massachusetts alone by the 1770s.
merchants in salem marblehead and smaller new england ports built a major fishing industry by selling salted mackerel and cod to the sugar islands and to southern europe.
baltimore merchants transformed their town into a major the british atlantic world 1660 1750 port by developing a bustling export business in wheat while traders in charleston shipped deerskins indigo and rice to european markets map 3 4.
as transatlantic commerce expanded from five hundred voyages a year in the 1680s to fifteen hundred annually in the 1730s american port cities grew in size and complexity.
by 1750 the populations of newport and charleston were nearly 10 000 boston had 15 000 residents and new york had almost 18 000.
the largest port was philadelphia whose population by 1776 had reached 30 000 the size of a large european provincial city.
smaller coastal towns emerged as centers of the lumber and shipbuilding industries.
seventy sawmills lined the piscataqua river in new hampshire providing low cost wood for homes warehouses and especially shipbuilding.
hundreds of shipwrights turned out oceangoing vessels while other artisans made ropes sails and metal fittings for the new fleet.
by the 1770s colonial built ships made up one third of the british merchant fleet.
the south atlantic system extended far into the interior.
a explain fleet of small vessels sailed back consequences and forth on the hudson and how did the rise of the delaware rivers delivering car south atlantic system goes of european manufactures impact economic development in the northern and picking up barrels of flour colonies.
and wheat to carry to new york and philadelphia for export to the west indies and europe.
by the 1750s hundreds of professional teamsters in maryland were transporting 370 000 bushels of wheat and corn and 16 000 barrels of flour to urban markets each year more than 10 000 wagon trips.
to service this traffic entrepreneurs and artisans set up taverns horse stables and barrel making shops in towns along the wagon roads.
lancaster the town that hosted the iroquois conference described in the chapter opening in a prosperous wheat growing area of pennsylvania boasted more than 200 german and english artisans and a dozen merchants.
urban society wealthy merchants dominated the social life of seaport cities.
in 1750 about 40 merchants controlled more than 50 percent of philadelphias trade.
like the chesapeake gentry urban merchants imitated the british upper classes importing architectural design books from england and building georgian style mansions to display their wealth.
their wives strove to create a genteel culture by buying fine furniture and entertaining guests at elegant dinners.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 with the map title in mind look carefully at the two types of transoceanic trade one controlled by british ships and the other open to colonial vessels.
the latter soon dominated this ocean commerce.
n the bold colorful arrows on this map give it a dynamic quality that reflects the nature of the atlantic trade.
but the title suggests we should look for something particular the rise of the american merchant.
w e t o ba cco igo ind great britain glasgow r mbe r lu flou london bristol s europe ar u fa man boston newport new york philadelphia baltimore chesapeake ports north america salt wine bills of exchang e s la v fish rice es ds oo dg bil f ls o atlantic oc e a n nge ha exc e tur fac m rum ods u an new spain spain portugal flour lumber fish molasses sugar manufactures bills of exchange west indies france las mo ds d goo cture o red g rum manufactu charleston savannah g su ses madrid lisbon cadiz think of the bold straight arrows as a diagram rather than as routes that are accurate in a geographical sense.
the width of the arrows suggests the relative importance of each leg.
compare this diagram type map with the accurately scaled widths of the arrows on map 3 3.
africa slaves james fort sierra leone british controlled trade american controlled trade 1 000 miles accra cape coast castle 1 000 kilometers lagos map 3 4 the growing power of american merchants 1750 throughout the colonial era british merchant houses dominated the transatlantic trade in manufactures sugar tobacco and slaves.
however by 1750 american born merchants in boston new york and philadelphia had seized control of the commerce between the mainland and the west indies.
in addition newport traders played a small role in the slave trade from africa and boston and charleston merchants grew rich carrying fish and rice to southern europe.
artisan and shopkeeper families the middle ranks of seaport society made up nearly half the population.
innkeepers butchers seamstresses shoemakers weavers bakers carpenters masons and dozens of other skilled workers toiled to gain an income sufficient to maintain their families in modest comfort.
wives and husbands often worked as a team and taught the mysteries of the craft to their children.
some artisans aspired to wealth and status an entrepreneurial ethic that prompted them to hire apprentices and expand production.
however most artisans were not well todo.
during his working life a tailor was lucky to accumulate 30 worth of property far less than the 2 000 owned at death by an ordinary merchant or the 300 listed in the probate inventory of a successful blacksmith.
laboring men and women formed the lowest ranks of urban society.
merchants needed hundreds of dockworkers to unload manufactured goods and molasses from inbound ships and reload them with barrels of wheat fish and rice.
for these demanding jobs merchants used enslaved blacks and indentured servants who together made up 30 percent of the workforce in philadelphia and new york city until the 1750s otherwise they hired unskilled wageworkers.
poor white and black women eked out a living by washing clothes spinning wool or working as servants or prostitutes.
to make ends meet laboring families sent their children out to work.
periods of stagnant commerce threatened the financial security of merchants and artisans alike.
for laborers seamen and seamstresses whose chapter 3 the british atlantic world 1660 1750 the greenwood lee family 1747 born in massachusetts and apprenticed as an engraver john greenwood 1727 1792 painted dozens of commissioned works there before moving to surinam in 1752.
he painted this scene of his own family at the age of twenty.
group portraits with so many people were rare in the colonies and it is a technically impressive composition.
greenwood himself is at the right rear wigless he wears a velvet cap to keep his head warm and holding a palette and brushes.
the table displays a basket of needlework and a volume of the spectator the popular london periodical published by joseph addison and richard steele.
photograph 2014 museum of fine arts boston.
bequest of henry lee shattuck in memory of the late morris gray 1983 34 household budgets left no margin for sickness or unemployment depressed trade meant hunger dependence on public charity and for the most desperate petty thievery or prostitution.
the sugar and slave based south atlantic system and cycles of imperial warfare brought economic uncertainty as well as opportunity to the people of the northern colonies.
the new politics of empire 1713 1750 the south atlantic system also changed the politics of empire.
british ministers pleased with the wealth produced by the trade in slaves sugar rice and tobacco ruled the colonies with a gentle hand.
the colonists took advantage of that leniency to strengthen their political institutions and eventually to challenge the rules of the mercantilist system.
the rise of colonial assemblies after the glorious revolution representative assemblies in america copied the english whigs and limited the powers of crown officials.
in massachusetts during the 1720s the assembly repeatedly ignored the kings instructions to provide the royal governor with a permanent salary and legislatures in north carolina new jersey and pennsylvania did the same.
using such tactics the legislatures gradually took control of taxation and appointments angering imperial bureaucrats and absentee proprietors.
the people in power in america complained william penn during a struggle with the pennsylvania assembly think nothing taller than themselves but the trees leading the increasingly powerful assemblies were mem identify causes bers of the colonial elite.
although what explains the increasing political autonomy of most property owning white men the colonies in the eighhad the right to vote only men teenth century.
of wealth and status stood for election.
in new jersey in 1750 90 percent of assemblymen came from influential political families figure 3 3.
in virginia seven members of the wealthy lee family sat in the house of burgesses and along with other powerful families dominated its major committees.
in new england affluent descendants of the original puritans formed a core of political leaders.
go into every village in new england john adams wrote in 1765 and you will find that the office of justice of the peace and even the place of representative have generally descended from generation to generation in three or four families at most however neither elitist assemblies nor wealthy property owners could impose unpopular edicts on the people.
purposeful crowd actions were a fact of colonial life.
an uprising of ordinary citizens overthrew the part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 number of relatives per assemblyman 7 3 6 1 2 none 100 1770 1776 figure 3 3 family connections and political power new jersey 1700 1776 as early as 1700 more than 50 percent of the members of the new jersey assembly came from families with a history of political leadership.
by 1750 the percentage whose fathers or other relatives had served in the assembly reached 90 percent indeed some members had seven relatives who were or had been political leaders clear testimony of the emergence of powerful political families and an experienced governing elite.
however as the conflict with britain increased after 1765 voters in new jersey and elsewhere ousted lukewarm patriots and new families entered the political ranks.
dominion of new england in 1689.
in new york mobs closed houses of prostitution in salem massachusetts they ran people with infectious diseases out of town and in new jersey in the 1730s and 1740s mobs of farmers battled with proprietors who were forcing tenants off disputed lands.
when officials in boston restricted the sale of farm produce to a single public market a crowd destroyed the building and its members defied the authorities to arrest them.
if you touch one you shall touch all an anonymous letter warned the sheriff and we will show you a hundred men where you can show one these expressions of popular discontent combined with the growing authority of the assemblies created a political system that was broadly responsive to popular pressure and increasingly resistant to british control.
salutary neglect british colonial policy during the reigns of george i r 1714 1727 and george ii r 1727 1760 allowed for this rise of american self government as royal bureaucrats pleased by growing trade and import duties relaxed their supervision of internal colonial affairs.
in 1775 british political philosopher edmund burke would praise this strategy as salutary neglect.
salutary neglect was a by product of the political system developed by sir robert walpole the whig leader in the house of commons from 1720 to 1742.
by providing supporters with appointments and pensions walpole won parliamentary approval for his policies.
however his patronage appointments filled the british government including the board of trade and the colonial bureaucracy with do nothing political hacks.
when governor gabriel johnson arrived in north carolina in the 1730s he vowed to curb the powers of the assembly and make a mighty change in the face of affairs receiving little support from the board of trade johnson renounced reform and decided to do nothing which can be reasonably blamed and leave the rest to time and a new set of inhabitants walpoles tactics also weakened the empire by undermining the legitimacy of the political system.
radical whigs protested that walpole had betrayed the glorious revolution by using patronage the practice of giving offices and salaries to political allies and bribery to create a strong court or kingly party.
the country party whose members were landed gentlemen likewise warned that walpoles policies of high taxes and a bloated royal bureaucracy threatened british liberties.
heeding these arguments colonial legislators complained that royal governors abused their patronage powers.
to preserve american liberty the colonists strengthened the powers of the representative assemblies unintentionally laying the foundation for the american independence movement american voices p 108.
protecting the mercantile system in 1732 walpole provided a parliamentary subsidy for the new colony of georgia.
while georgias reformminded trustees envisioned the colony as a refuge for britains poor walpole had little interest in social reform he subsidized georgia to protect the valuable rice growing colony of south carolina.
the subsidy however did exactly the opposite.
britains expansion into georgia outraged spanish officials who were chapter 3 the british atlantic world 1660 1750 succession 1740 1748.
massive french armies battled british subsidized german forces in europe and french naval forces roamed the west indies vainly trying to conquer a british sugar island.
three thousand new england militiamen supported by a british naval squadron in 1745 captured louisbourg the french fort guarding the entrance to the st lawrence river.
to the dismay of new england puritans who feared invasion from catholic quebec the treaty of aix la chapelle 1748 returned louisbourg to france.
the treaty made it clear to colonial leaders that england would act in its own interests not theirs.
mercantilism and the american colonies sir robert walpole the kings minister all eyes are on the secretary of the treasury sir robert walpole left as he offers advice to the speaker of the house of commons.
a brilliant politician walpole used patronage to command a majority in the commons and also won the confidence of george i and george ii the german speaking monarchs from the duchy of hanover.
walpoles personal motto let sleeping dogs lie helps explain his colonial policy of salutary neglect.
clandon park surrey uk national trust photographic library hawksley studios the bridgeman art library.
already angry about the rising tide of smuggled british manufactures in new spain.
to counter britains commercial imperialism spanish naval forces stepped up their seizure of illegal traders in the process mutilating an english sea captain robert jenkins.
yielding to parliamentary pressure walpole declared war on spain in 1739.
the so called war of jenkinss ear 1739 1741 was a fiasco for britain.
in 1740 british regulars failed to capture st augustine because south carolina whites still shaken by the stono rebellion refused to commit militia units to the expedition.
a year later an assault on the prosperous seaport of cartagena in present day colombia also failed 20 000 british sailors and soldiers and 2 500 colonial troops died in the attack mostly from tropical diseases.
the war of jenkinss ear quickly became part of a general european conflict the war of the austrian though parliament prohibited americans from manufacturing textiles woolen act 1699 hats hat act 1732 and iron products such as plows axes and skillets iron act 1750 it could not prevent the colonies from maturing economically.
american merchants soon controlled over 75 percent of the transatlantic trade in manufactures and 95 percent of the commerce between the mainland and the british west indies see map 3 4 p 104.
moreover by the 1720s the british sugar islands could not absorb all the flour fish and meat produced by mainland settlers.
so ignoring britains intense rivalry with france colonial merchants sold their produce to the french sugar islands.
when american rum distillers began to buy cheap molasses from the french islands the west indian sugar lobby in london persuaded parliament to pass the molasses act of 1733.
the act placed a high tariff on french molasses so high that it would no longer be profitable for american merchants to import it.
colonists protested that the molasses act would cripple the distilling industry cut farm exports and by slashing colonial income reduce the mainlands purchases of british goods.
when parliament ignored these arguments american merchants smuggled in french molasses by bribing customs officials.
the lack of currency in the colonies prompted another conflict with british officials.
to pay for british manufactures american merchants used the bills of exchange and the gold and silver coins earned in the west indian trade.
these payments drained the colonial economy of money making it difficult for americans to borrow funds or to buy and sell goods among themselves.
to remedy the problem ten colonial assemblies established public land banks which lent paper money american voices the rise of colonial self government between 1700 and 1760 members of the representative assemblies in british north america gradually expanded their authority and power.
their success was the result of greater popular participation in politics and their own political skills.
however the shift in power from imperial appointees to colonial legislators occurred in a piecemeal fashion as the almost unconscious product of a series of small seemingly inconsequential struggles.
as you read the following correspondence among legislators governors and british officials look closely at the character of the disputes and how they were resolved.
alexander spotswood confronting the house of burgesses as a reward for his military service fighting the forces of louis xiv of france alexander spotswood became governor of virginia in 1710.
a contentious man spotswood was a controversial governor.
he told the house of burgesses to its face that the voters had mistakenly chosen a set of representatives whom heaven has not generally endowed with the ordinary intellectual or social qualifications requisite to legislators spotswood set out to reform the voting system that in his judgment produced such mediocre representatives.
his efforts to oust popular members of the gentry from the house of burgesses created few friends in 1722 his enemies in virginia used their influence in london to have him removed from office.
to ye council of trade virginia october 15 1712 my lords.
the indians continue their incursions in north carolina and the death of colo hyde their govr which happened the beginning of last month increases the misery of that province.
this unhappy state of her majts subjects in my neighbourhood is ye more affecting to me because i have very little hopes of being enabled to relieve them by our assembly which i have called to meet next week for the mob of this country having tried their strength in the late election and finding themselves able to carry whom they please have generally chosen representatives of their own class who as their principal recommendation have declared their resolution to raise no tax on the people let the occasion be what it will.
this is owing to a defect in the constitution which allows to every one tho but just out of the condition of a servant and that can but purchase half an acre of land an equal vote with the man of the best estate in the country.
the militia of this colony is perfectly useless without arms or ammunition and by an unaccountable infatuation no arguments i have used can prevail on these people to make their militia more serviceable or to fall into any other measures for the defence of their country.
from the journal of the virginia council december the 17th 1714 the governor this day laying before the council a letter from the right honorable the lords commissioners for trade dated the 23d of april 1713 directing him to advise with the council to recommend to the generall assembly to pass a law for qualifying the electors the persons elected burgesses to serve in the generall assembly of this colony in a more just equal manner than the laws now in force do direct.
the council declare that they cannot advise the governor to move for any alteration in the present method of electing of burgesses some being of opinion that this is not a proper time others that the present manner of electing of burgesses the qualifications of the elected is sufficiently provided for by the laws now in force.
to mr secretary james stanhope july 15 1715.
i cannot forbear regretting yt i must always have to do with ye representatives of ye vulgar people and mostly with such members as are of their stamp and understanding for so long as half an acre of land which is of small value in this country qualifys a man to be an elector the meaner sort of people will ever carry ye elections and the humour generally runs to choose such men as are their most familiar companions who very eagerly seek to be burgesses merely for the lucre of the salary and who for fear of not being chosen again dare in assembly do nothing that may be disrelished disapproved out of the house by ye common people.
hence it often happens yt what appears prudent and feasible to his majestys governors and council here will not pass with the house of burgesses upon whom they must depend for the means of putting their designs in execution.
to the lords commissioners of trade may 23 1716.
the behaviour of this gentleman philip ludwell jr the colonys auditor in constantly opposing whatever i have offered for ye due collecting the quitt rents annual feudal dues on land and regulating the accts his stirring up ye humours of the people before the last election of burgesses tampering with the most mutinous of that house and betraying to them the measures resolved on in council for his majestys service would have made me likewise suspend him from ye council but i find by the late instructions i have received from his majesty that power is taken from ye governor and transferred upon the majority of that board of councilors and while there are no less than seven of his relations there it is impossible to get a majority to consent to the suspension of him.
sources r a brock ed the official letters of alexander spotswood richmond virginia historical society 1885 2 1 2 124 154 155 h r macilwaine ed executive journals of the council of colonial virginia richmond virginia state library 1928 3 392.
george clinton a plea for assistance george clinton served as governor of new york from 1744 to 1752.
like many governors during the era of salutary neglect clinton owed his appointment to political connections in england.
as the second son of the seventh earl of lincoln he would inherit neither the familys estate nor his fathers position in the house of lords those went to his elder brother.
to provide an income for clinton his family traded its votes in parliament for patronage appointments.
however once clinton was installed as governor of new york he found himself dependent on the assembly for the payment of his salary and the salaries of all members of his administration.
my lords i have in my former letters informd your lordships what incroachments the assemblys of this province have from time to time made on his majestys prerogative authority in this province in drawing an absolute dependence of all the officers upon them for their saleries reward of their services by their taking in effect the nomination to all officers.
1stly that the assembly refuse to admit of any amendment to any money bill in any part of the bill so that the bill must pass as it comes from the assembly or all the supplies granted for the support of government the most urgent services must be lost.
2ndly it appears that they take the payment of the military forces passing of muster rolls into their own hands by naming the commissaries for those purposes in the act.
3rdly they by granting the saleries to the officers personally by name not to the officer for the time being intimate that if any person be appointed to any office his salery must depend upon their approbation of the appointment.
i must now refer it to your lordships consideration whether it be not high time to put a stop to these usurpations of the assembly on his majestys authority in this province and for that purpose may it not be proper that his majesty signify his disallowance of the act at least for the payment of saleries.
source e b ocallaghan ed documents relative to the colonial history of the state of new york albany 1860 on 2 211.
questions for analysis 1.
what policies does spotswood wish to pursue.
why cant he persuade the house of burgesses to implement them.
according to spotswood what is wrong with virginias political system.
how does he propose to reform it.
unlike the house of burgesses which was elected by qualified voters the members of the governors council in virginia were appointed by the king usually on the governors recommendation.
what is the councils response to the plan to reform the political system.
given spotswoods description of the incident involving philip ludwell where did the political sympathies of the council lie.
what were clintons complaints about the actions of the new york assembly.
did these actions represent a more or less serious threat to imperial power than the activities of the virginia burgesses.
based on their correspondence with the board of trade which governor spotswood or clinton was the stronger representative of the interests of the crown.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 the siege and capture of louisbourg 1745 in 1760 as british and colonial troops moved toward victory in the french and indian war 1754 1763 the london artist j stevens sought to bolster imperial pride by celebrating an earlier angloamerican triumph.
in 1745 a british naval squadron led a flotilla of colonial ships and thousands of new england militiamen in an attack on the french fort at louisbourg on cape breton island near the mouth of the st lawrence river.
after a siege of forty days the anglo american force captured the fort long considered impregnable.
the victory was bittersweet because the treaty of aix la chapelle 1748 returned the island to france.
anne s k brown military collection brown university library.
to farmers who pledged their land as collateral for the loans.
farmers used the currency to buy tools or livestock or to pay creditors thereby stimulating trade.
however some assemblies particularly the legislature in rhode island issued huge quantities of paper money which consequently decreased in value and required merchants to accept it as legal tender.
english merchants and other creditors rightly complained about being forced to accept devalued money.
so in 1751 parliament passed the currency act which barred the new england colonies from establishing new land banks and prohibited the use of publicly issued paper money to pay private debts.
these conflicts over trade and paper money angered a new generation of english political leaders.
in 1749 charles townshend of the board of trade charged that the american assemblies had assumed many of the ancient and established prerogatives wisely preserved in the crown and he vowed to replace salutary neglect with more rigorous imperial control.
the wheel of empire had come full circle.
in the 1650s england had set out to create a centrally managed atlantic empire and over the course of a century achieved the military and economic aspects of that goal.
mercantilist legislation maritime warfare commercial expansion and the forced labor of a million african slaves brought prosperity to britain.
however internal unrest the glorious revolution and a policy of salutary neglect had weakened britains political authority over its american colonies.
recognizing the threat self government posed to the empire british officials in the late 1740s vowed to reassert their power in america an initiative with disastrous results.
summary in this chapter we examined processes of change in politics and society.
the political story began in the 1660s as britain imposed controls on its american possessions.
parliament passed the acts of trade and navigation to keep colonial products and trade in english hands.
then king james ii abolished representative institutions in the northern colonies and created the authoritarian dominion of new england.
following the glorious revolution the navigation acts remained in place and tied the american economy to that of britain.
but the uprisings of 1688 1689 overturned james iis policy of strict imperial control restored colonial self government and ushered in an era of salutary political neglect.
it also initiated a long era of imperial warfare in which native american peoples allied themselves to the colonies and often served as proxy warriors against frenchand spanish allied peoples pursuing their own goals in the process.
the social story centers on the development of the south atlantic system of production and trade which chapter 3 involved an enormous expansion in african slave raiding the atlantic slave trade and the cultivation of sugar rice and tobacco in america.
this complex system created an exploited african american labor force in the southern mainland and west indian colonies while it allowed european american farmers chapter review merchants and artisans on the north american mainland to prosper.
how would the two stories play out.
in 1750 slavery and the south atlantic system seemed firmly entrenched but the days of salutary neglect appeared numbered.
c h a p t e r r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events proprietorship p 82 quakers p 82 navigation acts p 83 dominion of new england p 85 glorious revolution p 86 constitutional monarchy p 87 second hundred years war p 88 key people tribalization p 88 covenant chain p 89 south atlantic system p 90 middle passage p 94 stono rebellion p 101 gentility p 102 salutary neglect p 106 patronage p 106 land banks p 110 william penn p 82 edmund andros p 85 william of orange p 86 john locke p 86 jacob leisler p 87 william byrd ii p 102 robert walpole p 106 review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapters main ideas.
what strategies did charles ii and james ii employ to try to gain more centralized control over englands american colonies.
what did james hope to accomplish by creating the dominion of new england.
how did the long era of imperial warfare beginning in 1689 affect the colonies native americans and relations between them.
what was the south atlantic system and how did it shape colonial society.
how did the institution of slavery develop and why did it develop differently in the chesapeake the carolina low country and the west indies.
thematic understanding trace the developments outlined in the section entitled politics and power from 1660 to 1750 on the thematic timeline on page 79.
what pattern of political evolution do you see in colonial interactions with britain.
part 2 chapter review making connections recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place in chapter 2 we traced the emergence of three distinct colonial types in the americas during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries tribute plantation and neoeuropean colonies.
in chapter 3 we have seen how britains plantation and neo european colonies became more closely interconnected after 1700.
what developments caused them to become more closely tied to each other.
how did they benefit from these ties.
can you see any disadvantages to the colonies in a more fully integrated atlantic system.
more to explore visual evidence consider the illustrations of women hulling rice in west africa and georgia on page 100.
historians have long debated the role africans played in developing rice cultivation in the south carolina and georgia low country.
these debates have focused primarily on methods of cultivation did africans who had prior experience with rice teach english planters how to grow it.
how can these two images contribute to the debate and expand our perspective on the question of african influences in american rice production.
start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.
ira berlin many thousands gone 2000.
explores the varieties of slave experience in north america.
olaudah equiano the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano 1789 reprint 2006.
a compelling and influential eighteenth century slave autobiography.
paul mapp the elusive west and the contest for empire 1713 1763 2011.
offers a continental perspective on the contest for european control of north america.
owen stanwood the empire reformed 2011.
tells the story of the glorious revolution in the american colonies.
africans in america part 1 terrible transformation 1450 1750 pbs video 1998 and the related web site pbs org wgbh aia part1 title html.
treats the early african american experience.
the atlantic slave trade and slave life in the americas a visual record hitchcock itc virginia edu slavery.
an extensive collection of slave images.
chapter 3 timeline chapter review ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
first navigation act 1660 1685 reign of charles ii king of england charles ii grants carolina proprietorship english capture new netherland rename it new york virginia law declares that the murder of a slave cannot be treated as a felony william penn founds pennsylvania 1685 1688 reign of james ii king of england 1686 1689 dominion of new england 1688 1689 glorious revolution in england william and mary ascend throne in england revolts in massachusetts maryland and new york 1689 1713 england france and spain at war parliament creates board of trade 1714 1750 british policy of salutary neglect american assemblies gain power 1720 1742 robert walpole leads parliament 1720 1750 african american communities form rice exports from south carolina soar planter aristocracy emerges seaport cities expand parliament charters georgia challenging spain hat act limits colonial enterprise molasses act threatens distillers stono rebellion in south carolina 1739 1748 war with spain in the caribbean and france in canada and europe iron act restricts colonial iron production currency act prohibits land banks and paper money key turning points the glorious revolution 1688 1689 salutary neglect and the rise of the assemblies 1714 1750 and the hat molasses iron and currency acts 1732 1751.
how do these developments reflect britains new attitude toward its colonies.
in what matters did parliament seek to control the colonies and in what did it grant them autonomy.
growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 c h a p t e r new englands freehold society farm families women in the household economy farm property inheritance freehold society in crisis diversity in the middle colonies economic growth opportunity and conflict cultural diversity religion and politics commerce culture and identity transportation and the print revolution the enlightenment in america american pietism and the great awakening religious upheaval in the north social and religious conflict in the south the midcentury challenge war trade and social conflict 1750 1765 the french and indian war the great war for empire british industrial growth and the consumer revolution the struggle for land in the east western rebels and regulators i n 1736 alexander macallister left the identify the big idea highlands of scotland for the backin what ways were britains americountry of north carolina where his can colonies affected by events wife and three sisters soon joined him.
across the atlantic and how were macallister prospered as a landowner and their societies taking on a life of mill proprietor and had only praise for his their own.
carolina was the best poor mans country he wrote to his brother hector urging him to advise all poor people.
to take courage and come in north carolina there were no landlords to keep the face of the poor.
to the grinding stone and so many highlanders were arriving that it will soon be a new scotland here on the far margins of the british empire people could breathe the air of liberty and not want the necessarys of life some 300 000 european migrants primarily highland scots scots irish and germans heeded macallisters advice and helped swell the population of britains north american settlements from 400 000 in 1720 to almost 2 million by 1765.
macallisters air of liberty did not last forever as the rapid increase in white settlers and the arrival of nearly 300 000 enslaved africans transformed life throughout mainland british north america.
long settled towns in new england became overcrowded and antagonistic ethnic and religious communities jostled uneasily with one another in the middle atlantic colonies in 1748 there were more than a hundred german lutheran and reformed congregations in quaker led pennsylvania.
by then the macallisters and thousands of other celtic and german migrants had altered the social landscape and introduced religious conflict into the southern backcountry.
everywhere two european cultural movements the enlightenment and pietism changed the tone of intellectual and spiritual life.
advocates of rational thought viewed human beings as agents of moral self determination and urged americans to fashion a better social order.
religious pietists outnumbered them and had more influence.
convinced of the weakness of human nature evangelical ministers told their followers to seek regeneration through divine grace.
amidst this intellectual and religious ferment migrants and the landless children of long settled families moved inland and sparked wars with the native peoples and with france and spain.
a generation of dynamic growth produced a decade of deadly warfare that would set the stage for a new era in american history.
john collet george whitefield preaching no painting could capture english minister george whitefields charismatic appeal although this image conveys his open demeanor and religious intensity.
when whitefield spoke to a crowd near philadelphia an observer noted that his words were sharper than a two edged sword.
some of the people were pale as death others were wringing their hands.
and most lifting their eyes to heaven and crying to god for mercy an astute businessman as well as a charismatic preacher whitefield tirelessly promoted the sale of his sermons and books.
private collection the bridgeman art library.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 new englands freehold society in the 1630s the puritans had fled england where a small elite of nobles and gentry owned 75 percent of the arable land while tenants renters and propertyless workers farmed it.
in new england the puritans created a yeoman society of relatively equal landowning farm families.
but by 1750 the migrants numerous descendants had parceled out the best farmland threatening the future of the freehold ideal.
farm families women in the household economy the puritans vision of social equality did not extend to women and their ideology placed the husband firmly at the head of the household.
in the well ordered family 1712 the reverend benjamin wadsworth of boston advised women since he is thy husband god has made him the head and set him above thee it was a wifes duty to love and reverence her husband.
women learned this subordinate role throughout their lives.
understand small girls watched their mothers points of view defer to their fathers and as what ideas instituyoung women they were told to tions and responsibilities be silent in company they saw shaped new england farm the courts prosecute more women womens lives.
than men for the crime of fornication sex outside of marriage and they found that their marriage portions would be inferior to those of their brothers.
thus ebenezer chittendon of guilford connecticut left his land to his sons decreeing that each daughter shall have half so much as each son one half in money and the other half in cattle throughout the colonies women assumed the role of dutiful helpmeets helpmates to their husbands.
in addition to tending gardens farmwives spun thread and yarn from flax and wool and then wove it into cloth for shirts and gowns.
they knitted sweaters and stockings made candles and soap churned milk into butter fermented malt for beer preserved meats and mastered dozens of other household tasks.
notable women those who excelled at domestic arts won praise and high status thinking like a historian p 118.
bearing and rearing children were equally important tasks.
most women in new england married in their early twenties and by their early forties had given birth to six or seven children delivered with the help of a female neighbor or a midwife.
one massachusetts mother confessed that she had little time for religious activities because the care of my babes takes up so large a portion of my time and attention yet most puritan congregations were filled with women in a church of between three and four hundred communicants the eminent minister cotton mather noted there are but few more than one hundred men all the rest are women womens lives remained tightly bound by a web of legal and cultural restrictions.
ministers praised women for their piety but excluded them from an equal role in the church.
when hannah heaton a connecticut farmwife grew dissatisfied with her prudence punderson 1758 1784 the first second and last scenes of mortality this powerful image reveals both the artistic skills of colonial women in the traditional medium of needlework and the puritans continuing cultural concern with the inevitability of death.
prudence punderson the connecticut woman who embroidered this scene rejected a marriage proposal and followed her loyalist father into exile on long island in 1778.
sometime later she married a cousin timothy rossiter and bore a daughter sophia who may well be the baby in the cradle being rocked by jenny a slave owned by prudences father.
long worried by my ill state of health and perhaps now anticipating her own death prudence has inscribed her initials on the coffin and in creating this embroidery transformed her personal experience into a broader meditation on the progression from birth to motherhood to death.
connecticut historical society.
chapter 4 congregationalist minister thinking him unconverted and a blind guide she sought out equality minded quaker and evangelist baptist churches that welcomed questioning women such as herself and treated saved women equally with men.
however by the 1760s many evangelical congregations had reinstituted mens dominance over women.
the government of church and state must be.
family government controlled by its king declared the danbury connecticut baptist association.
farm property inheritance by contrast european men who migrated to the colonies escaped many traditional constraints including the curse of landlessness.
the hope of having land of their own becoming independent of landlords is what chiefly induces people into america an official noted in the 1730s.
owning property gave formerly dependent peasants a new social identity.
unlike the adventurers seeking riches in other parts of the americas most new england migrants wanted farms that would provide a living for themselves and ample land for their children.
in this way they hoped to secure a competency for their families the ability to keep their households solvent and independent and to pass that ability on to the next generation.
parents who could not give their offspring land placed these children as indentured servants in more prosperous households.
when the indentures ended at age eighteen or twenty one propertyless sons faced a decadeslong climb up the agricultural ladder from laborer to tenant and finally to freeholder.
sons and daughters in well to do farm families were luckier they received a marriage portion when they were in their early twenties.
that portion land livestock or farm equipment repaid them for their past labor and allowed parents to choose their marriage partners.
parents security during old age depended on a wise choice of son or daughter in law.
although the young people could refuse an unacceptable match they did not have the luxury of falling in love with and marrying whomever they pleased.
marriage under eighteenth century english common law was not a contract between equals.
a bride relinquished to her husband the legal ownership of all her property.
after his death she received a dower right the right to use though not sell one third of the familys property.
on the widows death or remarriage her portion was divided among the children.
thus the widows property rights were subordinate to those of the family line which stretched across the generations.
growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 a fathers duty was to provide inheritances for his children so that one day they could be for themselves men who failed to do so lost status in the community.
some fathers willed the family farm to a single son and provided other children with money an apprenticeship or uncleared frontier tracts.
other yeomen moved their families to the frontier where life was hard but land was cheap and abundant.
the squires house stands on the bank of the susquehannah traveler philip fithian reported from the pennsylvania backcountry in the early 1760s.
he tells me that he will be able to settle all his sons and his fair daughter betsy on the fat of the earth freehold society in crisis because of rapid natural increase new englands population doubled each generation from 100 000 in 1700 to nearly 200 000 in 1725 to almost 400 000 in 1750.
farms had been divided and then subdivided making them so small 50 acres or less that parents could provide only one child with an adequate inheritance.
in the 1740s the reverend samuel chandler of andover massachusetts was much distressed for land for his children seven of them young boys.
a decade later in nearby concord about 60 percent of the farmers owned less land than their fathers had.
because parents had less to give their sons and daughters they had less control over their childrens lives.
the traditional system of arranged marriages broke down as young people engaged in premarital sex and then used the urgency of pregnancy to win permission to marry.
throughout new england premarital conceptions rose dramatically from about 10 percent of firstborn children in the 1710s to more than 30 percent in the 1740s.
given another chance young people would do the same again an anglican minister observed because otherwise they could not obtain their parents consent to marry even as new england families changed they maintained the freeholder ideal.
some parents chose to have smaller families and used birth control to do so abstention identify causes coitus interruptus or primitive what factors threatened condoms.
other families peti the freeholder ideal in tioned the provincial government midcentury new england for frontier land grants and hacked and what strategies did new farms out of the forests of farming families use to central massachusetts western preserve this ideal.
connecticut and eventually new hampshire and vermont.
still others improved their farms productivity by replacing the traditional english crops of wheat and barley with high yielding potatoes thinking like a historian womens labor as these documents show women bore the responsibility for a wide variety of work from keeping up households to supporting themselves independently.
thomas tusser five hundred pointes of good husbandrie 1557.
advice manuals like tussers circulated for generations and offered guidance on household management.
in this couplet tusser stresses the virtues of a wifes economy and hard work.
wife make thine own candle spare penny to handle.
provide for thy tallow ere frost cometh in and make thine own candle ere winter begin.
eliza lucas letters 1740 1742.
george lucas owned three south carolina plantations but as lieutenant governor of antigua he was frequently absent.
when his daughter was sixteen he gave her responsibility for managing them.
she introduced indigo cultivation in south carolina and it soon became the colonys second leading cash crop.
these letters were written when she was between the ages of eighteen and twenty.
may 2 1740 i have the business of 3 plantations to transact which requires much writing and more business and fatigue of other sorts than you can imagine.
but least you should imagine it too burthensom to a girl at my early time of life give me leave to answer you i assure you i think myself happy that i can be useful to so good a father and by rising very early i find i can go through much business july 1740 wrote my father a very long letter on his plantation affairs and on.
the pains i had taken to bring the indigo ginger cotton and lucerne and casada to perfection and had greater hopes from the indigo.
than any of the rest of the things i tried february 6 1741.
i have a sister to instruct and a parcel of little negroes whom i have undertaken to teach to read april 23 1741 wrote to my father informing him of the loss of a negro man also the boat being overset in santilina saint helena sound and 20 barrels of rice lost 1742 wont you laugh at me if i tell you i am so busey in providing for posterity i hardly allow my self time to eat or sleep.
i am making a large plantation of oaks which i look upon as my own property whether my father gives me the land or not and therefore i design many years hence when oaks are more valueable than they are now which you know they will be when we come to build fleets c june 1742 i am engaged with the rudiments of the law to which i am yet but a stranger.
if you will not laugh too immoderately at me ill trust you with a secrett.
i have made two wills already 3.
mary vial holyoke diary excerpts 1761.
mary vial holyoke wife of a prominent physician in salem massachusetts kept a diary that offers a glimpse of the range of household tasks women faced.
1761 jan 16 began upon the firkin of butter of 40 lb.
22 bot hog weighed 182 pounds at 2 5.
salted hog with half lisbon half saltertudas tortugas salt.
7 scowerd pewter.
17 made the dr six cravats marked h.
17 made soap.
23 dressed a calves head turtle fashion.
may 20 began to whitewash.
30 scowerd pewter.
july 7 scowered rooms.
colonial house interiors in germantown pennsylvania and augusta maine.
these images show the dining room of benjamin chew a wealthy philadelphia lawyer below and the kitchen of the howards an extended family of soldiers and merchants on the maine frontier opposite.
source photo by ron blunt courtesy of cliveden a national trust historic site philadelphia pa.
source old fort western augusta maine.
5 business advertisement in the pennsylvania gazette 1758.
not all womens work was done in the home.
hannah breintnall a philadelphia widow ran a tavern before opening a shop specializing in eyeglasses.
moll placket hole was born in a bawdy house in a lane in the city of brotherly love.
a t the age of twelve shocking to consider.
her mother sold her virginity sold it for the trifling consideration of ten pounds.
her purchaser was soon cloyed and abandoned her.
virtue lost and good reputation if ever she had it gone she commenced open prostitute and dealt out her favours to the highest bidder.
s he understood the trade and set up a bawdy house.
it was necessary however that a man should live with her that they might appear to the publick as honest housekeepers.
the trade became at last so publick that it gave offence to her sober neighbours.
t he town tired out with her insolence and her escape from justice in a regular manner set a mob many of whom had been her beneficiaries upon her.
they pulled down her house and destroyed her furniture c she stormed and raged and swore if her customers would not build her a better house she would expose them.
they opened a subscription and a hundred pounds were subscribed in one day.
sources 1 alice morse earle home life in the colonial days new york the macmillan company 1898 35 2 from the letterbook of eliza lucas pinckney 1739 1762 edited by elise pinckney university of north carolina press 1972.
based on original documents from the south carolina historical society.
courtesy of the south carolina historical society 3 george francis dow ed the holyoke diaries 1709 1856 salem ma the essex institute 1911 49 51 6 hilliad magna being the life and adventures of moll placket hole philadelphia printed by anthony armbruster 1765.
analyzing the evidence source library company of philadelphia.
compare the advice manual source 1 with eliza lucass letters and mary vial holyokes diary.
what themes do they share in common and how do these womens experiences deviate from the expectations of the advice book authors.
eliza lucas supervised slave labor and mary vial holyoke very likely employed servants.
how do these facts affect the way you interpret sources 2 and 3.
compare the two house interiors source 4.
what work would women have done in these spaces.
the chews were a slaveholding family and the howards probably employed servants.
with that in mind consider the relationship between supervisory and manual labor.
hannah breintnall was a well to do widow while moll placket hole was a fictional stereotype.
what does breintnalls experience tell us about the prospects of a woman living without a male protector.
how does moll placket hole shed light on popular attitudes toward such women.
putting it all together 6.
hilliad magna being the life and adventures of moll placket hole 1765.
moll placket hole was a satirical seven page pamphlet that purported to describe the life of a philadelphia prostitute.
moll was an eighteenth century term for a loose woman or prostitute while placket hole referred to a slit that might be found in a womans skirt.
with all these sources in mind write a short essay that considers the role of hierarchy and social power in womens work.
how did economic and social status affect the work that was expected of women.
how did the women whose lives are documented here navigate the challenges and opportunities they faced.
and how does the satire of moll placket hole illuminate popular attitudes toward womens work and its place in colonial society.
british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 tenancy in new york in new yorks fertile hudson river valley wealthy dutch and english families presided over the huge manors created by the dutch west india company and english governors map 4 1.
like chesapeake planters the new york landlords aspired to live in the manner of the european gentry but found that few migrants wanted to labor as peasants.
to 20 miles 20 kilometers m oh a wk schenectady s un mo ire w e s massachusetts livingston manor little nine partners kingston c t icu beekman patent connecticut newburgh conn e poughkeepsie t r great nine partners.
previously home to new netherland and new sweden the mid atlantic region was already ethnically diverse before england gained control of it.
the founding of pennsylvania and new jersey amplified this pattern.
fertile land seemed abundant and grain exports to europe and the west indies financed the colonies rapid settlement america compared p 121.
between 1720 and 1770 a growing demand for wheat corn and flour doubled their prices and brought people and prosperity to the region.
yet that very growth led to conflict both within the middle colonies and in their relations with native american neighbors.
ksh hudson ic r ton economic growth opportunity and conflict n ta rensselaerswyck manor us a ho the middle colonies new york new jersey and pennsylvania became home to peoples of differing origins languages and religions.
scots irish presbyterians english and welsh quakers german lutherans and moravians dutch reformed protestants and others all sought to preserve their cultural and religious identities as they pursued economic opportunity.
at the same time rapid population growth throughout the region strained public institutions pressured indian lands and created a dynamic but unstable society.
troy in albany new york diversity in the middle colonies vermont claimed by new york massachusetts and new hampshire r and maize indian corn.
corn was an especially wise choice good for human consumption as well as for feeding cattle and pigs which provided milk and meat.
gradually new england changed from a grain to a livestock economy becoming a major exporter of salted meat to the plantations of the west indies.
as the population swelled new england farmers developed the full potential of what one historian has called the household mode of production in which families swapped labor and goods.
women and children worked in groups to spin yarn sew quilts and shuck corn.
men loaned neighbors tools draft animals and grazing land.
farmers plowed fields owned by artisans and shopkeepers who repaid them with shoes furniture or store credit.
partly because currency was in short supply no cash changed hands.
instead farmers artisans and shopkeepers recorded debits and credits and balanced the books every few years.
this system helped new englanders to maximize agricultural output and preserve the freehold ideal.
ber part 2 hudson r philipse patent oblong patent cortlandt manor new jersey philipsburg manor white plains long island sound saint george manor new york city morissania manor long island manor boundary disputed colonial boundary map 4 1 the hudson river manors dutch and english manorial lords owned much of the fertile east bank of the hudson river where they leased farms on perpetual contracts to german tenants and refused to sell land to freehold seeking migrants from overcrowded new england.
this powerful landed elite produced aristocratic minded patriot leaders such as gouverneur morris and robert livingston as well as prominent american families such as the roosevelts.
america c o m pa r e d transatlantic migration 1500 1760 the following graph compares the number of european and african migrants who arrived in the american colonies of spain portugal britain france and the netherlands.
it also charts change over time while immigrants in the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries went predominantly to the colonies of spain and portugal britains colonies became the principal destination for both europeans and africans between 1640 and 1760.
figure 4 1 2 000 000 transatlantic migration 1 910 000 source of data stanley l engerman and kenneth l sokoloff factor endowments institutions and differential paths of growth among new world economies a view from economic historians of the united states in how latin america fell behind economic histories of brazil and mexico 1800 1914 ed.
stephen haber palo alto ca stanford university press 1997 264.
1 500 000 1 313 000 1 000 000 questions for analysis 763 000 661 000 547 000 500 000 397 000 190 000 130 000 3 000 spain portugal 1500 1640 1641 1760 britain france 10 000 netherlands africans europeans attract tenants the manorial lords granted long leases with the right to sell improvements such as houses and barns to the next tenant.
they nevertheless struggled to populate their estates.
most tenant families hoped that with hard work and ample sales they could eventually buy their own farmsteads.
but preindustrial technology limited output.
a worker with a hand sickle could reap only half an acre of wheat rye or oats a day.
the cradle scythe a tool introduced during the 1750s doubled or tripled the amount of grain one worker could cut.
even so a family with two adult workers could reap only about 12 acres of grain or roughly 150 to 180 bushels of wheat.
after saving enough grain for food and seed the surplus might be worth 15 enough to buy salt and sugar tools and cloth but little else.
the road to landownership was not an easy one.
conflict in the quaker colonies in quakerdominated pennsylvania and new jersey wealth was initially distributed more evenly than in new york 1.
what relationship do you see between the number of european emigrants and the importation of african slaves.
which nations colonies had the highest percentage of africans relative to europeans.
which had the lowest.
which time periods had the highest and lowest percentages of africans.
compare france and the netherlands to spain portugal and britain.
why do you suppose that the ratio of africans to europeans is so much higher in french and dutch colonies than in the other nations.
which type of colony tribute plantation or neo european was likely to have been most important to the french and dutch.
but the proprietors of each colony like the manor lords of new york had enormous land claims.
the first migrants lived simply in small one or two room houses with a sleeping loft a few benches or stools and some wooden platters and cups.
economic growth brought greater prosperity along with conflicts between ordinary settlers and the proprietors who tried to control their access to land resources and political power.
william penns early appeals to british quakers and continental protestants led to a boom in immigrants.
when these first arrivals reported that pennsylvania and new jersey were the best poor mans country in the world thousands more followed.
soon the proprietors of both colonies were overwhelmed by the demand for land.
by the 1720s many new migrants were forced to become squatters settling illegally on land they hoped eventually to be able to acquire on legal terms.
frustration over the lack of land led the penn family to perpetrate one of the most infamous land frauds of the eighteenth century the so called walking purchase of 1737 in which they exploited an old and probably part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 fraudulent indian deed to claim more than a million acres of prime farmland north of philadelphia.
this purchase while opening new lands to settlement poisoned indian relations in the colony.
delaware and shawnee migration to western pennsylvania and the ohio valley which was already under way accelerated rapidly in response.
immigrants flooded into philadelphia which grew from 2 000 people in 1700 to 25 000 by 1760.
many families came in search of land for them philadelphia was only explain a temporary way station.
other consequences migrants came as laborers includhow did rapid immigration and economic growth triging a large number of indentured ger conflict in the middle servants.
some were young colonies.
unskilled men but the colonys explosive growth also created a strong demand for all kinds of skilled laborers especially in the construction trades.
pennsylvania and new jersey grew prosperous but contentious.
new jersey was plagued by contested land titles and ordinary settlers rioted against the proprietors in the 1740s and the 1760s.
by the 1760s eastern pennsylvania landowners with large farms were using slaves and poor scots irish migrants to grow wheat.
other ambitious men were buying up land and dividing it into small tenancies which they lent out on profitable leases.
still others sold farming equipment and manufactured goods or ran mills.
these large scale farmers rural landlords speculators storekeepers and gristmill operators formed a distinct class of agricultural capitalists.
they built large stone houses for their families furnishing them with four poster beds and expensive mahogany tables on which they laid elegant linen and imported dutch dinnerware.
by contrast one half of the middle colonies white men owned no land and little personal property.
some were the sons of smallholding farmers and would eventually inherit some land.
but many were scots irish or german inmates single men or families explained a tax assessor such as live in small cottages and have no taxable property except a cow in the predominantly german township of lancaster pennsylvania a merchant noted an abundance of poor people who maintain their families with great difficulty by day labour although these workers hoped eventually to become landowners rising land prices prevented many from realizing their dreams.
cultural diversity the middle atlantic colonies were not a melting pot.
most european migrants held tightly to their traditions creating a patchwork of ethnically and religiously diverse communities figure 4 2.
in 1748 a swedish traveler counted no fewer than twelve religious denominations figure 4 2 estimated european migration to the british mainland colonies 1700 1780 1700 1720 1740 1760 total 1700 1780 germany 4 000 17 900 52 700 23 700 98 300 n ireland 2 000 6 900 25 400 36 200 70 500 s ireland 2 500 10 400 18 200 13 400 44 500 england 1 700 7 100 16 300 19 000 44 100 scotland 2 800 6 800 25 000 35 300 wales 1 200 4 700 10 700 12 400 29 000 other 1 000 2 300 2 300 5 900 all 12 400 50 800 132 400 132 000 327 600 1700 1719 1720 1739 1740 1759 1760 1779 after 1720 european migration to british north america increased dramatically peaking between 1740 and 1780 when more than 264 000 settlers arrived in the mainland colonies.
emigration from germany peaked in the 1740s but the number of migrants from ireland scotland england and wales continued to increase during the 1760s and early 1770s.
most migrants including those from ireland were protestants.
chapter 4 in philadelphia including anglicans baptists quakers swedish and german lutherans mennonites scotsirish presbyterians and roman catholics.
migrants preserved their cultural identity by marrying within their ethnic groups.
a major exception was the huguenots calvinists who had been expelled from catholic france in the 1680s and resettled in holland england and the british colonies.
huguenots in american port cities such as boston new york and charleston quickly lost their french identities by intermarrying with other protestants.
more typical were the welsh quakers in chester county pennsylvania 70 percent of the children of the original welsh migrants married other welsh quakers as did 60 percent of the third generation.
in pennsylvania and western new jersey quakers shaped the culture because of their numbers wealth and social cohesion.
most quakers came from english counties with few landlords and brought with them growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 traditions of local village governance popular participation in politics and social equality.
but after 1720 the growth of german and scots irish populations challenged their dominance.
the german influx the quaker vision of a peaceable kingdom attracted 100 000 german migrants who had fled their homelands because of military conscription religious persecution and high taxes.
first to arrive in 1683 were the mennonites religious dissenters drawn by the promise of freedom of worship.
in the 1720s a larger wave of german migrants arrived from the overcrowded villages of southwestern germany and switzerland.
wages were far better in pennsylvania heinrich schneebeli reported to his friends in zurich and one also enjoyed there a free unhindered exercise of religion a third wave of germans and swiss nearly 40 000 strong landed in philadelphia between 1749 and 1756.
to help pay a quaker meeting for worship quakers dressed plainly and met for worship in unadorned buildings sitting in silence until inspired by an inner light women spoke during meetings on terms of near equality to men a tradition that prepared quaker women to take a leading part in the nineteenth century womens rights movement.
in this english work titled quaker meeting an elder his hat on a peg above his head conveys his thoughts to the congregation.
museum of fine arts boston.
m and m karolik collection.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 the demory house c 1780 the demory house lies near the shenandoah valley in northwestern virginia and was probably built by a migrant from pennsylvania according to a german design used by both german and scots irish settlers.
the house is small but sturdy.
it measures 20 feet by 14 feet deep and has one and a half stories.
the two first floor rooms a kitchen and a parlor are separated by an 18 18 inch square chimney set in the center of the house as well as the stairs leading up to the sleeping chamber.
clay and small stones fill the gaps in the exterior walls which consist of timber planking about 12 inches tall and 6 to 8 inches wide.
2003 copyright and all rights reserved by christopher c fennell.
the costs of the expensive trip from the rhine valley german immigrants pioneered the redemptioner system a flexible form of indentured servitude that allowed families to negotiate their own terms upon arrival.
families often indentured one or more children while their parents set up a household of their own.
germans soon dominated many districts in eastern pennsylvania and thousands more moved down the fertile shenandoah valley into the western backcountry of maryland virginia and the carolinas map 4 2.
many migrants preserved their cultural identity by settling in identify causes german speaking lutheran and what attracted german reformed communities that and scots irish migrants to pennsylvania in such large endured well beyond 1800.
minister in north carolina admonished young people not to contract any marriages with the english or irish arguing that we owe it to our native country to do our part that german blood and the german language be preserved in america these settlers were willing colonial subjects of britains german born and german speaking protestant monarchs george i r 1714 1727 and george ii r 1727 1760.
they generally avoided politics except to protect their cultural practices for example they insisted that married women have the legal right to hold property and write wills as they did in germany.
scots irish settlers migrants from ireland who numbered about 115 000 were the most numerous of the incoming europeans.
some were irish and catholic but most were scots and presbyterian the descendants of the calvinist protestants sent to ireland during the seventeenth century to solidify english rule there.
once in ireland the scots faced hostility from both irish catholics and english officials and landlords.
the irish test act of 1704 restricted voting and office holding to members of the church of england english mercantilist regulations placed heavy import duties on linens made by scots irish weavers and farmers paid heavy taxes.
this persecution made america seem desirable.
read this letter rev.
baptist boyd a migrant to new york wrote back to his minister and tell all the poor folk of ye place that god has opened a door for their deliverance.
all that a man works for is his own there are no revenue hounds to take it from us here lured by such reports thousands of scots irish families sailed for the colonies.
by 1720 most migrated to philadelphia attracted by the religious tolerance there.
seeking cheap land they moved to central pennsylvania and to the fertile shenandoah valley to the south.
governor william gooch of virginia welcomed the scots irish presence to secure the country against the indians an anglican planter however thought them as dangerous as the goths and vandals of old had been to the roman empire.
like the germans the scots irish retained their culture living in ethnic communities and holding firm to the presbyterian church.
religion and politics in western europe the leaders of church and state condemned religious diversity.
to tolerate all religions without controul is the way to have none at all declared an anglican clergyman.
orthodox church chapter 4 growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 map 4 2 ethnic and racial diversity in the british colonies 1775 scots and scots irish made up 15 percent of the population.
l michigan uron l h me.
vt part of n y n h n y abenaki o l ontari mass.
iroquois penn.
r i s r ie l e n in ottawa conn ta delaware n miami u s md.
m e w n j o those of german ancestry made up about 7 percent of the population.
atlantic ocean n ia ch in 1700 most colonists in british north america were of english origin by 1775 settlers of english descent constituted only about 50 percent of the total population.
african americans now accounted for onethird of the residents of the south while tens of thousands of german and scots irish migrants added ethnic and religious diversity in the middle colonies the southern backcountry and northern new england see figure 4 2.
quebec algonquin va la people of african origin accounted for 20 percent of the total population and were particularly numerous in the south.
ap pa shawnee cherokee n c catawba s c chickasaw ga predominant ethnic group choctaw creek florida officials carried such sentiments to pennsylvania.
the preachers do not have the power to punish anyone or to force anyone to go to church complained gottlieb mittelberger an influential german minister.
as a result sunday is very badly kept.
many people plough reap thresh hew or split wood and the like he concluded liberty in pennsylvania does more harm than good to many people both in soul and body mittelberger was mistaken.
although ministers in pennsylvania could not invoke government authority to uphold religious values the result was not social anarchy.
instead religious sects enforced moral behavior through communal self discipline.
quaker families attended a weekly meeting for worship and a monthly meeting for business every three months a committee reminded parents to provide proper religious instruction.
the committee also supervised adult behavior a chester county meeting for example disciplined a member to reclaim him from drinking to excess and keeping vain company significantly quaker meetings allowed couples to marry only if they had land and livestock sufficient to support a family.
as a result the 200 miles 200 kilometers african dutch english german scots irish scots swedish welsh children of well to do friends usually married within the sect while poor quakers remained unmarried wed later in life or married without permission in which case they were often ousted from the meeting.
these marriage rules helped the quakers build a selfcontained and prosperous community.
in the 1740s the flood of new migrants reduced quakers to a minority a mere 30 percent of pennsylvanians.
moreover scots irish settlers in central pennsylvania demanded an aggressive indian policy challenging the pacifism of the assembly.
to retain power understand quaker politicians sought an alli points of view ance with those german religious what issues divided the groups that also embraced paci various ethnic and relifism and voluntary not compul gious groups of the middle sory militia service.
in response colonies.
what core values german leaders demanded more did they agree upon.
seats in the assembly and laws that respected their inheritance customs.
other germans lutherans and baptists tried to gain control of the assembly by forming a general confederacy part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 with scots irish presbyterians.
an observer predicted that the scheme was doomed to failure because of mutual jealousy map 4 3.
by the 1750s politics throughout the middle colonies roiled with conflict.
in new york a dutchman declared that he valued english law no more than a turd while in pennsylvania benjamin franklin disparaged the boorish character and swarthy complexion of german migrants.
yet there was broad agreement on the importance of economic opportunity and liberty of conscience.
the unstable balance between shared values and mutual mistrust prefigured tensions that would pervade an increasingly diverse american society in the centuries to come.
conn r i pennsylvania n n j e w s md.
atlantic ocean new york ie er virginia north carolina anglican south carolina ga congregational lutheran presbyterian baptist roman catholic jewish reformed churches 200 miles 200 kilometers after 1720 transatlantic shipping grew more frequent and britain and its colonies more closely connected while a burgeoning print culture flooded the colonies with information and ideas.
two great european cultural movements the enlightenment which emphasized the power of human reason to understand and shape the world and pietism an evangelical christian movement that stressed the individuals personal relationship with god reached america as a result.
at the same time an abundance of imported goods began to reshape material culture bringing new comforts into the lives of the middling sort while allowing prosperous merchants and landowners to set themselves apart from their neighbors in new ways.
n h l ontario l commerce culture and identity dutch german french quaker map 4 3 religious diversity in 1750 by 1750 religious diversity was on the rise not only in the multiethnic middle colonies but also in all of british north america.
baptists had increased their numbers in new england long the stronghold of congregationalists and would soon become important in virginia.
already there were considerable numbers of presbyterians lutherans and german reformed in the south where anglicanism was the established religion.
transportation and the print revolution in the eighteenth century improved transportation networks opened britains colonies in new ways and british shipping came to dominate the north atlantic.
in 1700 britain had 40 000 sailors by 1750 the number had grown to 60 000 while many more hailed from the colonies.
an enormous number of vessels plied atlantic waters in the late 1730s more than 550 ships arrived in boston annually.
about a tenth came directly from britain or ireland the rest came mostly from other british colonies either on the mainland or in the west indies.
a road network slowly took shape as well though roadbuilding was expensive and difficult.
in 1704 sarah kemble knight traveled from boston to new york on horseback.
the road was smooth and even in some places treacherous in others it took eight days of hard riding to cover 200 miles.
forty years later a physician from annapolis maryland traveled along much better roads to portsmouth new hampshire and back more than 1 600 miles in all.
he spent four months on the road stopping frequently to meet the locals and satisfy his curiosity.
by the mid eighteenth century the great wagon road carried migrating families down the shenandoah valley as far as the carolina backcountry.
all of these water and land routes carried people produce and finished merchandise.
they also carried information as letters newspapers pamphlets and crates of books began to circulate widely.
the trip across the atlantic took seven to eight weeks on average so chapter 4 the news arriving in colonial ports was not fresh by our standard but compared to earlier years the colonies were awash in information.
until 1695 the british government had the power to censor all printed materials.
in that year parliament let the licensing act lapse and the floodgates opened.
dozens of new printshops opened in london and britains provincial cities.
they printed newspapers and pamphlets poetry ballads and sermons and handbills tradesmans cards and advertisements.
larger booksellers also printed scientific treatises histories travelers accounts and novels.
the result was a print revolution.
in britain and throughout europe print was essential to the transmission of new ideas and both the enlightenment and pietism took shape in part through its growing influence.
all this material crossed the atlantic and filled the shops of colonial booksellers.
the colonies also began printing their own newspapers.
in 1704 the boston newsletter was founded by 1720 boston had five printing presses and three newspapers and by 1776 the thirteen colonies that united in declaring independence had thirty seven newspapers among them.
this world of print was essential to their ability to share grievances and join in common cause.
the enlightenment in america to explain the workings of the natural world some colonists relied on folk wisdom.
swedish migrants in pennsylvania attributed magical powers to the great white mullein a common wildflower and treated fevers by tying the plants leaves around their feet and arms.
traditionally christians believed that the earth stood at the center of the universe and god and satan intervened directly and continuously in human affairs.
the scientific revolution of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries challenged these ideas and educated people most of them christians began to modify their views accordingly.
the european enlightenment in 1543 the polish astronomer copernicus published his observation that the earth traveled around the sun not vice versa.
copernicuss discovery suggested that humans occupied a more modest place in the universe than christian theology assumed.
in the next century isaac newton in his principia mathematica 1687 used the sciences of mathematics and physics to explain the movement of the planets around the sun and invented calculus in the process.
though newton was himself profoundly religious in the long run his work growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 undermined the traditional christian understanding of the cosmos.
in the century between the principia mathematica and the french revolution of 1789 the philosophers of the european enlightenment used empirical research and scientific reasoning to study all aspects of life including social institutions and human behavior.
enlightenment thinkers advanced four fundamental principles the lawlike order of the natural world the power of human reason the natural rights of individuals including the right to self government and the progressive improvement of society.
english philosopher john locke was a major contributor to the enlightenment.
in his essay concerning human understanding 1690 locke stressed the impact of environment and experience on human behavior and beliefs arguing that the character of individuals place events and societies was not fixed but in context could be changed through edu what conditions and ideas cation rational thought and lay behind the emergence purposeful action.
lockes two of the enlightenment in treatises of government 1690 america.
advanced the revolutionary theory that political authority was not given by god to monarchs as james ii had insisted see chapter 3.
instead it derived from social compacts that people made to preserve their natural rights to life liberty and property.
in lockes view the people should have the power to change government policies or even their form of government.
some clergymen responded to these developments by devising a rational form of christianity.
rejecting supernatural interventions and a vengeful calvinist god congregationalist minister andrew eliot maintained that there is nothing in christianity that is contrary to reason the reverend john wise of ipswich massachusetts used lockes philosophy to defend giving power to ordinary church members.
just as the social compact formed the basis of political society wise argued so the religious covenant among the lay members of a congregation made them not the bishops of the church of england or even ministers like himself the proper interpreters of religious truth.
the enlightenment influenced puritan minister cotton mather as well.
when a measles epidemic ravaged boston in the 1710s mather thought that only god could end it but when smallpox struck a decade later he used his newly acquired knowledge of inoculation gained in part from a slave who told him of the practices success in africa to advocate this scientific preventive for the disease.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 enlightenment philanthropy pennsylvania hospital philadelphia using public funds and private donations philadelphia reformers built this imposing structure in 1753.
the new hospital embodied two principles of the enlightenment that purposeful actions could improve society and that the products of these actions should express reason and order exhibited here in the buildings symmetrical facade.
etchings like this one from the 1760s a perspective view of the pennsylvania hospital by john streeper and henry dawkins circulated widely and bolstered philadelphias reputation as the center of the american enlightenment.
historical society of pennsylvania.
franklins contributions benjamin franklin was the exemplar of the american enlightenment.
born in boston in 1706 to devout calvinists he grew to manhood during the print revolution.
apprenticed to his brother a boston printer franklin educated himself through voracious reading.
at seventeen he fled to philadelphia where he became a prominent printer and in 1729 he founded the pennsylvania gazette which became one of the colonies most influential newspapers.
franklin also formed a club of mutual improvement that met weekly to discuss morals politics or natural philosophy these discussions as well as enlightenment literature shaped his thinking.
as franklin explained in his autobiography 1771 from the different books i read i began to doubt of revelation god revealed truth like a small number of urban artisans wealthy virginia planters and affluent seaport merchants franklin became a deist.
deism was a way of thinking not an established religion.
my own mind is my own church said deist thomas paine.
i am of a sect by myself added thomas jefferson.
influenced by enlightenment science deists such as jefferson believed that a supreme being or grand architect created the world and then allowed it to operate by natural laws but did not intervene in peoples lives.
rejecting the divinity of christ and the authority of the bible deists relied on natural reason their innate moral sense to define right and wrong.
thus franklin a onetime slave owner came to question the morality of slavery repudiating it once he recognized the parallels between racial bondage and the colonies political bondage to britain.
franklin popularized the practical outlook of the enlightenment in poor richards almanack 1732 1757 an annual publication that was read by thousands.
he also founded the american philosophical society 1743 present to promote useful knowledge adopting this goal in his own life franklin invented bifocal lenses for eyeglasses the franklin stove and the lightning rod.
his book on electricity published in england in 1751 won praise as the greatest contribution to science since newtons discoveries.
inspired by chapter 4 growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 with god pietism appealed to believers hearts rather than their minds american voices p 130.
in the 1720s german migrants carried pietism to america sparking a religious revival or renewal of religious enthusiasm in pennsylvania and new jersey where dutch minister theodore jacob frelinghuysen preached passionate sermons to german settlers and encouraged church members to spread the message of spiritual urgency.
a decade later william tennent and his son gilbert copied frelinghuysens approach and led revivals among scots irish presbyterians throughout the middle atlantic region.
benjamin franklins rise this portrait of benjamin franklin attributed to robert feke and executed around 1746 portrays franklin as a successful businessman.
his ruffled collar and cuffs his fashionably curly wig and his sober but expensive suit reveal his social ambitions.
in later portraits after he gained fame as an enlightenment sage he dispensed with the wig and chose more unaffected poses but in 1746 he was still establishing his credentials as a young philadelphia gentleman on the rise.
harvard university art museum fogg art museum bequest of dr john collins warren 1856 h47 photo imaging department president and fellows of harvard college.
franklin ambitious printers in americas seaport cities published newspapers and gentlemens magazines the first significant nonreligious periodicals to appear in the colonies.
the european enlightenment then added a secular dimension to colonial cultural life foreshadowing the great contributions to republican political theory by american intellectuals of the revolutionary era john adams james madison and thomas jefferson.
american pietism and the great awakening as some colonists turned to deism thousands of others embraced pietism a christian movement originating in germany around 1700 and emphasizing pious behavior hence the name.
in its emotional worship services and individual striving for a mystical union new england revivalism simultaneously an american born pietist movement appeared in new england.
revivals of christian zeal were built into the logic of puritanism.
in the 1730s jonathan edwards a minister in northampton massachusetts encouraged a revival there that spread to towns throughout the connecticut river valley.
edwards guided and observed the process and then published an account entitled a faithful narrative of the surprising work of god printed first in london 1737 then in boston 1738 and then in german and dutch translations.
its publication history highlights the transatlantic network of correspondents that gave pietism much of its vitality.
whitefields great awakening english minister george whitefield transformed the local revivals of edwards and the tennents into a great awakening.
after whitefield had his personal awakening upon reading the german pietists he became a follower of john wesley the founder of english methodism.
in 1739 whitefield carried wesleys fervent message to america where he attracted huge crowds from georgia to massachusetts.
whitefield had a compelling presence.
he looked almost angelical a young slim slender youth.
cloathed with authority from the great god wrote a connecticut farmer.
like most evangelical preachers whitefield did not read his sermons but spoke from memory.
more like an actor than a theologian he gestured eloquently raised his voice for dramatic effect and at times assumed a female persona as a woman in labor struggling to deliver the word of god.
when the young preacher told his spellbound listeners that they had sinned and must seek salvation some suddenly felt a new light within them.
as the power of god come down hannah heaton recalled my knees smote together.
and it seemed to me i was a sinking down into hell.
but then i resigned my distress and was perfectly easy quiet and calm.
and it seemed as american voices evangelical religion and enlightenment rationalism two great historical movements enlightenment thought and pietistic religion swept across british north america in the eighteenth century and offered radically different indeed almost completely contradictory worldviews.
pietism sparked religious revivals based on passion and emotion while enlightenment rationalism encouraged personal restraint and intellectual logic.
both movements shaped american cultural development pietism transformed american religious life and enlightenment thinking influenced the principles of the american government.
sarah lippet death as a passage to life sarah lippet was a longtime member of the baptist church of middletown in eastern new jersey.
she died in october 1767 at the age of sixty one fellow parishioners reported her sentiments as she lay for four days on her deathbed.
all my lifetime i have been in fears and doubts but now am delivered.
he hath delivered them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.
for the love i have for christ i am willing to part with all my friends to be with him for i love him above all yet it is nothing in me for i know if i had my desert i should be in hell.
i believe in christ and i know that i put my whole trust in him and he that believeth in him shall not be ashamed nor be confounded.
why do you mourn when i rejoice.
you should not it is no more for me to die and leave my friends for the great love i have for christ than for me to go to sleep.
i have no fears of death in my mind.
christ has the keys of death and hell and blessed are the dead that die in the lord.
i cant bear to see a tear shed.
you should not mourn.
source the triumphant christian in historical and genealogical miscellany ed.
john e stillwell new york 1964 3 465 466.
poor me miserable me.
i was loaded with the guilt of sin.
hell fire was most always in my mind and i have hundreds of times put my fingers into my pipe when i have been smoaking to feel how fire felt and to see how my body could bear to lye in hell fire for ever and ever.
and while these thoughts were in my mind god appeared unto me and made me skringe before whose face the heavens and the earth fled away and i was shrinked into nothing i knew not whether i was in the body or out i seemed to hang in open air before god and he seemed to speak to me in an angry and sovereign way what.
wont you trust your soul with god.
my heart answered o yes yes yes.
when god disappeared or in some measure withdrew every thing was in its place again and i was on my bed.
i was set free my distress was gone and i was filled with a pineing desire to see christs own words in the bible.
i got the bible up under my chin and hugged it it was sweet and lovely the word was nigh near me in my hand then i began to pray and to praise god.
source the spiritual travels of nathan cole 1741 in the great awakening documents on the revival of religion 1740 1745 ed.
richard l bushman new york atheneum 1970 68 70.
nathan cole the struggle for salvation benjamin franklin connecticut farmer nathan cole found god after listening to a sermon by george whitefield the great english evangelist.
but coles spiritual quest was not easy.
he struggled for two years before coming to believe that he was saved.
franklin stood at the center of the american enlightenment.
in his autobiography he outlined his religious views and his human centered moral principles.
after hearing whitefield i began to think i was not elected and that god made some for heaven and me for hell.
and i thought god was not just in so doing.
my heart then rose against god exceedingly for his making me for hell now this distress lasted almost two years the importance of a virtuous life my parents had early given me religious impressions and brought me through my childhood piously in the dissenting way.
but i was scarce 15 when after doubting by turns of several points as i found them disputed in the different books i read i began to doubt of revelation itself.
some books against deism fell into my hands.
it happened that they wrought an effect on me quite contrary to what was intended by them for the arguments of the deists that were quoted in those books appeared to me much stronger than the refutations.
in short i soon became a thorough deist.
i grew convincd that truth sincerity integrity in dealings between man man were of the utmost importance to the felicity of life and i formd written resolutions which still remain in my journal book to practice them ever while i lived.
about the year 1734.
there arrived among us from ireland a young presbyterian preacher named hemphill who delivered with a good voice apparently extempore most excellent discourses which drew together considerable numbers of different persuasions who joind in admiring them.
among the rest i became one of his constant hearers his sermons pleasing me as they had little of the dogmatical kind but inculcated strongly the practice of virtue or what in the religious stile are called good works.
those however of our congregation who considered themselves as orthodox presbyterians disapprovd his doctrine and were joind by most of the old clergy who arraignd him of heterodoxy before the synod in order to have him silencd.
i became his zealous partisan.
i never was without some religious principles i never doubted for instance the existance of the deity that he made the world governd it by his providence that the most acceptable service of god was the doing good to man that our souls are immortal and that all crime will be punished virtue rewarded either here or hereafter these i esteemd the essentials of every religion.
and government.
i shall consider man in a state of natural being as a free born subject under the crown of heaven and owing homage to none but god himself.
it is certain civil government in general is a very admirable result of providence and an incomparable benefit to mankind yet must needs be acknowledged to be the effect of humane free compacts and not of divine institution it is the produce of mans reason of humane and rational combinations and not from any direct orders of infinite wisdom.
the prime immunity in mans state is that he is most properly the subject of the law of nature.
he is the favourite animal on earth in that this part of gods image viz.
reason is congenate with his nature wherein by a law immutable instampt upon his frame god has provided a rule for men in all their actions obliging each one to the performance of that which is right not only as to justice but likewise as to all other moral vertues which is nothing but the dictate of right reason founded in the soul of man.
the second great immunity of man is an original liberty instampt upon his rational nature.
he that intrudes upon this liberty violates the law of nature.
the third capital immunity belonging to mans nature is an equality amongst men which is not to be denyed by the law of nature till man has resigned himself with all his rights for the sake of a civil state and then his personal liberty and equality is to be cherished and preserved to the highest degree.
source john wise a vindication of the government of new england churches boston j allen for n boone 1717 32 40.
source louis p masur ed the autobiography of benjamin franklin with related documents 2nd ed.
boston bedford st.
martins 2003 73 74 93 94 108.
questions for analysis john wise the primacy of human reason and natural laws reverend john wise 1652 1725 served for many years as a pastor in ipswich massachusetts.
a graduate of harvard college wise used the enlightenment doctrines of john locke and samuel von pufendorf to justify the democratic structure of new england congregational churches.
i shall disclose several principles of natural knowledge plainly discovering the law of nature or the true sentiments of natural reason with respect to mans being 1.
all of these writers declare a belief in god.
how do their beliefs and outlooks differ.
these writers were variously influenced by the great awakening the enlightenment and rational christianity.
how are these movements reflected in the passages above.
what roles do fear and anxiety play in the experiences of sarah lippet and nathan cole.
what difference does it make that neither franklin nor wise expresses fear either of god or of his own sinfulness.
benjamin franklin and john wise stress the importance of reason and virtue as guides to human conduct.
how would nathan cole and sarah lippet react to that emphasis.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 the print revolution and the great awakening george whitefield made his first trip to north america in 1738 when he traveled to savannah georgia.
benjamin franklin published the first edition of this journal of his voyage in philadelphia in 1739 the copy pictured here was printed a year later.
texts like this one highlight the importance of the print revolution to eighteenth century culture whitefield was utterly unknown in north america until he began publicizing his ministry and his travels through such works.
enlightenment ideas too were conveyed to large and far flung audiences in books magazines and newspapers.
library company of philadelphia.
if i had a new soul body both strengthened and self confident these converts the so called new lights were eager to spread whitefields message.
the rise of print intersected with this enthusiasm.
religion is become the subject of most conversations the pennsylvania gazette reported.
no books are in request but those of piety and devotion whitefield and his circle did their best to answer the demand for devotional reading.
as he traveled whitefield regularly sent excerpts of his journal to be printed in newspapers.
franklin printed whitefields sermons and journals by subscription and found them to be among his best selling titles.
printed accounts of whitefields travels conversion narratives sermons and other devotional literature helped to confirm pietists in their faith and strengthen the communication networks that sustained them.
religious upheaval in the north like all cultural explosions the great awakening was controversial.
conservative ministers passionless old lights according to the evancompare and gelists condemned the cryings contrast out faintings and convulsions in what ways was the in revivalist meetings and the new spread of ideas during the lights claims of working miracles enlightenment and the or speaking with tongues bosgreat awakening similar ton minister charles chauncy and how did it differ.
attacked the pietist new lights for allowing women to speak in public it was a plain breach of that commandment of the lord where it is said let your women keep silence in the churches in connecticut old lights persuaded the legislature to prohibit evangelists from speaking to a congregation without the ministers permission.
but the new lights refused to be silenced.
dozens of farmers women and artisans roamed the countryside condemning the old lights as unconverted and willingly accepting imprisonment i shall bring glory to god in my bonds a dissident preacher wrote from jail.
the great awakening undermined legally established churches and their tax supported ministers.
in new england new lights left the congregational church and founded 125 separatist churches that supported their ministers through voluntary contributions figure 4 3.
other religious dissidents joined baptist congregations which also condemned government support of churches god never allowed any civil state upon earth to impose religious taxes declared baptist preacher isaac backus.
in new york and new jersey the dutch reformed church split in two as new lights refused to accept doctrines imposed by conservative church authorities in holland.
the great awakening also appealed to christians whose established churches could not serve their needs.
by 1740 pennsylvanias german reformed and lutheran congregations suffered from a severe lack of university trained pastors.
in the colonys dutch reformed dutch and swedish lutheran and even its chapter 4 growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 figure 4 3 church growth by denomination 1700 1780 in 1700 and again in 1740 the congregationalist and anglican churches had the most members.
by 1780 however largely because of their enthusiastic evangelical message presbyterian and baptist congregations outnumbered those of the anglicans.
the growth of immigrant denominations such as the german reformed and lutheran was equally impressive.
anglican congregations half the pulpits were empty.
in this circumstance itinerant preachers who stressed the power of heart religion and downplayed the importance of formal ministerial training found a ready audience.
the great awakening challenged the authority of all ministers whose status rested on respect for their education and knowledge of the bible.
in an influential pamphlet the dangers of an unconverted ministry 1740 gilbert tennent asserted that ministers authority should come not from theological knowledge but from the conversion experience.
reaffirming martin luthers belief in the priesthood of all christians tennent suggested that anyone who had felt gods redeeming grace could speak with ministerial authority.
sarah harrah osborn a new light exhorter in rhode island refused to shut up my mouth.
and creep into obscurity when silenced by her minister.
as religious enthusiasm spread churches founded new colleges to educate their young men and to train ministers.
new light presbyterians established the college of new jersey princeton in 1746 and new york anglicans founded kings college columbia in 1754.
baptists set up the college of rhode island brown in 1764 two years later the dutch reformed church subsidized queens college rutgers in new jersey.
however the main intellectual legacy of the great awakening was not education for the privileged few but a new sense of authority among the many.
a european visitor to philadelphia remarked in surprise the poorest day laborer.
holds it his right to advance his opinion in religious as well as political matters with as much freedom as the gentleman social and religious conflict in the south in the southern colonies where the church of england was legally established religious enthusiasm triggered social conflict.
anglican ministers generally ignored the spiritual needs of african americans and landless whites who numbered 40 percent and 20 percent of the population respectively.
middling white freeholders 35 percent of the residents formed the core of most church of england congregations.
but prominent planters just 5 percent held the real power using their control of parish finances to discipline ministers.
one clergyman complained that dismissal awaited any minister who had the courage to preach against any vices taken into favor by the leading men of his parish the presbyterian revival soon a democratization of religion challenged the dominance of both the anglican church and the planter elite.
in 1743 bricklayer samuel morris inspired by reading george whitefields sermons led a group of virginia anglicans out of their congregation.
seeking a deeper religious experience morris invited new light presbyterian samuel davies to lead their prayer meetings.
daviess sermons filled with erotic devotional imagery and urging christians to feel ardent passion sparked presbyterian revivals across the tidewater region part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 threatening the social authority of the virginia gentry.
traditionally planters and their well dressed families arrived at anglican services in fancy carriages drawn by well bred horses and flaunted their power by sitting in the front pews.
such ritual displays of the gentrys superiority were meaningless if freeholders attended other churches.
moreover religious pluralism threatened the tax supported status of the anglican church.
to halt the spread of new light ideas virginia governor william gooch denounced them as false teachings and anglican justices of the peace closed presbyterian churches.
this harassment kept most white yeomen and poor tenant families in the church of england.
the baptist insurgency during the 1760s the vigorous preaching and democratic message of new light baptist ministers converted thousands of white farm families.
the baptists were radical protestants whose central ritual was adult rather than infant baptism.
once men and women had experienced the infusion of grace had been born again they were baptized in an emotional public ceremony often involving complete immersion in water.
slaves were welcome at baptist revivals.
during the 1740s george whitefield had urged carolina planters to bring their slaves into the christian fold but white opposition and the africans commitment to their ancestral religions kept the number of converts low.
however in the 1760s native born african americans in virginia welcomed the baptists message that all people were equal in gods eyes.
sensing a threat to the system of racial slavery the house of burgesses imposed heavy fines on baptists who preached to slaves without their owners permission.
baptists threatened gentry authority because they repudiated social distinctions and urged followers to call one another brother and sister they also condemned the planters decadent lifestyle.
as planter landon carter complained the baptists were destroying pleasure in the country for they encourage ardent prayer.
an intire banishment of gaming dancing sabbath day diversions the gentry responded with violence.
in caroline county an anglican posse attacked brother john waller at a prayer meeting.
waller was violently jerked off the stage they caught him by the back part of his neck beat his head against the ground and a gentleman gave him twenty lashes with his horsewhip despite these attacks baptist congregations multiplied.
by 1775 about 15 percent of virginias whites and hundreds of enslaved blacks had joined baptist baptism in the schuylkill river the baptist movement which made adult baptism central to its religious practice gained enormous influence during the great awakening.
baptists presented a challenge to the social order in new england where isaac backus and other leaders vigorously opposed the power of established congregationalist churches.
they presented an even graver threat to established authority in virginia where they ministered to african american slaves and ridiculed the pretensions of the gentry.
this woodcut from an eighteenth century history of the baptist movement shows a congregation gathered on the banks of the schuylkill river in pennsylvania to witness the baptism of a new convert.
historical society of pennsylvania.
chapter 4 churches.
to signify their state of grace some baptist men cut off their hair like cromwells round headed chaplains others forged a new evangelical masculinity crying weeping lifting up the eyes groaning when touched by the holy spirit.
the baptist revival in the chesapeake challenged customary authority in families and society but did not overturn it.
rejecting the pleas of evangelical women baptist men kept church authority in the hands of free born male members and anglican slaveholders retained control of the political system.
still the baptist insurgency infused the lives of poor tenant families with spiritual meaning and empowered yeomen to defend their economic interests.
moreover as baptist ministers spread christianity among slaves the cultural gulf between blacks and whites shrank undermining one justification for slavery and giving some blacks a new religious identity.
within a generation african americans would develop distinctive versions of protestant christianity.
the midcentury challenge war trade and social conflict 1750 1763 between 1750 and 1763 three significant events transformed colonial life.
first britain went to war against the french in america sparking a worldwide conflict the great war for empire.
second a surge in trade boosted colonial consumption but caused americans to become deeply indebted to british creditors.
third westward migration sparked warfare with indian peoples violent disputes between settlers and land speculators and backcountry rebellions against easterncontrolled governments.
the french and indian war in 1754 overlapping french and british claims in north america came to a head map 4 4.
the french maintained their vast claims through a network of forts and trading posts that sustained alliances with neighboring indians.
the soft underbelly of this sprawling empire was the ohio valley where french claims were tenuous.
native peoples were driven out of the valley by iroquois attacks in the seventeenth century but after 1720 displaced indian populations especially delawares and shawnees from pennsylvania resettled there in large numbers.
in the 1740s british traders from pennsylvania began traveling down the ohio growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 river.
they traded with delawares and shawnees in the upper valley and began to draw french allied indians into their orbit and away from french posts.
then in 1748 the ohio company of virginia a partnership of prominent colonial planters and london merchants received a 200 000 acre grant from the crown to establish a new settlement on the upper ohio threatening french claims to the region.
conflict in the ohio valley by midcentury britain relied on the iroquois confederacy as its partner in indian relations throughout the northeast.
by extending the covenant chain the iroquois had become a kind of indian empire in their own right claiming to speak for other groups throughout the region based on their seventeenth century conquests.
the delawares shawnees and other groups who repopulated the ohio valley did so in part to escape the iroquois yoke.
to maintain influence on the ohio the iroquois sent two half kings tanaghrisson an adopted seneca and scarouady an oneida to the native settlement of logstown a trading town on the upper ohio where britain recognized them as leaders.
french authorities alarmed by british inroads built a string of forts from lake erie to the headwaters of the ohio culminating with fort duquesne on the site of present day pittsburgh.
to reassert british claims governor dinwiddie dispatched an expedition led by colonel george washington a twenty twoyear old virginian whose half brothers were ohio company stockholders.
washington discovered that most of the ohio indians had decided to side with the french only the iroquois half kings and a few of their followers supported his efforts.
after washingtons party fired on a french detachment tanaghrisson rushed in and killed a french officer to ensure war a prospect that would force british arms to support iroquois interests in the valley.
washingtons party was soon defeated by a larger french force.
the result was an international incident that prompted virginian and british expansionists to demand war.
but war in north america was a worrisome prospect the colonies were notoriously incapable of cooperating in their own defense and the covenant chain was badly in need of repair.
the albany congress the iroquois confederacy was unhappy with its british alliance and believed that the british were neglecting the iroquois while settlers from new york pressed onto their lands.
moreover the ohio indians france and britain were all acting in the ohio valley without consulting them.
to mend labrador sea y hudson bay cree m c r f algonquin fox law me.
la ie er ke s t penn.
delaware n h ft stanwix n y albany n j boston new york at l a n t i c ocean cherokee n c.
it br s c catawba comanche chickasaw wichita pueblo rt h santa fe s philadelphia no i e w is u s a l o i n n mass.
r i conn ft duquesne md.
ohio ft cumberland company of shawnee virginia.
va williamsburg r io oh h osage a port royal abenaki miami pawnee micmac ft ticonderoga iroquois ottawa detroit quebec rica lake michigan sioux.
ir ipp iss iss cheyenne on ur m ft beausjour n montreal ft frontenac ft oswego tario l on lak eh anishinaabeg e n superior ke la w a ren ce r.
assiniboine mandan ft louisbourg e y b a o n ame s n s o d h u c a p savannah creek caddo natchez charleston ga choctaw san antonio a id or fl new orleans sh ni apache st augustine sp a french claims british claims spanish claims disputed british french claims disputed british spanish claims major fort rio gr french outposts and settlements a nde gulf of mexico n e w s p a i n mexico city map 4 4 european spheres of influence in north america 1754 in the mid eighteenth century france spain and the british owned hudson bay company laid claim to the vast areas of north america still inhabited primarily by indian peoples.
british settlers had already occupied much of the land east of the appalachian mountains.
to safeguard their lands west of the mountains native americans played off one european power against another.
as a british official remarked to preserve the ballance between us and the french is the great ruling principle of modern indian politics when britain expelled france from north america in 1763 indians had to face encroaching anglo american settlers on their own.
500 miles 500 kilometers chapter 4 growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 continental assembly to manage trade indian policy and the colonies defense.
though it was attractive to a few reform minded colonists and administrators the plan would have compromised the independence of colonial assemblies and the authority of parliament.
it never received serious consideration but that did not stop the push toward war.
to see a longer excerpt of the albany plan of union along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
hendrick peters theyanoguin chief of the mohawks great britains alliance with the iroquois confederacy the covenant chain was central to its indian policy in the mid eighteenth century and the mohawk warrior and sachem hendrick peters theyanoguin emerged as its most powerful spokesman.
his speech at the albany congress of 1754 in which he urged great britain toward war was reported in newspapers in britain and the colonies and made him a transatlantic celebrity.
this print was advertised for sale in london bookstalls just as his death at the battle of lake george 1755 was being reported in newspapers there.
hendrick wears a rich silk waistcoat an overcoat trimmed with gold lace a ruffled shirt and a tricorn hat gifts from his british allies while he holds a wampum belt in one hand and a tomahawk in the other.
courtesy of the john carter brown library at brown university.
relations with the iroquois the british board of trade called a meeting at albany in june 1754.
there a prominent mohawk leader named hendrick peters theyanoguin challenged britain to defend its interests more vigorously while benjamin franklin proposed a plan of union among the colonies to counter french expansion.
the albany plan of union proposed that one general government.
be formed in america including all the said colonies it would have created a the war hawks win in parliament the fight for the ohio prompted a debate over war with france.
henry pelham the british prime minister urged calm there is such a load of debt and such heavy taxes already laid upon the people that nothing but an absolute necessity can justifie our engaging in a new war but two expansionist minded war hawks rising british statesman william pitt and lord halifax the new head of the board of trade persuaded pelham to launch an american war.
in june 1755 british and new england troops captured fort beausjour in the disputed territory of nova scotia which the french called acadia.
soldiers from puritan massachusetts then forced nearly 10 000 french settlers from their lands arguing they were rebels without property rights and deported them to france the west indies and louisiana where acadians became cajuns.
english and scottish protestants took over the farms the french catholics left behind.
this anglo american triumph was quickly offset by a stunning defeat.
in july 1755 general edward braddock advanced on fort duquesne with a force of 1 500 british regulars and virginia militiamen.
braddock alienated potential allies by treating indians including tanaghrisson dismissively and denying the privilege of rank to colonial officers like george washington.
persuaded that british arms could easily triumph in the american backcountry he was instead routed by a french and indian force.
braddock was killed and more than half his troops were killed or wounded.
we have been beaten most shamefully beaten by a handfull of men george washington complained bitterly as he led the survivors back to virginia.
the great war for empire by 1756 the american conflict had spread to europe where it was known as the seven years war and pitted britain and prussia against france spain and austria.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 braddocks defeat and death july 1755 in may 1755 general edward braddock led a force of 1 500 british regulars and virginia militiamen out of fort cumberland in western maryland intending to oust the french from fort duquesne 50 miles to the west.
as braddock neared the fort the french garrison of 200 troops and about 600 indian allies mostly potawatomis ottawas shawnees and delawares set out to ambush his force.
instead they unexpectedly met the british along a narrow roadway.
as the french and indians fanned out to attack from the woods the british troops george washington reported were struck with such a panic that they behaved with more cowardice than it is possible to conceive.
the officers behaved gallantly in order to encourage their men for which they suffered greatly the british casualties 450 killed 500 wounded included general braddock pictured above who later died from his wounds.
chicago history museum usa the bridgeman art library.
when britain mounted major offensives in india west africa and the west indies as well as in north america the conflict became the great war for empire.
william pitt emerged as the architect of the british war effort.
pitt was a committed expansionist with a touch of arrogance.
i know that i can save this country and that i alone can he boasted.
a master strategist he planned to cripple france by seizing its colonies.
in north america he enjoyed a decisive demographic advantage since george iis 2 million subjects outnumbered the french 14 to 1.
to mobilize the colonists pitt paid half the cost of their troops and supplied them with arms and equipment at a cost of 1 million a year.
he also committed a fleet of british ships and 30 000 british soldiers to the conflict in america.
beginning in 1758 the powerful anglo american forces moved from one triumph to the next in part because they brought indian allies back into the fold.
they forced the french to abandon fort duquesne renamed fort pitt and then captured fort louisbourg a stronghold at the mouth of the st lawrence.
in 1759 an armada led by british general james wolfe sailed down the st lawrence and took quebec the heart of frances american empire.
the royal navy prevented french reinforcements from crossing the atlantic allowing british forces to complete the conquest of canada in 1760 by capturing montreal map 4 5.
elsewhere the british likewise had great success.
from spain the british won cuba and the philippine islands.
fulfilling pitts dream the east india company chapter 4 growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 e 1 olf w gulf of st lawrence new france cape breton island ft louisbourg july 26 1758 quebec sept 13 1759 erie r ny he s ti philadelphia ri ft cumberland mac r baltimore oto p v n e w abenaki s t 1 ers h am portsmouth atlantic ocean boston new york b ft.
necessity july 3 4 1754 shawnee h on port royal ft beausjour micmac ia ot c s a halifax.
ohio r ft duquesne july 9 1755 l co ies d ela w are r delaware al leg e lak iroquois r no s ft oswego ft niagara july 25 1759 mo haw k r albany st john t montreal sept 8 1760 amher st 1760 connecti cut r.
lake ontario ft ticonderoga july 8 1758 hudson r on e hur lak ft frontenac aug 27 1758.
ce r ren aw l.
r algonquin otta wa 200 miles 200 kilometers british movement british victories french victories fort settlement map 4 5 the anglo american conquest of new france after full scale war with france began in 1756 it took almost three years for the british ministry to equip colonial forces and dispatch a sizable army to far off america.
in 1758 british and colonial troops attacked the heartland of new france capturing quebec in 1759 and montreal in 1760.
this conquest both united and divided the allies.
colonists celebrated the great victory the illuminations and fireworks exceeded any that had been exhibited before reported the south carolina gazette.
however british officers had little respect for colonial soldiers.
said one they are the dirtiest most contemptible cowardly dogs you can conceive ousted french traders from india and british forces seized french senegal in west africa.
they also captured the rich sugar islands of martinique and guadeloupe in the french west indies but at the insistence of the west indian sugar lobby which wanted to protect its monopoly the ministry returned the islands to france in the treaty of paris of 1763.
despite that controversial decision the treaty confirmed britains triumph.
it granted britain sovereignty over half of north america including french canada all french territory east of the mississippi river spanish florida and the recent conquests in africa and india.
britain had forged a commercial and colonial empire that was nearly worldwide.
though britain had won cautious support from some native american groups in the late stages of the war its territorial acquisitions alarmed many native peoples from new york to the mississippi who preferred the presence of a few french traders to an influx of thousands of anglo american settlers.
to encourage the french to return the ottawa chief pontiac declared i am french and i want to die french neolin a delaware prophet went further calling for explain the expulsion of all white skinned consequences invaders if you suffer the english how did the seven years among you you are dead men.
war reshape britains sickness smallpox and their empire in north america poison rum will destroy you and affect native peoples.
entirely in 1763 inspired by neolins nativist vision pontiac led a major uprising at detroit.
following his example indians throughout the great lakes and ohio valley seized nearly every british military garrison west of fort niagara besieged fort pitt and killed or captured more than 2 000 settlers.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 british military expeditions defeated the delawares near fort pitt and broke the siege of detroit but it took the army nearly two years to reclaim all the posts it had lost.
in the peace settlement pontiac and his allies accepted the british as their new political fathers the british ministry having learned how expensive it was to control the trans appalachian west issued the royal proclamation of 1763 which confirmed indian control of the region and declared it off limits to colonial settlement.
it was an edict that many colonists would ignore.
british industrial growth and the consumer revolution britain owed its military and diplomatic success to its unprecedented economic resources.
since 1700 when it had wrested control of many oceanic trade routes from the dutch britain had become the dominant commercial power in the atlantic and indian oceans.
by 1750 it was also becoming the first country to use new manufacturing technology and work discipline to expand output.
this combination of commerce and industry would soon make britain the most powerful nation in the world.
mechanical power was key to britains industrial revolution.
british artisans designed and built water mills and steam engines that efficiently powered a wide array of machines lathes for shaping wood jennies and looms for spinning and weaving textiles and hammers for forging iron.
compared with traditional manufacturing methods the new power driven machinery produced woolen and linen textiles iron tools furniture and chinaware in greater quantities and at lower cost.
moreover the entrepreneurs running the new workshops drove their employees hard forcing them to keep pace with the machines and work long hours.
to market the abundant factory produced goods english and scottish merchants extended credit to colonial shopkeepers for a full year instead of the traditional six months.
americans soon were purchasing 30 percent of all british exports.
to pay for british manufactures mainland colonists increased their exports of tobacco rice indigo and wheat.
using credit advanced by scottish merchants planters in virginia bought land slaves and equipment to grow tobacco explain which they exported to expandconsequences ing markets in france and central how did the prosperity of europe.
in south carolina rice the british empire improve planters used british government and endanger the lives and subsidies to develop indigo and interests of colonists.
rice plantations.
new york nicholas boylston c 1769 merchants in the coastal and transatlantic trades gained enormous wealth in the mid eighteenth century and displayed it in new ways.
among the most flamboyant was nicholas boylston.
of boylstons home john adams wrote a seat it is for a noble man a prince in this portrait painted by john singleton copley in 1769 boylston flaunts his exotic possessions.
in place of the wig he would have worn outside his home boylston wears a red velvet turban to keep his shaved head warm.
his morning gown of heavy silk damask covers a rich waistcoat casually unbuttoned in the middle to reveal his elegant ruffled shirt.
boylston rests his left elbow on two thick account books an unmistakable reminder of the source of his wealth.
photograph 2014 museum of fine arts boston.
bequest of david p kimball 23 504.
pennsylvania maryland and virginia became the breadbasket of the atlantic world supplying europes exploding population with wheat.
americans used their profits and the generous credit extended from overseas to buy english manufactures.
when he was practicing law in boston john adams visited the home of nicholas boylston one of the citys wealthiest merchants to view the furniture which alone cost a thousand pounds sterling he wrote.
t he marble tables the rich beds with crimson damask curtains and counterpins the beautiful chimny clock the spacious garden are the most magnificent of any thing i have ever seen through their possessions well to do colonists set themselves apart from their humbler or as they might have said more vulgar neighbors.
chapter 4 basis of connecticuts sea to sea royal charter of 1662.
however charles ii had also granted the wyoming valley to william penn and the penn family had sold farms there to pennsylvania residents.
by the late 1750s settlers from connecticut and pennsylvania were at war burning down their rivals houses and barns.
delawares with their own claim to the valley were caught in the crossfire.
in april 1763 the delaware headman teedyuscung was burned to death in his cabin in retaliation teedyuscungs son captain bull led a war party that destroyed a community of connecticut settlers.
simultaneously three distinct but related land disputes broke out in the hudson river valley map 4 6.
dutch tenant farmers wappinger indians and migrants from massachusetts asserted ownership rights to lands long claimed by manorial families such as the van rensselaers and the livingstons.
when the manor lords turned to the legal system to uphold their claims dutch and english farmers in westchester dutchess and albany counties rioted to close the courts.
in response new yorks royal governor ordered british troops to assist local sheriffs and manorial bailiffs they suppressed the tenant uprisings intimidated the wappingers and evicted the massachusetts squatters.
other land disputes erupted in new jersey and the southern colonies where landlords and english aristocrats had successfully revived legal claims based on long dormant seventeenth century charters.
one although britains consumer revolution raised living standards it landed many consumers and the colonies as a whole in debt figure 4 4.
even during the wartime boom of the 1750s exports paid for only 80 percent of british imports.
britain financed the remaining 20 percent the americans trade deficit through the extension of credit and pitts military expenditures.
when the military subsidies ended in 1763 the colonies fell into an economic recession.
merchants looked anxiously at their overstocked warehouses and feared bankruptcy.
i think we have a gloomy prospect before us a philadelphia trader noted in 1765.
the increase in transatlantic trade had made americans more dependent on overseas credit and markets.
the struggle for land in the east in good times and bad the population continued to grow intensifying the demand for arable land.
consider the experience of kent connecticut.
like earlier generations kents residents had moved inland to establish new farms but kent stood at the colonys western boundary.
to provide for the next generation many kent families joined the susquehanna company 1749 which speculated in lands in the wyoming valley in present day northeastern pennsylvania.
as settlers took up farmsteads there the company urged the connecticut legislature to claim the region on the population growth diversity and conflict 1720 1763 british imports in average yearly balance of payments 1768 1772 4 5 million earnings payments sterling millions 4 0 3 5 3 0 2 5 2 0 debt fueled consumption 1 5 commodities exports foreign earnings ship sales foreign earnings shipping british military expenditures 2 870 000 140 000 820 000 365 000 commodities imports purchases of slaves servants imperial government taxes 3 920 000 280 000 40 000 total 4 195 000 4 240 000 avg.
annual colonial deficit deficit over 5 years 45 000 225 000 1 0 0 5 figure 4 4 mainland population and british imports around 1750 british imports were growing at a faster rate than the american population indicating that the colonists were consuming more per capita.
but americans went into debt to pay for these goods running an annual trade deficit with their british suppliers that by 1772 had created a cumulative debt of 2 million.
part 2 british north america and the atlantic world 1660 1763 algonquin o ir new york new england migrants vs hudson valley manor lords pennsylvania sh a n en an do ah m o va lle u n y t a delaware maryland paxton boys shawnee virginia speculators ohio company rhode island connecticut settlers in wyoming valley i n l ie er conn e s mass.
s uron l h l n vt abenaki n y new w hamp.
is o qu ario ont western rebels and regulators maine mass.
massachusetts settlers in new york new jersey new jersey land riots del.
revival of charter claims in virginia and north carolina h i virginia at l an tic oc e an c a ee e ch north carolina p p a l k ro north carolina regulators a catawba south carolina area of settlement up to 1700 up to 1750 up to 1775 creek georgia south carolina regulators 300 miles 300 kilometers map 4 6 westward expansion and land conflicts 1750 1775 between 1750 and 1775 the mainland colonial population more than doubled from 1 2 million to 2 5 million triggering westward migrations and legal battles over land which had become increasingly valuable.
violence broke out in eastern areas where tenant farmers and smallholders contested landlords property claims based on ancient titles and in the backcountry where migrating settlers fought with indians rival claimants and the officials of easterndominated governments.
court decision allowed lord granville the heir of an original carolina proprietor to collect an annual tax on land in north carolina another decision awarded ownership of the entire northern neck of virginia along the potomac river to lord fairfax.
the revival of these proprietary claims by manorial lords and english nobles testified to the rising value of land along the atlantic coastal plain.
it also underscored the increasing similarities between rural societies in europe and america.
to avoid the status of european peasants native born yeomen and tenant families joined the stream of european migrants searching for cheap land near the appalachian mountains.
as would be landowners moved west they sparked conflicts over indian policy political representation and debts.
during the war with france delaware and shawnee warriors had exacted revenge for thomas penns land swindle of 1737 by destroying frontier farms in pennsylvania and killing hundreds of residents.
scots irish settlers demanded the expulsion of all indians but quaker leaders refused.
so in 1763 a group of scots irish frontiersmen called the paxton boys massacred twenty conestoga indians an assimilated community that had lived alongside their colonist neighbors peacefully for many years.
when governor john penn tried to bring the murderers to justice 250 armed scots irishmen advanced on philadelphia.
benjamin franklin intercepted the angry mob at lancaster and arranged a truce averting a battle with the militia.
prosecution of the paxton boys failed for lack of witnesses and the episode gave their defenders the opportunity to excoriate pennsylvanias government for protecting indians while it neglected the interests of backcountry colonists.
the south carolina regulators violence also broke out in the backcountry of south carolina where landhungry scottish and anglo american settlers clashed repeatedly with cherokees during the war with france.
after the fighting ended in 1763 a group of landowning vigilantes known as the regulators demanded that the eastern controlled government provide western districts with more courts fairer taxation and greater representation in the assembly.
we are free men british subjects not born slaves declared a regulator manifesto.
fearing slave revolts the lowland rice planters who ran the south carolina assembly compromised.
in 1767 the assembly created western courts and reduced the fees for legal documents but it refused to reapportion the legislature or lower western taxes.
like the paxton boys in pennsylvania the south carolina regulators won attention to backcountry needs but failed to wrest power from the eastern elite.
civil strife in north carolina in 1766 a more radical regulator movement arose in north carolina.
when the economic recession of the early 1760s brought a sharp fall in tobacco prices many farmers could not pay their debts.
when creditors sued these farmers for payment judges directed sheriffs to seize the debtors property.
many backcountry farmers lost their property or ended up in jail for resisting court orders.
chapter 4 to save their farms north carolinas debtors defied the governments authority.
disciplined mobs intimidated judges closed courts and freed their comrades from jail.
the regulators proposed a series of reforms including lower legal fees and tax payments in the produce of the country rather than in cash.
they also demanded greater representation in the assembly and a just revenue system that would tax each person in proportion to the profits arising from his estate all to no avail.
in may 1771 royal governor william tryon mobilized british troops and the eastern militia which defeated a large regulator force at the alamance river.
when the fighting ended thirty men lay dead and tryon summarily executed seven insurgent leaders.
not since bacons rebellion in virginia in 1675 and the colonial uprisings during the glorious revolution of 1688 see chapter 2 had a colonial dispute caused so much political agitation.
in 1771 as in 1675 and 1688 colonial conflicts became linked with imperial politics.
in connecticut the reverend ezra stiles defended the north carolina regulators.
what shall an injured oppressed people do he asked when faced with oppression and tyranny stiless remarks reflected growing resistance to recently imposed british policies of taxation and control.
the american colonies still depended primarily on britain for their trade and military defense.
however by the 1760s the mainland settlements had evolved into complex societies with the potential to exist independently.
british policies would chapter review play a crucial role in determining the direction the maturing colonies would take.
summary in this chapter we observed dramatic changes in british north america between 1720 and 1765.
an astonishing surge in population from 400 000 to almost 2 million was the combined result of natural increase european migration and the african slave trade.
the print revolution and the rise of the british atlantic brought important new influences the european enlightenment and european pietism transformed the world of ideas while a flood of british consumer goods and the genteel aspirations of wealthy colonists reshaped the colonies material culture.
colonists confronted three major regional challenges.
in new england crowded towns and eversmaller farms threatened the yeoman ideal of independent farming prompting families to limit births move to the frontier or participate in an exchange economy.
in the middle atlantic colonies dutch english german and scots irish residents maintained their religious and cultural identities while they competed for access to land and political power.
across the backcountry new interest in western lands triggered conflicts with indian peoples civil unrest among whites and ultimately the great war for empire.
in the aftermath of the fighting britain stood triumphant in europe and america.
c h a p t e r r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events tenancy p 116 competency p 117 household mode of production p 120 squatters p 121 redemptioner p 124 enlightenment p 126 pietism p 126 key people natural rights p 127 deism p 128 revival p 129 old lights p 132 new lights p 132 consumer revolution p 141 regulators p 142 isaac newton p 127 john locke p 127 benjamin franklin p 128 jonathan edwards p 129 george whitefield p 129 tanaghrisson p 135 william pitt p 138 pontiac p 139 part 2 chapter review review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapters main ideas.
compare colonists pursuits of happiness in new england the middle colonies the backcountry and the south.
how did poorer colonists in each of these regions seek to maintain their autonomy from powerful landlords and institutions and how did this effort shape the formation of regional identities.
how did the print and transportation revolutions transform colonial culture and the economy in the eighteenth century.
making connections half of north america into british hands.
how did that massive territorial acquisition affect ordinary colonists.
what impact did it have on native americans strategies for coexisting with their european neighbors.
review the events listed under work exchange and technology and identity for the period 1720 1750 on the thematic timeline on page 79.
how did economic developments in the colonies influence the formation of new cultural identities in this era.
thematic understanding recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place in chapter 3 we saw the rise of the south atlantic system an engine of economic growth that tied britains colonies more closely together and generated prosperity throughout the british atlantic world.
what consequences of that integration and prosperity are evident in the topics discussed in this chapter.
how was the great war for empire grounded in earlier economic developments.
and how did the postwar debt crisis grow out of the south atlantic system.
more to explore 3.
the great war for empire delivered the eastern visual evidence return to the john collet painting of george whitefield that opened the chapter p 115.
how does collet portray whitefields audience.
consider the postures and facial expressions of individual members of the crowd and imagine what might have been running through their minds as they listened.
what do the various elements of this painting the crowd tankard of ale sleeping dog setting suggest about the great awakenings appeal.
about collets attitude toward evangelical preaching.
start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.
fred anderson the war that made america 2005.
a compelling narrative of the seven years war in america.
also see the war that made america pbs video and its web site thewarthatmadeamerica org.
colin g calloway white people indians and highlanders 2008.
makes suggestive comparisons between britains encounters in scotland and america.
aaron spencer fogleman hopeful journeys 1996.
covers german migrations to america.
patrick griffin the people with no name 2001.
treats the experience of the scots irish in ireland and america.
susan e klepp and billy g smith eds the infortunate 1992.
a compelling narrative of one indentured servant immigrants experience in the middle colonies.
laurel thatcher ulrich a midwifes tale 1990.
a vivid account of one womans experiences on the maine frontier.
see also a midwifes tale pbs video and two related web sites pbs org wgbh amex midwife and dohistory org.
chapter 4 timeline chapter review ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
licensing act lapses in england triggering the print revolution 1710s 1730s enlightenment ideas spread from europe to america germans and scots irish settle in middle colonies theodore jacob frelinghuysen preaches pietism to german migrants 1720s 1730s william and gilbert tennent lead presbyterian revivals among scots irish jonathan edwards preaches in new england benjamin franklin founds the pennsylvania gazette george whitefield sparks great awakening 1740s 1760s conflict between old lights and new lights shortage of farmland in new england threatens freehold ideal growing ethnic and religious pluralism in middle atlantic colonies religious denominations establish colleges benjamin franklin founds american philosophical society samuel morris starts presbyterian revivals in virginia ohio company receives grant of 200 000 acres from the crown connecticut farmers form susquehanna company 1750s industrial revolution begins in england british shipping dominates north atlantic consumer purchases increase american imports and debt french and indian war begins iroquois and colonists meet at albany congress franklins plan of union britain begins great war for empire 1759 1760 britain completes conquest of canada 1760s land conflict along new york and new england border baptist revivals win converts in virginia pontiacs rebellion leads to proclamation of 1763 treaty of paris ends great war for empire scots irish paxton boys massacre indians in pennsylvania royal governor puts down regulator revolt in north carolina key turning points the ohio company grant 1748 the formation of the susquehanna company 1749 land conflict along new york and new england border 1760s and the defeat of the north carolina regulators 1771.
how do these events reveal tensions over the question of who would control the development of frontier lands in britains mainland north american colonies.
what were the effects of these conflicts on native american populations.
revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 p a r t 110 chapter 3 colonial ways of life indentured servants or slaves.
during the eighteenth century england would transport some 50 000 convicts to the north american colonies to relieve overcrowded jails and provide needed workers.
once in america many of the newcomers kept moving within and across colonies in search of better lands or new business opportunities such as trading with the native peoples who controlled the profitable fur trade.
this extraordinary mosaic of adventurous people created americas enduring institutions and values as well as its distinctive spirit and restless energy.
the shape of early america life in early america was hard and often short.
many in the first wave of american colonists died of disease or starvation others were killed by native americans.
the average death rate in the first years of settlement was 50 percent.
once colonial life became more settled and secure however the colonies grew rapidly.
on average the american population doubled every twenty five years during the colonial period.
by 1750 the number of colonists had passed 1 million by 1775 it approached 2 5 million.
by comparison the combined population of england scotland and ireland in 1750 was 6 5 million.
population growth benjamin franklin a keen observer of life in the new country said that the extraordinary growth in the colonial population came about because land was plentiful and cheap and laborers were scarce and expensive.
the opposite conditions prevailed in europe.
it suffered from overpopulation and expensive farmland.
from this reversal of conditions flowed many of the changes that european culture underwent during the colonization of america not the least being that more land and good fortune lured enterprising immigrants and led settlers to replenish the earth with large families.
once in the colonies settlers tended to have large families in part because farm children could lend a hand in the fields.
colonists tended to marry and start families at an earlier age than in europe.
in england the average age at marriage for women was twenty five or twenty six in america it dropped to twenty.
men in the colonies also married at a younger age.
the birth rate rose accordingly since women who married earlier had time for about two additional pregnancies during their childbearing years.
on average a married woman had a child every two to three years before menopause.
some women had as many as 20 pregnancies over their lifetime making for large families.
benjamin franklin for example had sixteen brothers and sisters.
the shape of early america 111 birthing children however was also dangerous since most babies were delivered at home in often unsanitary conditions and harsh weather.
miscarriages were common.
between 25 and 50 percent of women died during birthing or soon thereafter and almost a quarter of all babies did not survive infancy especially during the early stages of a colonial settlement.
each year more deaths occurred among young children than any other age group.
disease and epidemics were rampant in colonial america.
in 1713 boston minister cotton mather lost three of his children and his wife to a measles epidemic.
mather lost eight of fifteen children in their first year of life.
martha custis the virginia widow who married george washington had four children during her first marriage all of whom died young at ages two three sixteen and seventeen.
overall however mortality rates in the colonies were lower than in europe.
because fertile land was plentiful famine seldom occurred after the early years of settlement and although the winters were more severe than in england firewood was abundant.
the average age in the new nation in 1790 was sixteen years because the colonial population was younger on the colonial farm this plan of a newly cleared farm shows how trees were cut whole americans as a group were less down and the stumps left to rot.
susceptible to disease than were europeans.
colonists longevity reflected the different living conditions in america.
the majority of colonists lived in sparsely populated settlements and were less likely to be exposed to infectious diseases.
that began to change of course as colonial cities grew larger and more congested and trade and travel increased.
by the mid eighteenth century the colonies were beginning to see levels of contagion much like those in the cities of europe.
women in the colonies in contrast to the colonies of new spain and new france english america had far more women which largely explains the difference in population growth rates among the european empires competing in the americas.
more 112 chapter 3 colonial ways of life women did not mean more equality however.
most colonists brought to america deeply rooted convictions about the inferiority of women.
as one new england minister stressed the woman is a weak creature not endowed with the strength and constancy of mind of men women as had been true for centuries were expected to focus their time and talents on what was then called the domestic sphere they were to obey and serve their husbands nurture their children and maintain their households.
governor john winthrop insisted that a true wife would find contentment only in subjection to her husbands authority the wifes role said another puritan was to guide the house etc.
and not guide the husband a wife should view her spouse with a noble but generous fear which proceeds from love women in most colonies could not vote hold office attend schools or colleges bring lawsuits sign contracts or become ministers.
divorces were usually granted only for desertion or cruel and barbarous treatment and no matter who was named the guilty party the father received custody of the children.
a pennsylvania court did see fit to send a man to prison for throwing a loaf of hard bread at his wife which occasioned her death in a short time womens work virtually every member of a household regardless of age or gender worked and no one was expected to work harder than women.
as john cotton a boston minister admitted in 1699 women are creatures without which there is no comfortable living for a man women who failed to perform the work expected of them were punished as if they were servants or slaves.
in 1643 margaret page of salem massachusetts was jailed for being a lazy idle loitering person during the eighteenth century womens work typically involved activities in the house garden and fields.
unmarried women often worked outside their home.
many moved into other households to help with children or to make clothes.
others stayed at home but took in children or spun thread into yarn to exchange for cloth.
still others hired themselves out as apprentices to learn a skilled trade or craft.
throughout colonial america there were women silversmiths blacksmiths shoemakers sailmakers shopkeepers and mill owners.
other women operated laundries or bakeries.
technically any money earned by a married woman was the property of her husband.
farm women usually rose and prepared breakfast by sunrise and went to bed soon after dark.
they were responsible for building the fire and hauling water from a well or creek.
they fed and watered the livestock woke the children churned butter tended the garden prepared lunch the main meal of the the shape of early america 113 the first second and last scene of mortality prudence pundersons needlework ca.
1776 shows the domestic path from cradle to coffin followed by most affluent colonial women.
day played with the children worked the garden again prepared dinner milked the cows got the children ready for bed and cleaned the kitchen before retiring.
women also combed spun spooled wove and bleached wool for clothing knitted linen and cotton hemmed sheets pieced quilts made candles and soap chopped wood hauled water mopped floors and washed clothes.
female indentured servants in the southern colonies commonly worked as field hands weeding hoeing and harvesting.
meals in colonial america differed according to ethnic groups.
the english focused their diet on boiled or broiled meats venison mutton beef and pork.
meals were often cooked in one large cast iron pot combining stew meat with potatoes and vegetables which were then smothered with butter and seasoned with salt.
puddings made of bread or plums were the favorite dessert while beer with just a little alcohol content was the most common beverage even for children and infants.
cooking was usually done over a large open fireplace.
the greatest accidental killer of women was kitchen fires that ignited long dresses.
114 chapter 3 colonial ways of life one of the most lucrative trades among colonial women was the oldest prostitution.
many servants took up prostitution after their indenture was fulfilled and the colonial port cities had thriving brothels.
they catered to sailors and soldiers but men from all walks of life married and unmarried frequented what were called bawdy houses or in puritan boston disorderly houses virginias william byrd perhaps the wealthiest man in the colony complained in his diary that he had walked the streets of williamsburg trying to pick up a whore but could not find one local authorities frowned on such activities.
in massachusetts convicted prostitutes were stripped to the waist tied to the back of a cart and whipped as it moved through the town.
in south carolina several elected public officials were dismissed because they were caught lying with wenches new york city officials ordered raids on brothels in 1753.
some two dozen ladies of pleasure were arrested and five of them were subjected to a public whipping.
some enslaved women whose owners expected sexual favors turned the tables by demanding compensation.
on occasion circumstances forced women to exercise leadership outside the domestic sphere.
such was the case with south carolinian elizabeth lucas pinckney 1722 1793.
born in the west indies raised on the island of antigua and educated in england eliza moved with her family to charleston south carolina at age fifteen when her father george lucas inherited three plantations.
the following year however lucas a british army officer and colonial administrator was called back to antigua leaving eliza to care for her ailing mother and younger s ister and to manage three plantations worked by slaves.
she wrote a friend in england i have the business of three plantations to transact which requires much writing and more business and fatigue.
but by rising early i find i can go through much business eliza loved the vegetable world and experimented with several crops uch coveted before focusing on indigo a west indian plant that produced a m blue dye for coloring fabric especially military uniforms.
indigo made her family a fortune as it did for many other plantation owners on the carolina coast.
in 1744 she married charles pinckney a widower twice her age who was speaker of the south carolina assembly.
she made him promise that she could continue to manage the plantation.
as eliza began raising children she resolved to make a good wife to my dear husband.
a good mother to my children.
a good mistress to my servants making their lives as comfortable as i can she also pledged not to be luxurious or extravagant in the management of my table family budget and family on the one hand nor niggardly and covetous or too anxiously concerned about it on the other the shape of early america 115 in the towns women commonly served as tavern hostesses and shopkeepers and occasionally worked as doctors printers upholsterers painters and silversmiths.
often these women were widows carrying on their dead husbands trade or business and they became accustomed to some measure of social authority in a mans world women and religion during the colonial era no denomination allowed women to be ordained as ministers.
only the quakers let women hold church offices and preach exhort in public.
puritans cited biblical passages claiming that god required virtuous women to submit to male authority and remain silent in congregational matters.
governor john winthrop demanded that women not meddle in such things as are proper for men to manage.
women who challenged ministerial authority were usually prosecuted and punished.
yet by the eighteenth century as is true today women made up the overwhelming majority of church members.
their disproportionate attendance at church services and revivals worried many ministers since a feminized church was presumed to be a church in decline.
in 1692 the influential boston minister cotton mather observed that there are far more godly women in the world than there are godly men in explaining this phenomenon mather put a new twist on the old notion of women being the weaker sex.
he argued that the pain associated with childbirth which had long been interpreted as the penalty women paid for eves sinfulness was in part what drove women more frequently the more fervently to commit their lives to christ.
in colonial america the religious roles of black women were quite different from those of their white counterparts.
in most west african tribes women were not subordinate to men and frequently served as priests and cult leaders.
although some enslaved africans had been exposed to christianity or islam in africa most of them tried to sustain their traditional african religion once they arrived in the colonies.
in america black women and men were often excluded from church membership for fear that christianized slaves might seek to gain their freedom.
to clarify the situation virginia in 1667 passed a law specifying that children of slaves would be slaves even if they had been baptized as christians.
over time the colonial environment did generate slight improvements in the status of women.
the acute shortage of women in the early years made them more highly valued than they were in europe and the puritan emphasis on a w ell ordered family life led to laws protecting wives from physical abuse and allowing for divorce.
in addition colonial laws gave wives greater control 116 chapter 3 colonial ways of life over property that they had contributed to a marriage or that was left after a husbands death.
but the a ge old notion of female subordination and domesticity remained firmly entrenched in colonial america.
as a massachusetts boy maintained in 1662 the superior aspect of life was masculine and eternal the feminine inferior and mortal society and economy in the southern colonies as the southern colonies matured inequalities of wealth became more visible and social life grew more divided.
the use of enslaved indians and africans to grow and process the crops most in demand in europe generated enormous wealth for a few large landowners and their families.
socially the planters and merchants increasingly became a class apart from the common folk they dominated the legislatures bought luxury goods from london and paris and built brick mansions with formal gardens all the while looking down upon their social inferiors both white and black.
warm weather and plentiful rainfall enabled the southern colonies to grow the staple crops most profitable also called cash crops valued by the mother country tobacco rice sugarcane and indigo.
virginia as king charles i put it was founded upon smoke tobacco production soared during the seventeenth century.
in virginia and maryland wrote a royal official in 1629 tobacco.
is our all and indeed leaves no room for anything else the same was true for rice cultivation in south carolina and georgia.
using only hand tools slaves transformed the coastal landscapes removing trees from swamps and wetlands infested with snakes alligators and mosquitos.
they then created a system of floodgates to allow workers to drain or flood the fields as needed.
over time the rice planters became the wealthiest group in the british colonies.
as plantations grew in size the demand for enslaved laborers first native americans and later africans rose dramatically.
the first english immigrants to virginia and maryland the chesapeake colonies built primitive one room huts with dirt floors and little privacy.
they provided limited protection from the cold and wind and rotted quickly.
a visitor to virginia in 1622 reported that the colonys huts were the worst i ever saw eventually colonists built sparsely furnished cabins on stone or brick foundations roofed with thatched straw.
the spaces between the log timbers were chinked with wattle and daub a mix of mud sand straw and wooden stakes that when dried formed a sturdy wall or seam.
there were few furnishings in most colonial homes.
because most of the huts or cabins were society and economy in new england 117 virginia plantation wharf southern colonial plantations were often constructed along rivers with easy access to oceangoing vessels as shown on this 1730 tobacco label.
too small for beds residents slept on the floor and used blankets to keep warm.
rarely did they have glass to fill windows.
instead they simply used wooden shutters to cover the openings.
society and economy in new england environmental social and economic factors contributed to the remarkable diversity among the early american colonies.
new england was quite different from the southern and middle atlantic regions more governed by religious concerns less focused on commercial agriculture more engaged in trade and much less involved with slavery.
townships whenever new england towns were founded the first public structure built was usually a church.
by law every town had to collect taxes to support a church and every r esident whether a church member or 118 chapter 3 colonial ways of life ot was required to attend midweek and sunday religious services.
the avern age new englander heard 7 000 sermons in a lifetime.
the puritans believed that god had created a covenant or contract in which people formed a congregation for common worship.
this led to the idea of people joining together to form governments but the principles of democracy were not part of puritan political thought.
puritan leaders sought to do the will of god not to follow the will of the people and the ultimate source of authority was not majority rule but the bible as interpreted by ministers and magistrates political leaders.
unlike the settlers in the southern colonies or in dutch new york few new england colonists received huge tracts of land.
township grants were usually awarded to organized groups of settlers often already gathered into a church congregation.
they would request from the general court a town what elsewhere was commonly called a township.
they then divided the land according to a rough principle of equity.
those who invested more or had larger families or greater status might receive more land while the town retained some pasture and woodland in common and held other tracts for later arrivals.
dwellings and daily life the first colonists in new england initially lived in caves tents or cabins but they soon built simple w ood frame housing in colonial new england this frame house built in the 1670s belonged to rebecca nurse one of the women hanged as a witch in salem village in 1692.
society and economy in new england 119 houses.
the roofs were steeply pitched to reduce the buildup of snow and were covered with thatched grasses or reeds.
by the end of the seventeenth century most new england homes were plain but sturdy dwellings centered on a fireplace.
some had glass windows brought from england.
interior walls were often plastered and whitewashed but it was not until the eighteenth century that the exteriors of most houses were painted usually a deep indian red.
the interiors were dark illuminated by candles or oil lamps both of which were expensive out of practicality most people usually went to sleep soon after sunset.
family life revolved around the main room on the ground floor called the hall where meals were cooked in a large fireplace and where the family lived most of the time hence they came to be called living rooms.
food would be served at a table of r ough hewn planks called the board.
the father was sometimes referred to as the chair man because he sat in the only chair the origin of the term chairman of the board.
the rest of the family usually stood or sat on stools or benches and ate with their hands and wooden spoons.
forks were not introduced until the eighteenth century.
a typical meal consisted of corn boiled meat and vegetables washed down with beer cider rum or milk.
cornbread was a daily favorite as was cornmeal mush known as hasty pudding.
the new england economy early new england farmers and their families led hard lives.
clearing rocks from the g lacier scoured soil might require sixty days of hard labor per acre.
the growing season was short and no staple crops for sale in markets grew in the harsh climate.
the crops and livestock were those familiar to the english countryside wheat barley oats some cattle pigs and sheep.
many new englanders turned to the sea for their livelihood.
codfish had been a regular element of the european diet for centuries and the waters off the new england coast had the heaviest concentrations of cod in the world.
whales too abounded in new england waters.
they supplied oil for lighting and lubrication as well as ambergris a waxy substance used in the manufacture of perfumes.
new englanders exported dried fish to europe with lesser grades going to the west indies as food for slaves.
the thriving fishing industry encouraged the development of shipbuilding and the growing experience and expertise at seafaring spurred transatlantic commerce.
rising incomes and a booming trade with britain and europe soon brought a taste for luxury goods in new england that clashed with the puritan ideal of plain living and high thinking.
in 1714 a worried puritan deplored the great extravagance that people are 120 chapter 3 colonial ways of life fallen into far beyond their circumstances in their purchases buildings families expenses apparel generally in the whole way of living shipbuilding the abundant forests of new england represented a source of enormous wealth.
old growth trees were especially prized for use as ships masts and spars on which sails were attached.
early on the british government claimed the tallest and straightest american trees mostly white pines and oaks for use by the royal navy.
at the same time british officials encouraged the colonists to develop their own shipbuilding industry.
american built ships quickly became known for their quality and price.
it was much less expensive to purchase ships built in america than to transport american timber to britain for ship construction especially since a large ship might require as many as profitable fisheries catching curing 2 000 trees.
nearly a third of all british and drying codfish in newfoundland in ships were made in the colonies.
the early 1700s.
for centuries the rich fishing grounds of the north atlantic provided new englanders with a prosperous industry.
trade by the end of the seventeenth century the new england colonies had become part of a complex north atlantic commercial network trading not only with the british isles and the british west indies but also often illegally with spain france portugal the netherlands and their colonies.
trade in new england and the middle colonies differed from that in the south in two respects their lack of staple crops to exchange for english goods was a relative disadvantage but the success of shipping and commercial enterprises worked in their favor.
after 1660 to protect its agriculture and fisheries the english government placed prohibitive duties taxes on fish flour wheat and meat while leaving the door open to timber furs and whale oil products in great demand in the home country.
between 1698 and 1717 new england and new york bought more from england than they exported to it creating an unfavorable trade balance as more of their coins went out than came in.
these circumstances gave rise to the triangular trade in which new englanders for example shipped rum to the west coast of africa where it was society and economy in new england 121 es atlantic trade routes h o rs north america s ves mo mola n ey s u sse s ga r sl a fis h l iv es t ock fl o u r l u m b e r sl a v e s cuba en france lin s e r o t s l a v a s europe d o o fi s h f urs n g d e r m a nufactu portugal spain d goods i ns man uf act ure lisbon o sk indi g e to b a c c o azores c i r cadiz m e a t fi s h r u m l u m b e r g r a i n ma nuf ac t ur e d g o od s wi ne madeira at l a n t i c win e fr ui t newfoundland boston new york philadelphia charleston glasgow england bristol london netherlands su jamaica ga mo r la e ss s fr u it eu ea rop ro np du c ts africa hispaniola ocean west indies sla r u ve s m sla v sl av ec go oa ivo ld st ry co co as as t t es south america major trade routes intercoastal trade routes how was overseas trade in the south different from that in new england and what were north americas most important exports.
wwn64 america 10e the middle colonies.
26593 03map 01 what was the triangular trade.
first proof exchanged for slaves took the enslaved africans to the west indies to sell and returned home with various west indian commodities including molasses from which new englanders then manufactured rum.
in another version they shipped provisions to the west indies carried sugar and molasses to england and returned with goods manufactured in europe.
the devil in new england the puritans who settled new england were religious fundamentalists who looked to the bible for authority and inspiration.
they read the bible daily and memorized much of it.
yet at times religious zeal could get out of hand.
the strains of massachusettss 122 chapter 3 colonial ways of life t ransition from puritan utopia to royal colony reached a tragic climax in 1692 amid the witchcraft hysteria at salem village some fifteen miles north of boston.
belief in witchcraft was widespread throughout europe and the colonies in the seventeenth century.
prior to the dramatic episode in salem almost 300 new englanders mostly m iddle aged women had been accused of practicing witchcraft and more than 30 had been hanged.
the salem episode was unique in its scope and intensity however.
during the winter of 1691 1692 several adolescent girls became fascinated with the fortune telling and voodoo practiced by tituba a slave from barbados.
the entranced girls began to behave oddly shouting barking crawling and twitching for no apparent reason.
when asked who was tormenting them the girls replied that three women tituba sarah good and sarah osborne were satans servants.
the reverend samuel parris whose daughter claimed to be bewitched beat tituba his slave until she confessed.
authorities then arrested tituba and the other accused women.
two of them were hanged but not before they named other supposed witches in the village and more young girls experienced inexplicable fits.
soon the wild accusations spread and within a few months the salem village jail was filled with more than 150 men women and children all accused of practicing witchcraft.
when a prominent farmer giles corey was accused of supernatural crimes his neighbors lowered him into an open grave placed a board over his body and began loading it with heavy boulders to force a confession.
after three days of such abuse the defiant old man finally succumbed having muttered only two words more weight by denying guilt and choosing death corey ensured that his estate would go to his son rather than be confiscated by the government.
that convicted witches forfeited their property which was then put up for sale revealed the practical benefits and self interested motives behind some of the accusations.
as the allegations and executions multiplied leaders of the massachusetts bay colony began to worry that the witch hunts were out of control.
the governor finally intervened when his own wife was accused of serving the devil.
he disbanded the special court in salem and ordered the remaining suspects released including tituba who had languished in jail for thirteen months.
by then nineteen people including some men married to women who had been convicted had been hanged all justified by the biblical verse that tells believers not to suffer a witch to live a year after it had begun the witchcraft frenzy was finally over.
society and economy in the middle colonies 123 what explains salems mass hysteria.
it may have represented nothing more than theatrical adolescents trying to enliven the dreary routine of everyday life.
some historians have stressed that most of the accused witches were women many of whom had in some way defied the traditional roles assigned to females.
still another interpretation suggests that the accusations may have reflected the panicky atmosphere caused by frequent indian attacks occurring just north of salem along new englands northern frontier.
some of the accusing girls had seen their families killed by indians.
whatever its actual causes the witchcraft controversy also reflected the peculiar social tensions and personal feuds in salem village.
late in 1692 as the hysteria subsided several girls were traveling through nearby ipswich when they encountered an old woman.
a witch they shouted and began writhing as if possessed.
but the people of ipswich showed no interest and the bewitched girls picked themselves up and continued on their way.
the wonders of the invisible world title page of the 1693 london edition of cotton mathers account of the salem witchcraft trials.
mather a prominent boston minister warned his congregation that the devils legions were assaulting new england.
society and economy in the middle colonies both geographically and culturally the middle colonies new york new jersey pennsylvania delaware and maryland stood between new england and the south.
they reflected the diversity of colonial life and foreshadowed the pluralism of the future nation.
an economic mix the middle colonies produced surpluses of foodstuffs for export to the s lave based plantations of the south and the west indies wheat barley oats and other grains flour and livestock.
three great 124 chapter 3 colonial ways of life r ivers the hudson the delaware and the s usquehanna and their tributaries provided access to the backcountry of pennsylvania and new york which opened up a rich fur trade with native americans.
the regions bustling commerce thus rivaled that of new england.
land policies in the middle colonies followed the headright system prevalent in the chesapeake colonies.
in new york the early royal governors continued the dutch device of the patroonship granting to influential men called patroons vast estates on long island and throughout the hudson and mohawk valleys north of new york city.
the patroons controlled large domains farmed by tenants renters who paid fees to use the landlords mills warehouses smokehouses and docks.
with free land available elsewhere however new yorks population languished and the new waves of immigrants sought the promised land of pennsylvania.
an ethnic mix in the makeup of their population the middle colonies differed from both new englands puritan settlements and the biracial plantation colonies to the south.
in new york and new jersey dutch culture and language lingered.
along the delaware river near philadelphia the first settlers swedes and finns were overwhelmed by an influx of europeans.
by the mid eighteenth century the middle colonies were the fastest growing region in north america.
the germans came to america primarily pennsylvania mainly from the rhineland region of europe which had suffered from brutal religious wars that pitted protestants against catholics.
william penns recruiting brochures in german translation circulated throughout central europe and his promise of religious freedom appealed to many persecuted sects especially the mennonites german baptists whose beliefs resembled those of the quakers.
in 1683 a group of mennonites founded germantown near philadelphia.
they represented the first wave of german migrants a large proportion of whom paid their way as indentured servants or redemptioners the large numbers of penniless german immigrants during the eighteenth century alarmed many english colonists.
benjamin franklin worried that the germans will soon.
outnumber us throughout the eighteenth century the scots irish moved still farther out into the pennsylvania backcountry.
scotch irish is the more common but inaccurate name for the scots irish a mostly presbyterian population transplanted from scotland to northern ireland by the english government a century earlier to give catholic ireland a more protestant tone.
land was the great magnet attracting the poor scots irish immigrants.
they were said a recruiting agent full of expectation to have land for nothing and major immigrant groups in colonial america quebec c e q u e b ive r new hampshire lake champlain u ctic ne new york boston f o l er ke f de law susque river a p p a l a c h i a n ri ve r la ohio newport f f riv er pennsylvania j new york new jersey j w philadelphia s s baltimore delaware virginia chesapeake bay shenandoah river richmond f james river williamsburg north new bernf carolina fayetteville w charlotte f r f charleston j r ive georgia j savannah florida spanish atlantic ocean maryland potomac river sav an nah cape cod j rhode island south carolina 200 miles 200 kilometers connecticut are n han a ie n e o iver river mohawk iver m o u n t a i n s tr i nr dso hu ak r ta massachusetts n co law ren ce r augusta montreal st maine mass.
english africans scots irish german dutch highland scots french catholics j jews s swedes w welsh f french huguenots what attracted german immigrants to the middle colonies.
why did the scots irish spread across the appalachian backcountry.
where did the first jews settle in america.
how were they received.
wwn64 america 10e 26593 03map 02 first proof 126 chapter 3 colonial ways of life were unwilling to be disappointed in most cases the lands they squatted on were claimed by native americans.
in 1741 a group of delaware indians protested to pennsylvania authorities that the s cots irish intruders were taking our land without giving us anything for it if the colonial government did not stop the flow of whites the delawares threatened then they would drive them off the scots irish and the germans became the largest n on english ethnic groups in the colonies.
other ethnic minorities also enriched the population in the middle colonies huguenots french protestants whose religious freedom had been revoked in 1685 forcing many to leave france irish welsh swiss and jews.
new york had inherited from the dutch a tradition of ethnic and religious tolerance which had given the colony a diverse population before the english conquest french speaking walloons a celtic people of southern belgium french germans danes portuguese spaniards italians bohemians poles and others including some new england puritans.
the backcountry pennsylvania became the great distribution point for the different ethnic groups of european origin just as the chesapeake bay region and charleston south carolina became the distribution points for african peoples.
before the mid eighteenth century settlers in the pennsylvania backcountry had trespassed across indian lands and reached the appalachian mountain range.
rather than crossing the steep ridges the scots irish and germans filtered southward down the shenandoah valley of virginia and on into the carolina and georgia backcountry.
germans were the first white settlers in the upper shenandoah valley in southern pennsylvania western maryland and northern virginia and s cots irish filled the lower valley in western virginia and north carolina.
feisty determined and rugged the german and scots irish settlers built cabins and tended farms on indian lands built evangelical churches and established contentious isolated communities along the frontier of settlement.
r ace based slavery the institution of slavery is central to the history of the american colonies.
during the late seventeenth century slavery was legalized in all the colonies but was most prevalent in the south.
white colonists viewed race based slavery as a normal aspect of everyday life in an imperfect world few c onsidered it a moral issue.
they believed that god determined ones station in life slavery race based slavery 127 was therefore not a social evil but a personal misfortune dictated by god.
not until the late eighteenth century did large numbers of white europeans and americans begin to raise ethical questions about slavery.
initially during the seventeenth century many of the first africans in america were treated like indentured servants with a limited term of service after which they gained their freedom.
antonio an african arrived in jamestown during the early 1620s and worked as a servant for fourteen years before gaining his freedom.
he thereafter married an african woman changed his name to anthony johnson and developed a substantial farm of his own along the virginia shore.
until the mid seventeenth century no laws in the colonies specified the meaning and scope of the word slavery gradually however life long slavery for blacks became the c ustom and the l aw of the land.
by the 1660s colonial legislatures had begun to legalize the institution of r ace based slavery with detailed slave codes regulating most aspects of their lives.
the south carolina code for example defined all negroes mulattoes and indians sold into bondage as slaves for life as were the children born of enslaved mothers.
in 1667 the virginia legislature declared that slaves could not serve on juries travel without permission or gather in groups of more than two or three.
some colonies even prohibited owners from freeing their slaves manumission.
the codes allowed owners to punish slaves by whipping them slitting their noses cutting their ankle cords castrating men or killing them.
in 1713 a south carolina planter punished a slave by closing him up in a tiny coffin to die only to have his son slip in a knife so that he could kill himself rather than await suffocation.
color prejudice more than a century before the english arrived in america the portuguese and spanish had established a global trade in enslaved africans in spanish the word negro means black.
while english settlers often enslaved indian captives as had the spanish and portuguese before them the europeans did not enslave other europeans who were captured in warfare.
color was the crucial difference or at least the crucial rationalization used to justify the institution of slavery and its hellish brutalities.
the english associated the color black with darkness and evil.
to them the different appearance behavior and customs of africans and native americans represented savagery and heathenism.
colonial virginians justified slavery by convincing themselves that blacks and indians were naturally lazy treacherous and stupid among other shortcomings.
128 chapter 3 colonial ways of life colonial slavery during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the profitable sugar based economies of the french and british west indies and portuguese brazil had the greatest demand for enslaved africans as sugar became valued almost as much as gold or silver.
by 1675 the island colonies in the caribbean had more than 100 000 slaves while slaves in the american colonies numbered about 5 000.
the profits generated by sugar colonies in the caribbean were greater than all of the commerce in the american mainland colonies.
as tobacco rice and indigo crops became more established in maryland virginia and the carolinas however the number of african slaves in those colonies grew enormously.
at the same time the flow of white indentured servants from britain and europe to america was slowing.
between 1700 and 1709 only 1 500 indentured servants arrived in the american colonies 9 000 enslaved africans arrived during the same period.
until the eighteenth century english immigrants made up 90 percent of the american colonists.
after 1700 the largest number of new arrivals were enslaved africans who totaled more than all european immigrants combined.
the shifting popularity of black slaves over white servants reflected the growing industry of slave trading.
in the late seventeenth century the profitability of african slavery led dozens of new slave trading companies to emerge both in europe and america thus expanding the availability of enslaved africans and lowering the price.
american colonists preferred slaves because they were officially viewed as property with no civil rights and they and their offspring were servants for life not for a fixed number of years.
africans were preferred over enslaved indians because they could not escape easily in a land where they stood out because of their dark skin.
in short african slaves offered a better investment for colonial americans.
the market in slaves once a slave ship arrived at an american port africans in chains not knowing any english would be auctioned to the highest bidder who would cart them off to begin lifelong work for a complete stranger.
they were usually forbidden to use their former languages practice african religions or to sustain their native cultures.
with only rare exceptions slaves were allowed to own nothing.
enslaved africans were used in virtually all aspects of the expanding colonial economy.
the vast majority worked on farms or plantations often performing strenuous labor from dawn to dusk in oppressive heat and humidity.
as jedidiah morse a prominent charleston minister admitted in the late eighteenth century no white man to speak generally ever thinks of settling a farm and improving it for himself without negroes race based slavery 129 during the eighteenth century the demand for slaves soared in the southern colonies.
by 1750 there were almost 250 000 slaves in british america.
the vast majority resided in virginia and maryland about 150 000 compared with 60 000 in south carolina and georgia.
as the number of slaves grew so too did the breadth of their talents and expertise.
over time slaves became skilled artisans blacksmiths carpenters bricklayers.
many enslaved women worked as household servants and midwives.
typically the first wave of enslaved africans lived five years after arriving in america.
eight of the thirty two slaves that john mercer brought to his virginia plantation in the early eighteenth century died in their first year.
slave abuse and resistance colonial laws allowed whites to use brutal means to discipline and control their slaves.
they were whipped branded castrated or sold away often to the caribbean islands where working conditions were even worse.
a 1669 virginia law declared that accidentally killing a slave who was being whipped or beaten was not a serious crime.
during a three year period a south carolina overseer whipped five slaves to death.
william byrd ii a wealthy virginia planter confessed that the unhappy effect of owning many negroes is the necessity of being severe colonial newspapers were sprinkled with notices about runaway slaves.
a georgia slave owner asked readers to be on the lookout for a negro fellow named mingo about 40 years old and his wife quante a sensible wench about 20 with her child a boy about 3 years old all this country born in a few cases slaves organized armed rebellions in which they stole weapons burned and looted plantations and occasionally killed their captors.
in the late summer of 1739 some twenty slaves attacked a store in stono south carolina south of charleston.
led by a slave named jemmy they killed the owner seized weapons and headed south toward freedom in spanish florida gathering more recruits along the way.
within a few days the slaves had roamed over fifteen miles and killed t wenty five whites.
the growing army of slaves marched in military formation waving banners beating drums and freeing more slaves as they moved southward.
then the militia caught up with them.
most of the rebels were killed and in the weeks that followed sixty more were captured by enraged planters who cut off their heads and set them up at every mile post the stono rebellion so frightened white planters that they convinced the colonial assembly to pass the so called negro act of 1740 which called for more oversight of slave activities and harsher punishments for rebellious behavior.
it also reduced the penalty for a white killing a slave to a minor offense and banned slaves from testifying in courts.
130 chapter 3 colonial ways of life slavery in new york city in contrast to the experience of slaves in the southern colonies most slaves in the northern colonies lived in towns or cities and their urban environs gave them more opportunities to move about.
new york city had more slaves than any other american city.
by 1740 it was second only to charleston in the percentage of slaves in its population.
as the number of slaves increased in the congested city racial fears and tensions mounted and occasionally exploded.
in 1712 several dozen slaves revolted they started fires and then used swords axes and guns to kill whites as they attempted to fight the fires.
called out to restore order the militia captured t wenty seven slaves.
six committed suicide and the rest were executed some were burned alive.
new york officials thereafter passed their own black code that strictly regulated slave behavior.
the harsh regulations did not prevent another major racial incident.
in the bitterly cold march of 1741 city dwellers worried about a series of suspicious slavery in new amsterdam 1642 the significance of african slaves to the colonial economy is the focus of this engraving of the dutch colony new amsterdam later known as new york city.
colonial cities 131 fires including one at the governors house.
their worst fear was that the fires were set by slaves.
the negroes are rising shouted terrified whites.
the frantic city council launched an intense investigation to find the villains mary burton a sixteen year old white indentured servant told authorities that slaves and poor whites were plotting to burn the whole town and kill the white men.
the plotters were supposedly led by john hughson a white trafficker in stolen goods who owned the tavern where mary burton worked.
his wife two slaves and a prostitute were charged as c o conspirators.
despite their denials all were convicted and hanged.
within weeks more than half of the adult male slaves in the city were in jail.
what came to be called the conspiracy of 1741 finally ended after seventeen slaves and four whites were hanged thirteen more blacks were burned at the stake while many more were deported.
such organized rebellions were rare however in large part because the likelihood of success was so small and the punishments so severe.
much more common were subtler forms of resistance and accommodation adopted by enslaved africans stealing food breaking tools destroying crops feigning illness etc.
colonial cities throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the american colonies were mostly populated by farmers or farmworkers.
but a handful of cities blossomed into dynamic urban centers of political and social life.
economic opportunity drove most city dwellers.
in new york city for example a visitor said the art of getting money dominated everything the residents did.
colonial cities hugged the coastline or like philadelphia sprang up on rivers large enough to handle oceangoing vessels.
never comprising more than 10 percent of the colonial population the large coastal cities had a disproportionate influence on commerce politics society and culture.
by the end of the colonial period philadelphia with some 30 000 people was the largest city in the colonies and new york city with about 25 000 ranked second.
boston numbered 16 000 charleston south carolina 12 000 and newport rhode island 11 000 the social and political order the urban social elite was dominated by wealthy merchants and property owners served by a middle class of shop owners innkeepers and skilled craftsmen.
almost two thirds of urban male workers were a rtisans people who made their living at 132 chapter 3 colonial ways of life andicrafts.
they included carpenters h and coopers barrel makers shoemakers and tailors silversmiths and blacksmiths sailmakers stonemasons weavers and potters.
at the bottom of the social order were sailors manual laborers servants and slaves.
colonial cities were busy crowded and dangerous.
epidemics such as cholera malaria and yellow fever were common.
the use of open fireplaces for heating caused frequent fires that in turn led to the development of fire companies.
rising crime and violence required increased policing of neighborhoods by sheriffs and local militias.
colonists also were concerned the rapalje children john durand painted the children of a wealthy about the poor and homeless.
the numbrooklyn merchant wearing clothing ber of bostons poor receiving aid from typical of u pper crust urban society.
colonial authorities rose from 500 in 1700 to 4 000 in 1736 in new york city the number rose from 250 in 1698 to 5 000 in the 1770s.
those designated helpless among the destitute poor especially the disabled elderly widows and orphans were often provided money food clothing and fuel.
in some towns poorhouses were built to house the homeless poor and provide them with jobs.
the urban web overland travel in the colonies was initially by horse or by foot.
inns and taverns also called public houses or pubs were especially important since travel at night was treacherous and americans loved to drink.
during the colonial period it was said that when the spanish settled an area they would first build a church the dutch would first erect a fort and the english would first construct a tavern.
in 1690 boston alone had fi fty four taverns half of them operated by women.
colonial taverns and inns were places to eat relax read a newspaper play cards gossip and conduct business.
and of course they were the most popular places to drink alcoholic beverages beer hard cider and rum which became the favored drink.
but ministers and magistrates began to worry that the pubs were promoting drunkenness and social rebelliousness.
not only colonial cities 133 taverns a tobacconists business card from 1770 captures men talking in a philadelphia tavern while they drink ale and smoke pipes.
were poor whites drinking heavily but also indians which one governor told the assembly would have fatal consequences to the government early in the eighteenth century ministers succeeded in passing an anti tavern law in massachusetts bay colony.
called the act against intemperance immorality and profaneness it was directed at taverns that had become nurseries of intemperance it tightened the process of issuing licenses for the sale of liquor eliminated fiddle playing in pubs called for the public posting of the names of common drunkards and banned the sale of rum and brandy the most potent beverages.
after a few years however the law was rarely enforced and the concerns about taverns and drinking continued.
in 1726 a bostonian declared that the abuse of strong drink is becoming epidemical among us and it is very justly supposed.
that the multiplication of taverns has contributed not a little to this excess of riot and debauchery the failed 1712 law was the last legislative effort to restrict alcohol consumption before the revolution.
by the end of the seventeenth century there were more taverns in america than any other business.
indeed taverns became the most important social institution in the c olonies and the most democratic.
they were places where rich and poor often intermingled and by the mid eighteenth century they would become the gathering places for protests against british rule.
134 chapter 3 colonial ways of life ong distance communication was a more complicated matter.
postal serl vice in the seventeenth century was almost nonexistent people gave letters to travelers or sea captains in hopes they would be delivered.
under a parliamentary law of 1710 the postmaster of london named a deputy in charge of the colonies and a postal system eventually encompassed most of the atlantic seaboard providing the colonies with an effective means of communication that would prove crucial in the growing controversy with great britain.
more reliable mail delivery spurred the growing popularity of newspapers.
before 1745 t wenty two newspapers had been started seven in new england ten in the middle colonies and five in the south.
an important landmark in the development of freedom of the press was john peter zengers 1735 trial for publishing criticisms of new yorks royal governor in his newspaper the new york weekly journal.
english common law held that one might be punished for libel or criticism that fostered an ill opinion of the government zengers lawyer claimed that the editor had published the truth.
the jury agreed and found the editor not guilty.
the enlightenment in america the most significant of the new european ideas circulating in eighteenth century america grew out of a burst of innovative intellectual activity known as the enlightenment a profound breakthrough in understanding human society and the natural world.
the enlightenment celebrated rational inquiry scientific research and individual freedom.
enlightened people were those who sought the truth wherever it might lead rather than remain content with believing ideas and dogmas passed down through the ages or taken from the bible.
immanuel kant the e ighteenth century german philosopher summed up the enlightenment point of view by saying dare to know.
have the courage to use your own understanding he and others used the power of reason to analyze the workings of nature and they employed new tools like microscopes and telescopes to engage in close observation scientific experimentation and precise mathematical calculation.
the age of reason the enlightenment often called the age of reason was triggered when the ancient view that the earth was at the center of the universe was challenged by the controversial heliocentric sun centered solar system described in 1533 by nicolaus copernicus a polish astronomer the enlightenment in america 135 and catholic priest.
his theory that the earth orbits the sun was scorned by catholic officials before it was confirmed by other scientists.
in 1687 englishman isaac newton 1642 1727 announced his transformational theory of the earths gravitational pull.
using both scientific experiments and mathematics especially calculus newton challenged biblical notions of the worlds workings by depicting a changing dynamic universe moving in accordance with natural laws that could be grasped by human reason and explained by mathematics.
he implied that natural laws rather than god govern all things from the orbits of the planets to the effects of gravity to the science of human relations politics economics and society.
some enlightened people called deists carried newtons scientific outlook to its logical conclusion claiming that god created the world and designed its natural laws and that these laws governed the operation of the universe.
in other words deists insisted that god planned the universe and set it in motion but no longer interacted directly with the earth and its people.
so the rational god of the deists was nothing like the intervening providential god of the christian tradition to whom believers prayed for daily guidance and direct support.
evil according to the deists resulted not from humanitys inherent sinfulness as outlined in the bible but from human ignorance of the rational laws of nature.
therefore the best way to improve both society and human nature according to deists such as thomas jefferson and benjamin franklin was by cultivating reason which was the highest virtue.
enlightenment thinkers often capitalized both words.
by using education reason and scientific analysis societies were bound to improve their knowledge as well as their quality of life.
faith in human progress was thus one of the most important beliefs of the enlightenment.
equally important was the enlightened notion of political freedom.
both jefferson and franklin were intrigued by the english political philosopher john locke 1632 1704 who maintained that natural law called for a government resting on the consent of the governed and respecting the natural rights of all.
this idea would later influence colonial leaders efforts to justify a revolution.
the american enlightenment benjamin franklin epitomized the enlightenment.
born in boston in 1706 franklin left home at the age of seventeen bound for philadelphia.
six years later he bought a print shop where he edited and published the pennsylvania gazette one of the leading newspapers in the colonies.
when he was t wenty six he published poor 136 chapter 3 colonial ways of life richards almanack a collection of seasonal weather forecasts puzzles household tips and witty sayings.
before he retired from business at the age of forty two franklin had founded a public library started a fire company helped create what became the university of pennsylvania and organized a debating club that grew into the american philosophical society.
franklin was devoted to scientific investigation.
skeptical and curious pragmatic and irreverent he was an inventive genius.
his wide ranging experiments encompassed the fields of medicine meteorology geology astronomy and benjamin franklin a champion of physics among others.
he developed the rational thinking and common sense franklin stove the lightning rod bifobehavior franklin was an inventor cal spectacles and a glass harmonica.
philosopher entrepreneur and statesman.
although raised as a presbyterian franklin became a deist who prized science and reason.
he questioned the divinity of jesus and the assumption that the bible was truly the word of god.
like the european deists franklin came to believe in a god that had created a universe directed by natural laws.
for franklin and others to be enlightened meant developing the confidence and capacity to think for oneself to think critically rather than simply accepting what tradition dictated as truth.
education in the colonies white colonial americans were among the most literate people in the world.
almost 90 percent of men more than in england could read.
for the colonists at large education in the traditional ideas and manners of s ociety even literacy itself remained primarily the responsibility of family and church.
the modern concept of free public education would not be fully embraced until the nineteenth century.
yet colonists were concerned from the beginning that steps needed to be taken to educate their young.
the puritan emphasis on reading scripture which all protestants shared to some degree led to the emphasis on literacy.
in 1647 the massachusetts bay colony required every town to support a grammar school a latin school that could prepare a student for college.
the great awakening 137 the dutch in new netherland were as interested in education as the new england puritans.
in pennsylvania the quakers established private schools.
in the southern colonies however schools were rare.
the wealthiest southern planters and merchants sent their children to england for schooling or hired tutors.
the great awakening the growing popularity of enlightenment rationalism posed a direct threat to traditional religious life in europe and america.
but christianity has always shown remarkable resilience in the face of challenging new ideas.
colonial education a page from the this was certainly true in the early rhymed alphabet of the new england eighteenth century when the ameri primer a popular american textbook can colonies experienced a widespread first published in the 1680s.
revival of spiritual zeal designed to restore the primacy of emotion in the religious realm.
between 1700 and 1750 when the controversial ideas of the enlightenment were circulating among the best educated colonists hundreds of new christian congregations were founded.
most americans 85 percent lived in colonies with an established church meaning that the colonial government officially endorsed and collected taxes to support a single official denomination.
the church of england also known as anglicanism was the established church in virginia maryland delaware and the carolinas.
puritan congregationalism was the official faith in most of new england.
in new york anglicanism vied with the dutch reformed church for control.
pennsylvania had no single s tate supported church but quakers dominated the legislative assembly.
new jersey and rhode island had no official denomination and hosted numerous christian splinter groups.
most colonies organized religious life on the basis of local parishes which defined their theological boundaries and defended them against people who 138 chapter 3 colonial ways of life did not hold to the same faith.
in colonies with official tax supported religions people of other faiths could not preach without the permission of the parish.
in the 1730s and 1740s the parish system was thrown into turmoil by the arrival of outspoken traveling evangelists called itinerants who claimed that most of the local parish ministers were incompetent.
in their emotionally charged sermons the itinerants several of whom were white women and african americans insisted that christians must be reborn in their convictions and behavior.
revivalism during the early 1730s worries about the erosion of religious fervor helped spark a series of emotional revivals known as the great awakening.
the revivals quickly spread up and down the atlantic coast.
every social class ethnic group and region that participated was swept up in the ecstasy of renewed spiritual passion.
in the process the revivals divided congregations towns and families and fueled the growth of new denominations especially the baptists and methodists.
a skeptical benjamin franklin admitted that the awakening was having a profound effect on social life never did the people show so great a willingness to attend sermons.
religion is become the subject of most conversation jonathan jonathan edwards one of the foremost preachers of the great awakening edwards dramatically described the torments that awaited sinners in the afterlife.
edwards in 1734 1735 a remarkable spiritual transformation occurred in the congregation of jonathan edwards a p rominent congregationalist minister in the western massachusetts town of northampton.
one of americas most brilliant philosophers and theologians edwards had entered yale college in 1716 at age thirteen and graduated at the top of his class four years later.
when edwards arrived in northampton in 1727 he was shocked by the towns lack of religious conviction.
he claimed that the young people of northampton were preoccupied with sinful pleasures they indulged in lewd practices that corrupted others the great awakening 139 he warned that christians had become dangerously obsessed with making and spending money and that the new ideas associated with the enlightenment were eroding the importance of religious life.
to counteract the secularizing forces of the enlightenment edwards rushed to restore the emotional side of religion.
our people he said do not so much need to have their heads stored with new scientific knowledge as to have their hearts touched with spiritual intensity edwards was fiery and charismatic.
his vivid descriptions of the sufferings of hell and the delights of heaven helped rekindle spiritual intensity among his congregants.
by 1735 he could report that the town seemed to be full of the presence of god it never was so full of love nor of joy to judge the power of the religious awakening he thought one need only observe that it was no longer the tavern that drew local crowds but the ministers house in 1741 edwards delivered his most famous sermon sinners in the hands of an angry god it was designed in part to frighten people into seeking salvation.
edwards reminded the congregation that hell is real and that god holds you over the pit of hell much as one holds a spider or some loathsome insect over the fire abhors you and is dreadfully provoked.
he looks upon you as worthy of nothing else but to be cast into the fire when he finished he had to wait several minutes for the agitated congregants to quiet down before he led them in a closing hymn.
george whitefield the most celebrated promoter of the great awakening was a young english minister george whitefield whose reputation as a spellbinding evangelist preceded him to the colonies.
congregations were lifeless he claimed because dead men preach to them too many ministers were slothful shepherds and dumb dogs whitefield set out to restore the fires of religious intensity in america.
in the autumn of 1739 the twenty five y ear old evangelist began a fourteen month tour preaching to huge crowds from maine to georgia.
his critics were as fervent as his admirers.
a disgusted george whitefield the english ministers dramatic eloquence roused americans inspiring many to experience a religious rebirth.
140 chapter 3 colonial ways of life bostonian described a revival meetings theatrics the meeting was carried on with.
some screaming out in distress and anguish.
some again jumping up and down.
some lying along on the floor.
the whole with a very great noise to be heard at a miles distance and continued almost the whole night the short thin cross eyed whitefield enthralled audiences with his golden voice flamboyant style and unparalleled eloquence.
his sermons produced electric effects.
even benjamin franklin a confirmed rationalist who went to see whitefield preach in philadelphia was so excited by the fiery sermon that he emptied his pockets into the collection plate.
whitefield urged his listeners to experience a new birth a sudden emotional moment of conversion and salvation.
by the end of his sermon one listener reported the entire congregation was in utmost confusion some crying out some laughing and bliss still roaring to them to come to christ as they answered i will i will im coming im coming radical evangelists edwards and whitefield inspired many imitators the most radical of whom carried emotional evangelism to extremes stirring up women as well as those at the bottom of s ociety laborers seamen servants slaves and landless farm folk and ordaining their own ministers.
william tennent an irish born presbyterian revivalist charged that many local ministers were cold and sapless afraid to thrust the nail of terror into sleeping souls tennents oldest son gilbert also an evangelist defended his aggressive tactics by explaining that he and other traveling preachers invaded parishes only when the local minister showed no interest in the getting of grace and growing in it the tennents urged people to renounce their ministers and pursue salvation on their own.
they also attacked the excesses of the wealthy and powerful.
worried members of the colonial elite charged that the radical revivalists were spreading anarchy levelling and dissolution singing procession in 1740 this equally unsettling to the elite was engraving depicts a characteristic new the reverend james davenport the england singing procession at the most radical of the revivalists who height of the great awakening.
urged christians to renounce ratio the great awakening 141 nalist ministers influenced by the enlightenment and become the agents of their own salvation through a purely emotional conversion experience.
a connecticut minister warned that davenport and other extremists were frightening people out of their senses rather than offering reasonable sermons.
in 1743 in new london connecticut davenport attracted a huge crowd by building a bonfire and encouraging people to burn their fancy clothes and rationalist books.
a few weeks later the unstable davenport reversed himself and called his rantings enthusiastical and delusive women and revivals the great awakenings most controversial element was the emergence of women who defied the biblical ban against women speaking in religious services.
scores of women served as lay exhorters including sarah haggar osborne a rhode island schoolteacher who organized prayer meetings that eventually included men and women black and white.
when concerned ministers told her to stop she refused to shut my mouth and doors and creep into obscurity similarly in western massachusetts bathsheba kingsley stole her husbands horse to spread the gospel among her rural neighbors because she had received immediate revelations from heaven when her husband tried to intervene she pummeled him with hard words and blows praying loudly that he go quick to hell jonathan edwards denounced kingsley as a brawling woman who should keep chiefly at home for all of the turbulence created by the revivals however churches even the more democratic baptist and methodist congregations remained male bastions of political authority.
a changing religious landscape the great awakening made religion intensely personal by creating both a deep sense of spiritual guilt and an intense yearning for redemption.
yet it also undermined many of the established churches by emphasizing that all individuals regardless of wealth or social status could receive gods grace without the guidance of ministers.
denominations became bitterly divided as old light conservatives criticized disruptive and democratic revivalism and sparred with new light evangelicals who delighted in provoking emotional outbursts among their listeners and celebrating individual freedom in matters of faith.
jonathan edwards for one regretted the emergence of warring factions.
we are like two armies he said separated and drawn up in battle array ready to fight one another new england religious life would never be the same as puritanism disintegrated amid the intense warfare over the revivals of the great awakening.
142 chapter 3 colonial ways of life the puritan ideal of religious uniformity was shattered.
the crusty connecticut old light minister isaac stiles denounced the intrusion of choice into spiritual matters and charged that the multitudes were seriously soberly and solemnly out of their wits in their embrace of ultra emotional religion.
john henry goetschius a dutch reformed evangelist shot back that stiles and other old lights were simply determined to impose on many people against their will their old rotten and stinking routine religion in anglican virginia some fifty baptist evangelists were jailed for disturbing the peace during the great awakening.
new england subsequently attracted more and more baptists presbyterians anglicans and other denominations while the revival frenzy scored its most lasting victories along the western frontier of the middle and southern colonies.
in the more sedate churches of boston the principle of rational or enlightened religion gained the upper hand in a reaction against the excesses of revivalistic emotion.
boston ministers such as charles chauncey and jonathan mayhew found puritan theology too cold and forbidding.
to them the calvinist concept that people could be forever damned by predestination was irrational.
they embraced many insights drawn from enlightenment rationalism arguing that god created laws of nature which people could discover and exploit.
religious colleges in reaction to taunts that born again revivalist ministers lacked learning the awakening gave rise to denominational colleges that became the distinctive characteristic of american higher education.
the three colleges already in existence had religious origins harvard college founded in 1636 because the puritans dreaded to leave an illiterate ministry to the church when our present ministers shall lie in the dust the college of william and mary created in 1693 to strengthen the anglican ministry and yale college set up in 1701 to educate the puritans of connecticut who believed that harvard was drifting from the strictest orthodoxy.
the college of new jersey later princeton university was founded by presbyterians in 1746.
in close succession came kings college 1754 in new york later renamed columbia university an anglican institution the college of rhode island 1764 later called brown university which was baptist queens college 1766 later known as rutgers which was dutch reformed and dartmouth college 1769 which was congregationalist and the outgrowth of a school for indians.
the heart versus the head like a ferocious fire that burned intensely before dying out the great awakening subsided by 1750.
the emotional the great awakening 143 awakening like its counterpart the rational enlightenment influenced the forces leading to the revolution against great britain and set in motion powerful currents that still flow in american life.
ministers could no longer control the direction of religious life as more and more people took charge of their own spirituality and new denominations sprouted like mushrooms.
the awakening implanted in american culture the evangelical impulse and the emotional appeal of revivalism weakened the status of the old fashioned clergy and state supported churches and encouraged believers to exercise their own individual judgment.
by encouraging the proliferation of denominations it heightened the need for toleration of dissent.
in some respects however the warring awakening and the enlightenment one stressing the urgings of the spirit and the other celebrating the cold logic of reason led by different roads to similar ends.
both movements spread across the mainland colonies and thereby helped bind them together.
both emphasized the power and right of individual d ecision making and both aroused hopes that america would become the promised land in which people might attain the perfection of piety or reason if not both.
by urging believers to exercise their own spiritual judgment revivals weakened the authority of the established churches and their ministers just as colonial resentment of british economic regulations would later weaken the colonists loyalty to the king.
as such the great awakening and the enlightenment helped nurture a growing commitment to individual freedom and resistance to authority that would play a key role in the rebellion against british tyranny in 1776.
chapter review summary colonial demographics cheap land lured poor immigrants to america.
the initial shortage of women eventually gave way to a more equal gender ratio and a tendency to earlier marriage than in europe leading to higher birth rates and larger families.
people also lived longer on average in the colonies than in europe.
the lower death rates led to rapid population growth in the colonies.
women in the colonies english colonists brought their traditional beliefs and prejudices with them to america including convictions about the inferiority of women.
colonial women remained largely confined to womens work in the house yard and field.
over time though necessity created new opportunities for women outside their traditional roles.
colonial differences a thriving colonial trading economy sent raw materials such as fish timber and furs to england in return for manufactured goods.
the expanding economy created new wealth and a rise in the consumption of european goods and it fostered the expansion of slavery.
agriculture diversified tobacco was the staple crop in virginia rice in the carolinas.
plantation agriculture based on slavery became entrenched in the south.
new englands prosperous shipping industry created a profitable triangular trade among africa america and england.
by 1790 german scots irish welsh and irish immigrants as well as other european ethnic groups had settled in the middle colonies along with quakers jews huguenots and mennonites.
race based slavery deep rooted prejudice led to race based slavery.
africans were considered heathens whose supposed inferiority entitled white americans to use them for slaves.
africans brought diverse skills to help build americas economy.
the use of african slaves was concentrated in the south where landowners used them to produce lucrative staple crops such as tobacco rice and indigo.
but slaves lived in cities too especially new york.
as the slave population increased race relations grew more tense and slave codes were created to regulate the movement of enslaved people.
sporadic slave uprisings such as the stono rebellion occurred in both the north and south.
the enlightenment and the great awakening printing presses education and city life created a flow of new ideas that circulated via long distance travel tavern life the postal service and newspapers.
the attitudes of the enlightenment were transported along international trade routes.
sir isaac newtons scientific discoveries culminated in the belief that reason could improve society.
benjamin franklin who believed that people could shape their own destinies became the face of the enlightenment in america.
deism expressed the religious views of the age of reason.
by the 1730s a revival of faith the great awakening swept through the colonies.
new congregations formed as evangelists insisted that christians be reborn individualism not orthodoxy was stressed in this first popular religious movement in americas history.
chronology 1730 s 1740s first africans arrive at jamestown harvard college is established virginia enacts slave code declaring that enslaved children who were baptized as christians remained slaves salem witchcraft trials great awakening john peter zenger is tried for seditious libel stono rebellion george whitefield preaches his first sermon in america in philadelphia jonathan edwards preaches sinners in the hands of an angry god key terms death rate p 110 slave codes p 127 birth rate p 110 stono rebellion p 129 womens work p 112 enlightenment p 134 staple crops p 116 deists p 135 triangular trade p 120 great awakening p 138 race based slavery p 126 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
from colonies to states boston tea party disguised as native americans a swarm of patriots boarded three british ships and dumped more than 300 chests of east india company tea into boston harbor.
f our great european naval p owers spain france england and the netherlands holland created colonies in north america during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries as part of their larger fight for global supremacy.
throughout the eighteenth century wars raged across europe mostly pitting the catholic nations of france and spain against protestant great britain and the netherlands.
the conflicts increasingly spread to the americas and by the middle of the eighteenth century north america had become a primary battleground involving both colonists and native americans allied with different european powers.
spains sparsely populated settlements in the borderlands north of mexico were small and weak compared to those in the british colonies.
the spanish had failed to create colonies with robust economies.
instead spain emphasized the conversion of native peoples to catholicism prohibited manufacturing within its colonies strictly limited trade with the native americans and s earched in vain for gold.
the french and british colonies developed a thriving trade with native americans at the same time that the fierce rivalry between great britain and france gradually shifted the balance of power in europe.
by the end of the eighteenth century spain and the netherlands would be in decline leaving france and great britain to fight for dominance.
the nearly constant warfare led great britain to tighten its control over the american colonies to raise the funds needed to combat france and spain.
tensions over the british effort to preserve its empire at the expense of american freedoms would lead first to rebellion and eventually to revolution.
focus questions 1.
what were the similarities and differences in the way that the british and french empires administered their colonies before 1763.
what were some of the effects of the french and indian war.
how did it change relations among the european powers in north america.
in what ways did the british try to strengthen their control over the colonies after the french and indian war.
how did the colonies respond.
what were the underlying factors in the events of the 1770s that led the colonies to declare their independence from britain.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 global competition and the expansion of englands empire eastern north america in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries gulf of st lawrence hig mi c quebec 1608 penobscot new france u ro n lake r abenaki lake kennebec champlain huron ottawa mohawk lake ontario ottawa ce ren aw montreal ke h an la st l lake superior oneida onondaga fort orange cayuga van rensellaer estate seneca erie new lake tuscarorairoquois y nd fu f port royal y o 1606 ba new hampshire narragansett massachusetts bay 1629 1630 boston pequot plymouth 1620 netherland hartford 1624 narragansett bay providence 1636 new haven 1638 rhode island 1636 1643 delaware new amsterdam west mystic pennsylvania may 26 1637 new york western delaware 1681 wilmington fort christina baltimore shawnee 1664 connecticut 1636 1639 philadelphia maryland 1632 the chesapeake jam e upper cherokee s r henrico williamsburg jamestown virginia 1607 catawba middle cherokee upper natchez lower natchez raleigh expedition to roanoke island 1585 yamasee atl anti c o cean lower cherokee carolina 1663 charles town charleston georgia 1732 savannah creek by the early eighteenth century numerous english colonies populated eastern north america while the french had established their own presence to the north and west.
200 miles 200 kilometers 1585 date of settlement dutch settlement english from 1664 english settlement french settlement spanish settlement the first navigation act which aimed to wrest control of world trade from the dutch whose merchants profited from free trade with all parts of the world and all existing empires.
additional measures followed in 1660 and 1663.
englands new economic policy mercantilism rested on the idea that england should enjoy the profits arising from the english empire.
according to the navigation laws certain enumerated goods essentially how did the english empire in america expand in the mid seventeenth century.
the most valuable colonial products such as tobacco and sugar had to be transported in english ships and sold initially in english ports although they could then be re exported to foreign markets.
similarly most european goods imported into the colonies had to be shipped through england where customs duties were paid.
this enabled english merchants manufacturers shipbuilders and sailors to reap the benefits of colonial trade and the government to enjoy added income from taxes.
as members of the empire american colonies would profit as well since their ships were considered english.
indeed the navigation acts stimulated the rise of new englands shipbuilding industry.
the conquest of new netherland the restoration of the english monarchy when charles ii assumed the throne in 1660 sparked a new period of colonial expansion.
the government chartered new trading ventures notably the royal african company which was given a monopoly of the slave trade.
within a generation the number of english colonies in north america doubled.
first to come under english control was new netherland seized in 1664 during an anglodutch war that also saw england gain control of dutch trading posts in africa.
king charles ii awarded the colony to his younger brother james the duke of york with full and absolute power to govern as he pleased.
hence the colonys name became new york.
new netherland always remained peripheral to the far flung dutch empire.
the dutch fought to retain their holdings in africa asia and south america but they surrendered new netherland in 1664 without a fight.
english rule transformed this minor military base into an important imperial outpost a seaport trading with the caribbean and europe and a launching pad for military operations against the french.
new yorks european population around 9 000 when the english assumed control rose to 20 000 by 1685.
new york and englishmen the and rights of englishwomen english rule expanded the freedom of some new yorkers while reducing that of others.
the terms of surrender guaranteed that the english would respect the religious toleration and property holdings of the colonys many ethnic communities.
but english law ended the dutch tradition by which married women conducted business in their own name and inherited some of the property acquired during marriage.
as colonists of dutch origin adapted to english rule their wills directed more attention to advancing the fortunes of their sons than providing for their wives and daughters.
there had been many female traders in new amsterdam often widows who had inherited a deceased husbands property but few remained by the end of the seventeenth century.
the english also introduced more restrictive attitudes toward blacks.
in colonial new york city as in new amsterdam those residents who enjoyed the status of freeman obtained by birth in the city or by an act of local authorities enjoyed special privileges compared to others including the right to work in various trades.
but the english in a reversal of dutch practice expelled free blacks from many skilled jobs.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 an engraving representing the grand council of the iroquois nations of the area of present day upstate new york.
from a book about american indians published in paris by a jesuit missionary who depicts the indians in the attire of ancient romans.
note the prevalence of wampum belts in the image in the foreground and in the hand and at the feet of the central figure.
wampum was used to certify treaties and other transactions.
global competition and the expansion of englands empire others benefited enormously from english rule.
the duke of york and his appointed governors continued the dutch practice of awarding immense land grants to favorites including 160 000 acres to robert livingston and 90 000 to frederick philipse.
by 1700 nearly 2 million acres of land were owned by only five new york families who intermarried regularly exerted considerable political influence and formed one of colonial americas most tightly knit landed elites.
new york and the indians initially english rule also strengthened the position of the iroquois confederacy of upstate new york.
after a complex series of negotiations in the mid 1670s sir edmund andros who had been appointed governor of new york after fighting the french in the caribbean formed an alliance known as the covenant chain in which the imperial ambitions of the english and indians reinforced one another.
the five later six iroquois nations assisted andros in clearing parts of new york of rival tribes and helped the british in attacks on the french and their indian allies.
andros for his part recognized the iroquois claim to authority over indian communities in the vast area stretching to the ohio river.
but beginning in the 1680s indians around the great lakes and ohio valley regrouped and with french aid attacked the iroquois pushing them to the east.
by the end of the century the iroquois nations adopted a policy of careful neutrality seeking to play the european empires off one another while continuing to profit from the fur trade.
the charter of liberties many colonists meanwhile began to complain that they were being denied the liberties of englishmen especially the right to consent to taxation.
how did the english empire in america expand in the mid seventeenth century.
there had been no representative assembly under the dutch and the governors appointed by the duke of york at first ruled without one.
discontent was especially strong on long island which had been largely settled by new englanders used to self government.
in 1683 the duke agreed to call an elected assembly whose first act was to draft a charter of liberties and privileges.
the charter required that elections be held every three years among male property owners and the freemen of new york city it also reaffirmed traditional english rights such as trial by jury and security of property as well as religious toleration for all protestants.
in part the charter reflected an effort by newer english colonists to assert dominance over older dutch settlers by establishing the principle that the liberties to which new yorkers were entitled were those enjoyed by englishmen at home.
the founding of carolina for more than three decades after the establishment of maryland in 1634 no new english settlement was planted in north america.
then in 1663 charles ii awarded to eight proprietors the right to establish a colony to the north of florida as a barrier to spanish expansion.
not until 1670 did the first settlers arrive to found carolina.
in its early years carolina was the colony of a colony it began as an offshoot of the tiny island of barbados.
in the mid seventeenth century barbados was the caribbeans richest plantation economy but a shortage of available land led wealthy planters to seek opportunities in carolina for their sons.
at first carolinians armed friendly indians employing them on raids into spanish florida and enslaved others shipping them to other mainland colonies and the west indies.
indeed between 1670 and 1720 the number of indian slaves exported from charleston was larger than the number of african slaves imported.
in 1715 the yamasee and creek alarmed by the enormous debts they had incurred in trade with the settlers and by slave traders raids into their territory rebelled.
the uprising was crushed and most of the remaining indians were enslaved or driven out of the colony into spanish florida from where they occasionally launched raids against english settlements.
the fundamental constitutions of carolina issued by the proprietors in 1669 proposed to establish a feudal society with a hereditary nobility with strange titles like landgraves and caciques serfs and slaves.
needing to attract settlers quickly however the proprietors also provided for an elected assembly and religious toleration by now recognized as essential to enticing migrants to north america.
they also instituted a generous headright system offering 150 acres for each member of an arriving family in the case of indentured servants of course the land went to the employer and 100 acres to male servants who completed their terms.
none of the baronies envisioned in the fundamental constitutions was actually established.
slavery not feudalism made carolina an extremely hierarchical society.
the proprietors instituted a rigorous legal code that promised slaveowners absolute power and authority over their human property and included imported slaves in the headright system.
this allowed any persons who settled in carolina and brought with them slaves including planters from barbados who resettled in the colony instantly to c h.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 global competition and the expansion of englands empire acquire large new landholdings.
in its early days however the economy centered on cattle raising and trade with local indians not agriculture.
carolina grew slowly until planters discovered the staple rice that would make them the wealthiest elite in english north america and their colony an epicenter of mainland slavery.
the an early eighteenth century engraving depicts william penn welcoming a german immigrant on the dock in philadelphia.
penn sought to make migrants from all over europe feel at home in pennsylvania.
h o ly experiment the last english colony to be established in the seventeenth century was pennsylvania.
the proprietor william penn envisioned it as a place where those facing religious persecution in europe could enjoy spiritual freedom and colonists and indians would coexist in harmony.
penns late father had been a supporter and creditor of charles ii.
to cancel his debt to the penn family and bolster the english presence in north america the king in 1681 granted penn a vast tract of land south and west of new york as well as the old swedish dutch colony that became delaware.
a devout member of the society of friends or quakers penn was particularly concerned with establishing a refuge for his coreligionists who faced increasing persecution in england.
he had already assisted a group of english quakers in purchasing half of what became the colony of new jersey from lord john berkeley who had received a land grant from the duke of york.
penn was largely responsible for the frame of government announced in 1677 the west jersey concessions one of the most liberal of the era.
based on quaker ideals it created an elected assembly with a broad suffrage and established religious liberty.
penn hoped that west jersey would become a society of small farmers not large landowners.
quaker liberty like the puritans penn considered his colony a holy experiment but of a different kind a free colony for all mankind that should go hither he hoped that pennsylvania could be governed according to quaker principles among them the equality of all persons including women blacks and indians before god and the primacy of the individual conscience.
to quakers liberty was a universal entitlement not the possession of any single people a position that would eventually make them the first group of whites to repudiate slavery.
penn also treated indians with a consideration almost unique in the colonial experience arranging to purchase land before reselling it to colonists and offering refuge to tribes driven out of other colonies by warfare.
sometimes he even purchased the same land twice when more than one indian tribe claimed it.
since quakers were pacifists who came to america unarmed and did not even organize a militia until the 1740s peace with the native population was essential.
penns chain of friendship appealed to the local indians promising protection from rival tribes who claimed domination over them.
religious freedom was penns most fundamental principle.
he condemned attempts to enforce religious uniformity for how did the english empire in america expand in the mid seventeenth century.
depriving thousands of free inhabitants of england of the right to worship as they desired.
his charter of liberty approved by the assembly in 1682 offered christian liberty to all who affirmed a belief in god and did not use their freedom to promote licentiousness there was no established church in pennsylvania and attendance at religious services was entirely voluntary although jews were barred from office by a required oath affirming belief in the divinity of jesus christ.
at the same time the quakers upheld a strict code of personal morality.
penns frame of government prohibited swearing drunkenness and adultery as well as popular entertainments of the era such as revels bull baiting and cockfighting private religious belief may not have been enforced by the government but moral public behavior certainly was.
not religious uniformity but a virtuous citizenry would be the foundation of penns social order.
land in p e n n s y lva n i a given the power to determine the colonys form of government penn established an appointed council to originate legislation and an assembly elected by male taxpayers and freemen owners of 100 acres of land for free immigrants and 50 acres for former indentured servants.
these rules made a majority of the male population eligible to vote.
penn owned all the colonys land and sold it to settlers at low prices rather than granting it outright.
like other proprietors he expected to turn a profit and like most of them he never really did.
but if penn did not prosper pennsylvania did.
a majority of the early settlers were quakers from the british isles.
but pennsylvanias religious toleration healthy climate and inexpensive land along with penns aggressive efforts to publicize the colonys advantages soon attracted immigrants from all over western europe.
ironically the freedoms pennsylvania offered to european immigrants contributed to the deterioration of freedom for others.
the colonys successful efforts to attract settlers would eventually come into conflict with penns benevolent indian policy.
and the opening of pennsylvania led to an immediate decline in the number of indentured servants choosing to sail for virginia and maryland a development that did much to shift those colonies toward reliance on slave labor.
origins of american slavery no european nation including england embarked on the colonization of the new world with the intention of relying on african slaves for the bulk of its labor force.
but the incessant demand for workers spurred by the spread of tobacco cultivation eventually led chesapeake planters to turn to the transatlantic trade in slaves.
compared with indentured servants slaves offered planters many advantages.
as africans they could not claim the protections of english common law.
slaves terms of service never expired and they therefore did not become a population of unruly landless men.
their a quaker meeting a painting by an unidentified british artist dating from the late eighteenth or early nineteenth century.
it illustrates the prominent place of women in quaker gatherings.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 origins of american slavery children were slaves and their skin color made it more difficult for them to escape into the surrounding society.
african men moreover unlike their native american counterparts were accustomed to intensive agricultural labor and they had encountered many diseases known in europe and developed resistance to them so were less likely to succumb to epidemics.
englishmen and africans the english had long viewed alien peoples with disdain including the irish native americans and africans.
they described these strangers in remarkably similar language as savage pagan and uncivilized often comparing them to animals.
race the idea that humanity is divided into welldefined groups associated with skin color is a modern concept that had not fully developed in the seventeenth century.
nor had racism an ideology based on the belief that some races are inherently superior to others and entitled to rule over them.
the main lines of division within humanity were thought to be civilization versus barbarism or christianity versus heathenism not color or race.
nonetheless anti black stereotypes flourished in seventeenth century england.
africans were seen as so alien in color religion and social practices that they were enslavable in a way that poor englishmen were not.
most english also deemed indians to be uncivilized.
but the indian population declined so rapidly and it was so easy for indians familiar with the countryside to run away that indian slavery never became viable.
some indians were sold into slavery in the caribbean.
but it is difficult to enslave a people on their native soil.
slaves are almost always outsiders transported from elsewhere to their place of labor.
slavery in history slavery has existed for nearly the entire span of human history.
it was central to the societies of ancient greece and rome.
slavery survived for centuries in northern europe after the collapse of the roman empire.
germans vikings and anglo saxons all held slaves.
slavery persisted even longer in the mediterranean world where a slave trade in slavic peoples survived into the fifteenth century.
the english word slavery derives from slav pirates from the barbary coast of north africa regularly seized christians from ships and enslaved them.
in west africa as noted in chapter 1 slavery and a slave trade predated the coming of europeans and small scale slavery existed among native americans.
but slavery in nearly all these instances differed greatly from the institution that developed in the new world.
in the americas slavery was based on the plantation an agricultural enterprise that brought together large numbers of workers under the control of a single owner.
this imbalance magnified the possibility of slave resistance and made it necessary to police the system rigidly.
it encouraged the creation of a sharp boundary between slavery and freedom.
labor on slave plantations was far more demanding than in the household slavery common in africa and the death rate among slaves much higher.
in the new world slavery would come to be associated with race a concept that drew a permanent line between whites and blacks.
unlike in africa slaves who became free always carried with them in their skin color the mark of h o w w a s s l a v e r y e s t a b l i s h e d i n t h e we s t e r n a t l a n t i c w o r l d.
bondage a visible sign of being considered unworthy of incorporation as equals into free society.
slavery in the west indies a sense of africans as alien and inferior made their enslavement by the english possible.
but prejudice by itself did not create north american slavery.
for this institution to take root planters and government authorities had to be convinced that importing african slaves was the best way to solve their persistent shortage of labor.
during the seventeenth century the shipping of slaves from africa to the new world became a major international business.
but only a relative handful were brought to englands mainland colonies.
by the time plantation slavery became a major feature of life in english north america it was already well entrenched elsewhere in the western hemisphere.
by 1600 huge sugar plantations worked by slaves from africa had made their appearance in brazil a colony of portugal.
in the seventeenth century england holland denmark and france joined spain as owners of west indian islands.
english emigrants to the west indies outnumbered those to north america in the first part of the seventeenth century.
in 1650 the english population of the west indies exceeded that in all of north america.
generally the first settlers established mixed economies with small farms worked by white indentured servants.
but as sugar planters engrossed the best land they forced white farmers off island after island.
white indentured servants proved as discontented as elsewhere.
in 1629 when a spanish expedition attacked the british island of nevis servants in the local militia joined them shouting liberty joyful liberty with the indian population having been wiped out by disease and with the white indentured servants unwilling to do the back breaking monotonous work of sugar cultivation the massive importation of slaves cutting sugar cane an engraving from ten views in antigua published in 1823.
male and female slaves harvest and load the sugar crop while an overseer on horseback addresses a slave.
during the eighteenth century sugar was the chief crop produced by western hemisphere slaves.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 origins of american slavery an engraving from charles de rocheforts histoire naturelle et morale des les antilles de lamerique 1665 depicts a sugar mill powered by cattle with slaves feeding the cane into rollers which grind it to crush out the juice.
the text describes how the various parts of the machinery work.
from africa began.
in 1645 for example barbados a tiny island owned by england was home to around 11 000 white farmers and indentured servants and 5 000 slaves.
as sugar cultivation intensified planters turned increasingly to slave labor.
by 1660 the islands population had grown to 40 000 half european and half african.
ten years later the slave population had risen to 82 000 concentrated on some 750 sugar plantations.
meanwhile the white population stagnated.
by the end of the seventeenth century huge sugar plantations manned by hundreds of slaves dominated the west indian economy and on most of the islands the african population far outnumbered that of european origin.
sugar was the first crop to be mass marketed to consumers in europe.
before its emergence international trade consisted largely of precious metals like gold and silver and luxury goods aimed at an elite market like the spices and silks imported from asia.
sugar was by far the most important product of the british french and portugese empires and new world sugar plantations produced immense profits for planters merchants and imperial governments.
saint domingue todays haiti was the jewel of the french empire.
in 1660 barbados generated more trade than all the other english colonies combined.
compared to its rapid introduction in brazil and the west indies slavery developed slowly in north america.
slaves cost more than indentured servants and the high death rate among tobacco workers made it economically unappealing to pay for a lifetime of labor.
for decades servants from england formed the backbone of the chesapeake labor force and the number of africans remained small.
as late as 1680 there were only 4 500 blacks in the chesapeake a little over 5 percent of the regions population.
the most important social distinction in the seventeenth century chesapeake was not between black and white but between the white plantation owners who dominated politics and society and everybody else small farmers indentured servants and slaves.
h o w w a s s l a v e r y e s t a b l i s h e d i n t h e we s t e r n a t l a n t i c w o r l d.
slavery and the law centuries before the voyages of columbus spain had enacted las siete partidas a series of laws granting slaves certain rights relating to marriage the holding of property and access to freedom.
these laws were transferred to spains american empire.
they were often violated but nonetheless gave slaves opportunities to claim rights under the law.
moreover the catholic church often encouraged masters to free individual slaves.
the law of slavery in english north america would become far more repressive than in the spanish empire especially on the all important question of whether avenues existed by which slaves could obtain freedom.
for much of the seventeenth century however the legal status of chesapeake blacks remained ambiguous and the line between slavery and freedom more permeable than it would later become.
the first africans twenty in all arrived in virginia in 1619.
british pirates sailing under the dutch flag had seized them from a portuguese ship carrying slaves from angola on the southwestern coast of africa to modern day mexico.
small numbers followed in subsequent years.
although the first black arrivals were almost certainly treated as slaves it appears that at least some managed to become free after serving a term of years.
to be sure racial distinctions were enacted into law from the outset.
as early as the 1620s the law barred blacks from serving in the virginia militia.
the government punished sexual relations outside of marriage between africans and europeans more severely than the same acts involving two white persons.
in 1643 a poll tax a tax levied on individuals was imposed on african but not white women.
in both virginia and maryland however free blacks could sue and testify in court and some even managed to acquire land and purchase white servants or african slaves.
it is not known exactly how anthony johnson who apparently arrived in virginia as a slave during the 1620s obtained his freedom.
but by the 1640s he was the owner of slaves and of several hundred acres of land on virginias eastern shore.
blacks and whites labored side by side in the tobacco fields sometimes ran away together and established intimate relationships.
the rise of chesapeake slavery evidence of blacks being held as slaves for life appears in the historical record of the 1640s.
in registers of property for example white servants are listed by the number of years of labor while blacks with higher valuations have no terms of service associated with their names.
not until the 1660s however did the laws of virginia and maryland refer explicitly to slavery.
as tobacco planting spread and the demand for labor increased the condition of black and white servants diverged sharply.
authorities sought to in this scene depicted on an english handkerchief male and female slaves work in the tobacco fields alongside a white indentured servant right.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 origins of american slavery improve the status of white servants hoping to counteract the widespread impression in england that virginia was a death trap.
at the same time access to freedom for blacks receded.
a virginia law of 1662 provided that in the case of a child one of whose parents was free and one slave the status of the offspring followed that of the mother.
this provision not only reversed the european practice of defining a childs status through the father but also made the sexual abuse of slave women profitable for slaveholders since any children that resulted remained the owners property.
in 1667 the virginia house of burgesses decreed that religious conversion did not release a slave from bondage.
thus christians could own other christians as slaves.
moreover authorities sought to prevent the growth of the free black population by defining all offspring of interracial relationships as illegitimate severely punishing white women who begat children with black men and prohibiting the freeing of any slave unless he or she were transported out of the colony.
by 1680 even though the black population was still small notions of racial difference were well entrenched in the law.
in englands american empire wrote one contemporary these two words negro and slave have by custom grown homogenous and convertible in british north america unlike the spanish empire no distinctive mulatto or mixed race class existed the law treated everyone with african ancestry as black.
bacons land rebellion and labor in virginia virginias shift from white indentured servants to african slaves as the main plantation labor force was accelerated by one of the most dramatic confrontations of this era bacons rebellion of 1676.
governor william berkeley had for thirty years run a corrupt regime in alliance with an inner circle of the colonys wealthiest tobacco planters.
he rewarded his followers with land grants and lucrative offices.
at first virginias tobacco boom had benefited not only planters but also smaller farmers some of them former servants who managed to acquire farms.
but as tobacco farming spread inland planters connected with the governor engrossed the best lands leaving freed servants a growing population since virginias death rate was finally falling with no options but to work as tenants or to move to the frontier.
at the same time heavy taxes on tobacco and falling prices because of overproduction reduced the prospects of small farmers.
by the 1670s poverty among whites had reached levels reminiscent of england.
in addition the right to vote previously enjoyed by all adult men was confined to landowners in 1670.
governor berkeley maintained peaceful relations with virginias remaining native population.
his refusal to allow white settlement in areas reserved for indians angered many land hungry colonists.
as early as 1661 a virginia indentured servant was accused of planning an uprising among those who would be for liberty and free from bondage fifteen years later long simmering social tensions coupled with widespread resentment against the injustices of the berkeley regime erupted in bacons rebellion.
the spark was a minor confrontation between indians and colonists on virginias western frontier.
settlers now demanded that the governor authorize the extermination or removal of the colonys indians to open more land for whites.
fearing all out warfare and continu h o w w a s s l a v e r y e s t a b l i s h e d i n t h e we s t e r n a t l a n t i c w o r l d.
ing to profit from the trade with indians in deerskins berkeley refused.
an uprising followed that soon careened out of control.
beginning with a series of indian massacres it quickly grew into a full fledged rebellion against berkeley and his system of rule.
to some extent bacons rebellion was a conflict within the virginia elite.
the leader nathaniel bacon a wealthy and ambitious planter who had arrived in virginia in 1673 disdained berkeleys coterie as men of mean education and employments his backers included men of wealth outside the governors circle of cronies.
but bacons call for the removal of all indians from the colony a reduction of taxes at a time of economic recession and an end to rule by grandees rapidly gained support from small farmers landless men indentured servants and even some africans.
the bulk of his army consisted of discontented men who had recently been servants.
the end and its of the rebellion consequences bacon promised freedom including access to indian lands to all who joined his ranks.
his supporters invoked the tradition of english liberties and spoke of the poor being robbed and cheated by their social superiors.
in 1676 bacon gathered an armed force for an unauthorized and indiscriminate campaign against those he called the governors protected and darling indians he refused berkeleys order to disband and marched on jamestown burning it to the ground.
the governor fled and bacon became the ruler of virginia.
his forces plundered the estates of berkeleys supporters.
only the arrival of a squadron of warships from england restored order.
bacons rebellion was over.
twenty three of his supporters were hanged bacon himself had taken ill and died shortly after berkeleys departure.
the specter of a civil war among whites greatly frightened virginias ruling elite who took dramatic steps to consolidate their power and improve their image.
they restored property qualifications for voting which bacon had rescinded.
at the same time planters developed a new political style in which they cultivated the support of poorer neighbors.
meanwhile the authorities reduced taxes and adopted a more aggressive indian policy opening western areas to small farmers many of whom prospered from a rise in tobacco prices after 1680.
to avert the further rise of a rebellious population of landless former indentured servants virginias authorities accelerated the shift to slaves who would never become free on the tobacco plantations.
as virginia reduced the number of indentured servants it redefined their freedom dues to include fifty acres of land.
a slave society between 1680 and 1700 slave labor began to supplant indentured servitude on chesapeake plantations.
bacons rebellion was only one among several factors that contributed to this development.
as the death rate finally began to fall it became more economical to purchase a laborer for life.
improving conditions in england reduced the number of transatlantic migrants and the sir william berkeley governor of colonial virginia 1641 1652 and 1660 1677 in a portrait by sir peter lely.
berkeleys authoritarian rule helped to spark bacons rebellion.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 colonies in crisis opening of pennsylvania where land was readily available attracted those who still chose to leave for america.
finally the ending of a monopoly on the english slave trade previously enjoyed by the royal africa company opened the door to other traders and reduced the price of imported african slaves.
by 1700 blacks constituted more than 10 percent of virginias population.
fifty years later they made up nearly half.
recognizing the growing importance of slavery the house of burgesses in 1705 enacted a new slave code bringing together the scattered legislation of the previous century and adding new provisions that embedded the principle of white supremacy in the law.
slaves were property completely subject to the will of their masters and more generally of the white community.
they could be bought and sold leased fought over in court and passed on to ones descendants.
henceforth blacks and whites were tried in separate courts.
no black free or slave could own arms strike a white man or employ a white servant.
any white person could apprehend any black to demand a certificate of freedom or a pass from the owner giving permission to be off the plantation.
virginia had changed from a society with slaves in which slavery was one system of labor among others to a slave society where slavery stood at the center of the economic process.
notions of freedom one sentiment shared by europeans native americans and africans was fear of enslavement.
throughout history slaves have run away and in other ways resisted bondage.
they did the same in the colonial chesapeake.
colonial newspapers were filled with advertisements for runaway slaves.
these notices described the appearance and skills of the fugitive and included such comments as ran away without any cause or he has great notions of freedom some of the blacks brought to the region during the seventeenth century were the offspring of encounters between european traders and africans on the western coast of africa or the caribbean.
familiar with european culture and fluent in english they turned to the colonial legal system in their quest for freedom.
throughout the seventeenth century blacks appeared in court claiming their liberty at first on the basis of conversion to christianity or having a white father.
this was one reason virginia in the 1660s closed these pathways to freedom.
but although legal avenues to liberty receded the desire for freedom did not.
after the suppression of a slave conspiracy in 1709 alexander spotswood the governor of virginia warned planters to be vigilant.
the desire for freedom he reminded them can call together all those who long to shake off the fetters of slavery colonies in crisis king philips war of 1675 and bacons rebellion the following year coincided with disturbances in other colonies.
in maryland where the proprietor lord baltimore in 1670 had suddenly restricted the right to vote to owners of fifty acres of land or a certain amount of personal property a protestant uprising unsuccessfully sought to oust his government and restore the suffrage for all freemen.
in several colonies increasing settlement on the frontier led to resistance by alarmed indians.
a rebellion by westo indians what major social and political crises rocked the colonies in the late seventeenth century.
was suppressed in carolina in 1680.
the pueblo revolt of the same year discussed in chapter 1 indicated that the crisis of colonial authority was not confined to the british empire.
the glorious revolution turmoil in england also reverberated in the colonies.
in 1688 the long struggle for domination of english government between parliament and the crown reached its culmination in the glorious revolution which established parliamentary supremacy once and for all and secured the protestant succession to the throne.
under charles ii parliament had asserted its authority in the formation of national policy.
it expanded its control of finance influenced foreign affairs and excluded from political and religious power catholics and dissenters protestants who belonged to a denomination other than the official anglican church.
when charles died in 1685 he was succeeded by his brother james ii formerly the duke of york a practicing catholic and a believer that kings ruled by divine right.
in 1687 james decreed religious toleration for both protestant dissenters and catholics.
the following year the birth of jamess son raised the prospect of a catholic succession alarming those who equated popery with tyranny.
a group of english aristocrats invited the dutch nobleman william of orange the husband of jamess protestant daughter mary to assume the throne in the name of english liberties.
william arrived in england in november 1688 with an army of 21 000 men two thirds of them dutch.
as the landed elite and leaders of the anglican church rallied to williams cause james ii fled and the revolution was complete.
unlike the broad social upheaval that marked the english civil war of the 1640s the glorious revolution was in effect a coup engineered by a small group of aristocrats in alliance with an ambitious dutch prince.
they had no intention of challenging the institution of the monarchy.
but the overthrow of james ii entrenched more firmly than ever the notion that liberty was the birthright of all englishmen and that the king was subject to the rule of law.
to justify the ouster of james ii parliament in 1689 enacted a bill of rights which listed parliamentary powers such as control over taxation as well as rights of individuals including trial by jury.
these were the ancient and undoubted.
rights and liberties of all englishmen.
in the following year the toleration act allowed protestant dissenters but not catholics to worship freely although only anglicans could hold public office.
as always british politics were mirrored in the american colonies.
the period from the 1660s to the 1680s had been one of growing religious toleration in both regions succeeded by a tightening of religious control once william of orange a protestant became king.
indeed after the glorious revolution protestant domination was secured in most of the colonies with the established churches of england anglican and scotland presbyterian growing the fastest while catholics and dissenters suffered various forms of discrimination.
despite the new regimes language of liberty however religious freedom was far more advanced in some american colonies such as rhode island pennsylvania and carolina than in england.
nonetheless throughout english america the glorious revolution powerfully reinforced among the colonists the sense of sharing a proud legacy of freedom and protestantism with the mother country.
king william iii a portrait by an unknown artist painted around 1697.
william who came to power in england as a result of the glorious revolution wears an ermine cape.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 the glorious colonies in crisis revolution in america the glorious revolution exposed fault lines in colonial society and offered local elites an opportunity to regain authority that had recently been challenged.
until the mid 1670s the north american colonies had essentially governed themselves with little interference from england.
governor berkeley ran virginia as he saw fit proprietors in new york maryland and carolina governed in any fashion they could persuade colonists to accept and new england colonies elected their own officials and openly flouted trade regulations.
in 1675 england established the lords of trade to oversee colonial affairs.
three years later the lords questioned the massachusetts government about its compliance with the navigation acts.
they received the surprising reply that since the colony had no representatives in parliament the acts did not apply to it unless the massachusetts general court approved.
in the 1680s england moved to reduce colonial autonomy.
shortly before his death charles ii revoked the massachusetts charter citing wholesale violations of the navigation acts.
hoping to raise more money from america in order to reduce his dependence on parliament james ii between 1686 and 1688 combined connecticut plymouth massachusetts new hampshire rhode island new york and east and west jersey into a single super colony the dominion of new england.
it was ruled by the former new york governor sir edmund andros who did not have to answer to an elected assembly.
these events reinforced the impression that james ii was an enemy of freedom.
in new england andross actions alienated nearly everyone not dependent on his administration for favors.
he appointed local officials in place of elected ones imposed taxes without the approval of elected representatives declared earlier land grants void unless approved by him and enforced religious toleration for all protestants.
his rule threatened both english liberties and the church state relationship at the heart of the puritan order.
the maryland uprising in 1689 news of the overthrow of james ii triggered rebellions in several american colonies.
in april the boston militia seized and jailed edmund andros and other officials whereupon the new england colonies reestablished the governments abolished when the dominion of new england was created.
in may a rebel militia headed by captain jacob leisler established a committee of safety and took control of new york.
two months later marylands protestant association overthrew the government of the colonys catholic proprietor lord baltimore.
all of these new regimes claimed to have acted in the name of english liberties and looked to london for approval.
but the degrees of success of these coups varied markedly.
most triumphant were the maryland rebels.
concluding that lord baltimore had mismanaged the colony william revoked his charter although the proprietor retained his land and rents and established a new protestant dominated government.
catholics retained the right to practice their religion but were barred from voting and holding office.
in 1715 after the baltimore family had converted to anglicanism proprietary power was restored.
but the events of 1689 transformed the what major social and political crises rocked the colonies in the late seventeenth century.
ruling group in maryland and put an end to the colonys unique history of religious toleration.
leislers rebellion the outcome in new york was far different.
the german born leisler one of the wealthiest merchants in the city was a fervent calvinist who feared that james ii intended to reduce england and its empire to popery and slavery although it was not his intention leislers regime divided the colony along ethnic and economic lines.
members of the dutch majority seized the opportunity to reclaim local power after more than two decades of english rule while bands of rebels ransacked the homes of wealthy new yorkers.
prominent english colonists joined by some wealthy dutch merchants and fur traders protested to london that leisler was a tyrant.
william refused to recognize leislers authority and dispatched a new governor backed by troops.
many of leislers followers were imprisoned and he himself was condemned to be executed.
the grisly manner of his death leisler was hanged and then had his head cut off and body cut into four parts reflected the depths of hatred the rebellion had inspired.
for generations the rivalry between leisler and anti leisler parties polarized new york politics.
changes in new england after deposing edmund andros the new england colonies lobbied hard in london for the restoration of their original charters.
most were successful but massachusetts was not.
in 1691 the crown issued a new charter that absorbed plymouth into massachusetts and transformed the political structure of the bible commonwealth.
town government remained intact but henceforth property ownership not church membership would be the requirement to vote in elections for the general court.
the governor was now appointed in london rather than elected.
thus massachusetts became a royal colony the majority of whose voters were no longer puritan saints moreover it was required to abide by the english toleration act of 1690 that is to allow all protestants to worship freely.
the demise of the new england way greatly benefited non puritan merchants and large landowners who came to dominate the new government.
these events produced an atmosphere of considerable tension in massachusetts exacerbated by raids by french troops and their indian allies on the northern new england frontier.
the advent of religious toleration heightened anxieties among the puritan clergy who considered other protestant denominations a form of heresy.
i would not have a hand in setting up their devil worship one minister declared of the quakers.
indeed not a few puritans thought they saw the hand of satan in the events of 1690 and 1691.
the prosecution of witches belief in magic astrology and witchcraft was widespread in seventeenthcentury europe and america existing alongside the religion of the clergy and churches.
many puritans believed in supernatural interventions in the affairs of the world.
they interpreted as expressions of gods will such events c h.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 colonies in crisis as lightning that struck one house but spared another and epidemics that reduced the population of their indian enemies.
evil forces could also affect daily life.
witches were individuals usually women who were accused of having entered into a pact with the devil to obtain supernatural powers which they used to harm others or to interfere with natural processes.
when a child was stillborn or crops failed many believed that witchcraft was at work.
in europe and the colonies witchcraft was punishable by execution.
it is estimated that between the years 1400 and 1800 more than 50 000 people were executed in europe after being convicted of witchcraft.
witches were from time to time hanged in seventeenth century new england.
most were women beyond childbearing age who were outspoken economically independent or estranged from their husbands or who in other ways violated traditional gender norms.
the witchs alleged power challenged both gods will and the standing of men as heads of family and rulers of society.
the an illustration from cotton mathers 1692 account of witchcraft depicts a witch on her broomstick accompanied by satan.
salem witch trials until 1692 the prosecution of witches had been local and sporadic.
but in the heightened anxiety of that year a series of trials and executions took place in the town of salem that made its name to this day a byword for fanaticism and persecution.
the crisis began late in 1691 when several young girls began to suffer fits and nightmares attributed by their elders to witchcraft.
soon three witches had been named including tituba an indian from the caribbean who was a slave in the home of one of the girls.
since the only way to avoid prosecution was to confess and name others accusations of witchcraft began to snowball.
by the middle of 1692 hundreds of residents of salem had come forward to accuse their neighbors.
some it appears used the occasion to settle old scores within the salem community.
local authorities took legal action against nearly 150 persons the large majority of them women.
many confessed to save their lives but fourteen women and five men were hanged protesting their innocence to the end.
one man was pressed to death crushed under a weight of stones for refusing to enter a plea.
in salem accusations of witchcraft spread far beyond the usual profile of middle aged women to include persons of all ages one was a child of four and those with no previous history of assertiveness or marital discord.
as accusations and executions multiplied it became clear that something was seriously wrong with the colonys system of justice.
toward the end of 1692 the governor of massachusetts dissolved the salem court and ordered the remaining prisoners released.
at the same time the prominent clergyman increase mather published an influential treatise cases of conscience concerning evil spirits warning that juries should not take seriously either the testimony of those who claimed to be possessed or the confessions and accusations of persons facing execution.
the events in salem discredited the tradition of prosecuting witches and accelerated a commitment among prominent what were the directions of social and economic change in the eighteenth century colonies.
colonists to finding scientific explanations for natural events like comets and illnesses rather than attributing them to magic.
in future years only two accused witches would be brought to trial in massachusetts and both were found not guilty.
the growth of colonial america the salem witch trials took place precisely two centuries after columbuss initial voyage.
the western hemisphere was dramatically different from the world he had encountered.
powerful states had been destroyed and the native population decimated by disease and in some areas deprived of its land.
in north america three new and very different empires had arisen competing for wealth and power.
the urban based spanish empire with a small settler elite and growing mestizo population directing the labor of a large indian population still relied for wealth primarily on the gold and silver mines of mexico and south america.
the french empire centered on saint domingue martinique and guadeloupe plantation islands of the west indies.
on the mainland it consisted of a thinly settled string of farms and trading posts in the st lawrence valley.
in north america north of the rio grande the english colonies had far outstripped their rivals in population and trade.
as stability returned after the crises of the late seventeenth century english north america experienced an era of remarkable growth.
between 1700 and 1770 crude backwoods settlements became bustling provincial capitals.
even as epidemics continued in indian country the hazards of disease among colonists diminished agricultural settlement pressed westward and hundreds of thousands of newcomers arrived from the old world.
thanks to a high birthrate and continuing immigration the population of englands mainland colonies 265 000 in 1700 grew nearly tenfold to over 2 3 million seventy years later.
it is worth noting however that because of the decline suffered by the indians the north american population was considerably lower in 1770 than it had been in 1492.
a diverse population probably the most striking characteristic of colonial american society in the eighteenth century was its sheer diversity.
in 1700 the colonies were essentially english outposts.
relatively few africans had yet been brought to the mainland and the overwhelming majority of the white population close to 90 percent was of english origin.
in the eighteenth century african and non english european arrivals skyrocketed while the number emigrating from england declined see table 3 1.
as economic conditions in england improved the government began to rethink the policy of encouraging emigration.
no longer concerned with an excess population of vagabonds and masterless men authorities began to worry that large scale emigration was draining labor from the mother country.
about 40 percent of european immigrants to the colonies during the eighteenth century continued to arrive as bound laborers who had temporarily sacrificed their freedom to make the voyage c h.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 the growth of colonial america table 3 1 origins and status of migrants to british north american colonies 1700 1775 total slaves indentured servants africa 278 400 278 400 ireland 108 600 39 000 17 500 52 100 germany 84 500 30 000 54 500 england wales 73 100 27 200 32 500 13 400 scotland 35 300 7 400 2 200 25 700 other 5 900 5 900 total 585 800 278 400 103 600 52 200 151 600 convicts free to the new world.
but as the colonial economy prospered poor indentured migrants were increasingly joined by professionals and skilled craftsmen teachers ministers weavers carpenters whom england could ill afford to lose.
this brought to an end official efforts to promote english emigration.
attracting settlers yet while worrying about losing desirable members of its population the government in london remained convinced that colonial development enhanced the nations power and wealth.
to bolster the chesapeake labor force nearly 50 000 convicts a group not desired in britain were sent to work in the tobacco fields.
officials also actively encouraged protestant immigration from the non english and less prosperous parts of the british isles and from the european continent promising newcomers easy access to land and the right to worship freely.
a law of 1740 even offered european immigrants british citizenship after seven years of residence something that in the mother country could only be obtained by a special act of parliament.
the widely publicized image of america as an asylum for those whom bigots chase from foreign lands in the words of a 1735 poem was in many ways a byproduct of britains efforts to attract settlers from nonenglish areas to its colonies.
among eighteenth century migrants from the british isles the 80 000 english newcomers a majority of them convicted criminals were consider among the most striking features of eighteenth century colonial society was the racial and ethnic diversity of the population except in new england.
this resulted from increased immigration from the non english parts of the british isles and from mainland europe as well as the rapid expansion of the slave trade from africa.
what were the directions of social and economic change in the eighteenth century colonies.
european settlement and ethnic diversity on the atlantic coast of north america 1760 s new france t enc wr la.
e r quebec la maine to massachusetts ke montreal conn e on cticu t r hur new york lak ie e er hudson r.
lake ontario f pennsylvania.
io r oh portland new hampshire portsmouth massachusetts boston f providence hartford j newport new haven f rhode f new york j w philadelphiaj new s s jersey augusta lon g i s la n d island connecticut s maryland i n baltimore virginia o u n t a delaware m richmond f h ia n williamsburg a p p a l a a t l an t i c o c e an c north carolina charlotte new bern f w fayetteville south carolina f f j charleston georgia savannah j florida 200 miles 200 kilometers j s w f english french german dutch africans scots irish highland scots jews swedes welsh french huguenots c h.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 the growth of colonial america ably outnumbered by 145 000 from scotland and ulster the northern part of ireland where many scots had settled as part of englands effort to subdue the island.
scottish and scotch irish immigrants had a profound impact on colonial society.
mostly presbyterians they added significantly to religious diversity in north america.
their numbers included not only poor farmers seeking land but also numerous merchants teachers and professionals indeed a large majority of the physicians in eighteenth century america were of scottish origin.
the a german language illustrated family record from late seventeenth century pennsylvania.
numerous germans settled in the colony attracted by william penns generous policies about acquiring land and his promise of religious freedom.
german migration germans 110 000 in all formed the largest group of newcomers from the european continent.
most came from the valley of the rhine river which stretches through present day germany into switzerland.
in the eighteenth century germany was divided into numerous small states each with a ruling prince who determined the official religion.
those who found themselves worshiping the wrong religion lutherans in catholic areas catholics in lutheran areas and everywhere followers of small protestant sects such as mennonites moravians and dunkers faced persecution.
many decided to emigrate.
other migrants were motivated by persistent agricultural crises and the difficulty of acquiring land.
indeed the emigration to america represented only a small part of a massive reshuffling of the german population within europe.
millions of germans left their homes during the eighteenth century most of them migrating eastward to austriahungary and the russian empire which made land available to newcomers.
wherever they moved germans tended to travel in entire families.
english and dutch merchants created a well organized system whereby redemptioners as indentured families were called received passage in exchange for a promise to work off their debt in america.
most settled in frontier areas rural new york western pennsylvania and the southern backcountry where they formed tightly knit farming communities in which german for many years remained the dominant language.
their arrival greatly enhanced the ethnic and religious diversity of britains colonies.
religious diversity eighteenth century british america was not a melting pot of cultures.
ethnic groups tended to live and worship in relatively homogeneous communities.
but outside of new england which received few immigrants and retained its overwhelmingly english ethnic character american society had a far more diverse population than britain.
nowhere was this more evident than in the practice of religion.
in 1700 nearly all the churches in the what were the directions of social and economic change in the eighteenth century colonies.
colonies were either congregational in new england or anglican.
in the eighteenth century the anglican presence expanded considerably.
new churches were built and new ministers arrived from england.
but the number of dissenting congregations also multiplied.
apart from new jersey formed from east and west jersey in 1702 rhode island and pennsylvania the colonies did not adhere to a modern separation of church and state.
nearly every colony levied taxes to pay the salaries of ministers of an established church and most barred catholics and jews from voting and holding public office.
but increasingly de facto toleration among protestant denominations flourished fueled by the establishment of new churches by immigrants as well as new baptist methodist and other congregations created as a result of the great awakening a religious revival that will be discussed in chapter 4.
by the mideighteenth century dissenting protestants in most colonies had gained the right to worship as they pleased and own their churches although many places still barred them from holding public office and taxed them to support the official church.
a visitor to pennsylvania in 1750 described the colonys religious diversity we find there lutherans reformed catholics quakers menonists or anabaptists herrnhuters or moravian brethren pietists seventh day baptists dunkers presbyterians.
jews mohammedans pagans liberty of conscience wrote a german newcomer in 1739 was the chief virtue of british north america and on this score i do not repent my immigration equally important to eighteenth century immigrants however were other elements of freedom especially the availability of land the lack of a military draft and the absence of restraints on economic opportunity common in europe.
skilled workers were in great demand.
they earn what they want one emigrant wrote to his brother in switzerland in 1733 letters home by immigrants spoke of low taxes the right to enter trades and professions without paying exorbitant fees and freedom of movement.
in this country one wrote there are abundant liberties in just about all matters baptists were among the numerous religious denominations in the eigthteenthcentury colonies.
in this engraving from a history of american baptists published in 1770 a minister baptizes a new member in the schuylkill river in pennsylvania while members of the congregation look on.
voices of freedom f r o m l e t t e r b y a fe m a l e i n d e n t u r e d s e r v a n t september 22 1756 only a minority of emigrants from europe to british north america were fully free.
indentured servants were men and women who surrendered their freedom for a specified period the probability of you in england to conceive.
let it suffice that i am one of the unhappy number am letter by elizabeth sprigs of maryland to her toiling almost day and night and very often in the horses drudgery with only this comfort that you bitch you do not do half enough and then tied up father in england expresses complaints voiced and whipped to that degree that you now serve an of time in exchange for passage to america.
this by many indentured servants.
honored father my being forever banished from your sight will i hope pardon the boldness i now take of troubling you with these.
my long silence has been purely owing to my undutifulness to you and well knowing i had offended in the highest degree put a tie on my tongue and pen for fear i should be extinct from your good graces and add a further trouble to you.
o dear father believe what i am going to relate the words of truth and sincerity and balance my former bad conduct to my sufferings here and then i am sure youll pity your distressed daughter.
what we unfortunate english people suffer here is beyond animal.
scarce any thing but indian corn and salt to eat and that even begrudged nay many negroes are better used almost naked no shoes nor stockings to wear and the comfort after slaving during masters pleasure what rest we can get is to wrap ourselves up in a blanket and lie upon the ground.
this is the deplorable condition your poor betty endures and now i beg if you have any bowels of compassion left show it by sending me some relief.
clothing is the principal thing wanting which if you should condescend to may easily send them to me by any of the ships bound to baltimore town patapsco river maryland.
and give me leave to conclude in duty to you and uncles and aunts and respect to all friends.
elizabeth sprigs f r o m l e t t e r b y a s w i s s g e r m a n i m m i g r a n t t o pe n n s y l v a n i a august 23 1769 germans were among the most numerous pennsylvania shillings.
i think that with gods immigrants to the eighteenth century colonies.
help i will obtain land.
i am not pushing for it until i am in a better position.
i would like for my brother to come.
and it will then be even nicer in the country.
i assume that many wrote letters to family members at home relating their experiences and impressions.
dearest father brother and sister and brother in law i have told you quite fully about the trip and i will tell you what will not surprise you that we have a free country.
of the sundry craftsmen one may do whatever one wants.
nor does the land require payment of tithes taxes to support a local landlord typical in europe.
the land is very big from canada to the east of us to carolina in the south and to the spanish border in the west.
one can settle wherever one wants without asking anyone when he buys or leases something.
i have always enough to do and we have no shortage of food.
bread is plentiful.
if i work for two days i earn more bread than in eight days at home.
also i can buy many things so reasonably for example a pair of shoes for roughly seven the land has been described to you sufficiently by various people and it is not surprising that the immigrant agents demand payment.
for the journey is long and it costs much to stay away for one year.
johannes hnner questions 1.
why does elizabeth sprigs compare her condition unfavorably to that of blacks.
what does johannes hnner have in mind when he calls america a free country.
what factors might explain the different experiences of these two emigrants to british north america.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 indian the growth of colonial america life in transition the tide of newcomers who equated liberty with secure possession of land threatened to engulf the surviving indian populations.
by the eighteenth century indian communities were well integrated into the british imperial system.
indian warriors did much of the fighting in the centurys imperial wars.
their cultures were now quite different from what they had been at the time of first contact.
indian societies that had existed for centuries had disappeared the victims of disease and warfare.
new tribes like the catawba of south carolina and the creek confederacy which united dozens of indian towns in south carolina and georgia had been created from their remnants.
few indians chose to live among whites rather than in their own communities.
but they had become well accustomed to using european products like knives hatchets needles kettles and firearms.
alcohol introduced by traders created social chaos in many indian communities.
one cherokee told the governor of south carolina in 1753 the clothes we wear we cannot make ourselves they are made to us.
we use their ammunition with which we kill deer.
every necessary thing we must have from the white people while traders saw in indian villages potential profits and british officials saw allies against france and spain farmers and planters viewed indians as little more than an obstruction to their desire for land.
they expected indians to give way to white settlers.
the native population of the virginia and south carolina frontier had already been displaced when large numbers of settlers arrived.
in pennsylvania however the flood of german and scotch irish settlers into the backcountry upset the relatively peaceful indian white relations constructed by william penn.
at a 1721 conference a group of colonial and indian leaders reaffirmed penns chain of friendship.
but conflicts over land soon multiplied.
the infamous walking purchase of 1737 brought the fraudulent dealing so common in other colonies to pennsylvania.
the lenni lanape indians agreed to an arrangement to cede a tract of land bounded by the distance a man could walk in thirty six hours.
to their amazement governor james logan hired a team of swift runners who marked out an area far in excess of what the indians had anticipated.
by 1760 when pennsylvanias population a mere 20 000 in 1700 had grown to 220 000 indian colonist relations initially the most harmonious in british north america had become poisoned by suspicion and hostility.
one group of susquehanna indians declared that the white people had abused them and taken their lands from them and therefore they had no reason to think that they were now concerned for their happiness they longed for the days when old william penn treated them with fairness and respect.
regional diversity by the mid eighteenth century the different regions of the british colonies had developed distinct economic and social orders.
small farms tilled by family labor and geared primarily to production for local consumption predominated in new england and the new settlements of the backcountry the area stretching from central pennsylvania southward through the what were the directions of social and economic change in the eighteenth century colonies.
shenandoah valley of virginia and into upland north and south carolina.
the backcountry was the most rapidly growing region in north america.
in 1730 the only white residents in what was then called indian country were the occasional hunter and trader.
by the eve of the american revolution the region contained one quarter of virginias population and half of south carolinas.
most were farm families raising grain and livestock but slaveowning planters seeking fertile soil for tobacco farming also entered the area.
in the older portions of the middle colonies of new york new jersey and pennsylvania farmers were more oriented to commerce than on the frontier growing grain both for their own use and for sale abroad and supplementing the work of family members by employing wage laborers tenants and in some instances slaves.
because large landlords had engrossed so much desirable land new yorks growth lagged behind that of neighboring colonies.
what man will be such a fool as to become a base tenant wondered richard coote new yorks governor at the beginning of the eighteenth century when by crossing the hudson river that man can for a song purchase a good freehold with its fertile soil favorable climate initially peaceful indian relations generous governmental land distribution policy and rivers that facilitated long distance trading pennsylvania came to be known as the best poor mans country ordinary colonists there enjoyed a standard of living unimaginable in europe.
the consumer revolution during the eighteenth century great britain eclipsed the dutch as the leading producer and trader of inexpensive consumer goods including colonial william penns treaty with the indians.
penns grandson thomas the proprietor of pennsylvania commissioned this romanticized painting from the artist benjamin west in 1771 by which time harmony between indians and colonists had long since turned to hostility.
in the nineteenth century many reproductions of this image circulated reminding americans that indians had once been central figures in their history.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 the growth of colonial america products like coffee and tea and such manufactured goods as linen metalware pins ribbons glassware ceramics and clothing.
trade integrated the british empire.
as the american colonies were drawn more and more fully into the system of atlantic commerce they shared in the eras consumer revolution.
in port cities and small inland towns shops proliferated and american newspapers were filled with advertisements for british goods.
british merchants supplied american traders with loans to enable them to import these products and traveling peddlers carried them into remote frontier areas.
consumerism in a modern sense the mass production advertising and sale of consumer goods did not exist in colonial america.
nonetheless eighteenth century estate inventories records of peoples possessions at the time of death revealed the wide dispersal in american homes of english and even asian products.
in the seventeenth century most colonists had lived in a pioneer world of homespun clothing and homemade goods.
now even modest farmers and artisans owned books ceramic plates metal cutlery and items made of imported silk and cotton.
tea once a luxury enjoyed only by the wealthy became virtually a necessity of life.
people that are least able to go to the expense one new yorker noted must have their tea though their families want bread this 1772 broadside offers a rare view of the interior of a philadelphia shop and lists some of the many european and west indian goods on sale including rum tea spices and gun powder a sign of the ongoing consumer revolution linked to international trade.
colonial cities britains mainland colonies were overwhelmingly agricultural.
nine tenths of the population resided in rural areas and made their livelihood from farming.
colonial cities like boston new york philadelphia and charleston were quite small by the standards of europe or spanish america.
in 1700 when the population of mexico city stood at 100 000 boston had 6 000 residents and new york 4 500.
as late as 1750 eight cities in spanish america exceeded in size any in english north america.
english american cities served mainly as gathering places for agricultural goods and for imported items to be distributed to the countryside.
nonetheless the expansion of trade encouraged the rise of port cities home to a growing population of colonial merchants and artisans skilled craftsmen as well as an increasing number of poor.
in 1770 with some 30 000 inhabitants philadelphia was the capital of the new world at least its british component and after london and liverpool the empires third busiest port.
the financial commercial and cultural center of british america its growth rested on economic integration with the rich agricultural region nearby.
philadelphia merchants organized the collection of farm goods supplied rural storekeepers and extended credit to consumers.
they exported flour bread and meat to the west indies and europe.
colonial artisans the city was also home to a large population of furniture makers jewelers and silversmiths serving wealthier citizens and hundreds of lesser artisans like weavers blacksmiths coopers and construction workers.
the typical artisan owned his own tools and labored in a small workshop often his home assisted by family members and young journeymen and apprentices what were the directions of social and economic change in the eighteenth century colonies.
learning the trade.
the artisans skill which set him apart from the common laborers below him in the social scale was the key to his existence and it gave him a far greater degree of economic freedom than those dependent on others for a livelihood.
he that hath a trade hath an estate wrote benjamin franklin who had worked as a printer before achieving renown as a scientist and statesman.
despite the influx of british goods american craftsmen benefited from the expanding consumer market.
most journeymen enjoyed a reasonable chance of rising to the status of master and establishing a workshop of their own.
some achieved remarkable success.
born in new york city in 1723 myer myers a jewish silversmith of dutch ancestry became one of the citys most prominent artisans.
myers produced jewelry candlesticks coffeepots tableware and other gold and silver objects for the colonys elite as well as religious ornaments for both synagogues and protestant churches in new york and nearby colonies.
he used some of his profits to acquire land in new hampshire and connecticut.
myerss career reflected the opportunities colonial cities offered to skilled men of diverse ethnic and religious backgrounds.
an atlantic world people ideas and goods flowed back and forth across the atlantic knitting together the empire and its diverse populations british merchants and consumers american colonists african slaves and surviving indians and creating webs of interdependence among the european empires.
sugar tobacco and other products of the western hemisphere were marketed as far away as eastern europe.
london bankers financed the slave trade between africa and portugese brazil.
spain spent its gold and silver importing goods from other countries.
as trade expanded the north american and west indian colonies became the major overseas market for british manufactured goods.
although most colonial output was consumed at this piece of china made in england and exported to new england celebrates the coronation of james ii in 1685.
it is an example of the growing colonial demand for english consumer goods.
as atlantic trade expanded shipbuilding became a major enterprise in the colonies.
this painting from around 1750 by an unknown artist depicts vessels under construction at the greys inn creek shipyard in maryland.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 social classes in the colonies home north americans shipped farm products to britain the west indies and with the exception of goods like tobacco enumerated under the navigation acts outside the empire.
virtually the entire chesapeake tobacco crop was marketed in britain with most of it then re exported to europe by british merchants.
most of the bread and flour exported from the colonies was destined for the west indies.
african slaves there grew sugar that could be distilled into rum a product increasingly popular among both north american colonists and indians who obtained it by trading furs and deerskins that were then shipped to europe.
the mainland colonies carried on a flourishing trade in fish and grains with southern europe.
ships built in new england made up one third of the british empires trading fleet.
membership in the empire had many advantages for the colonists.
most americans did not complain about british regulation of their trade because commerce enriched the colonies as well as the mother country and lax enforcement of the navigation acts allowed smuggling to flourish.
in a dangerous world moreover the royal navy protected american shipping.
and despite the many differences between life in england and its colonies eighteenth century english america drew closer and closer to and in some ways became more and more similar to the mother country across the atlantic.
social classes in the colonies the a 1732 portrait of daniel peter and andrew oliver sons of a wealthy boston merchant.
the prominent display of their delicate hands tells the viewer that they have never had to do manual labor.
colonial elite most free americans benefited from economic growth but as colonial society matured an elite emerged that while neither as powerful or wealthy as the aristocracy of england increasingly dominated politics and society.
indeed the gap between rich and poor probably grew more rapidly in the eighteenth century than in any other period of american history.
in new england and the middle colonies expanding trade made possible the emergence of a powerful upper class of merchants often linked by family or commercial ties to great trading firms in london.
there were no banks in colonial america.
credit and money were in short supply and mercantile success depended on personal connections as much as business talent.
by 1750 the colonies of the chesapeake and lower south were dominated by slave plantations producing staple crops especially tobacco and rice for the world market.
here great planters accumulated enormous wealth.
the colonial elite also included the rulers of proprietary colonies like pennsylvania and maryland.
how did patterns of class and gender roles change in eighteenth century america.
america had no titled aristocracy as in britain.
it had no system of legally established social ranks or family pedigrees stretching back to medieval times.
apart from the de lanceys livingstons and van rensselaers of new york the penn family in pennsylvania and a few southern planters it had no one whose landholdings in monetary value rivaled those of the british aristocracy.
but throughout british america men of prominence controlled colonial government.
in virginia the upper class was so tightknit and intermarried so often that the colony was said to be governed by a cousinocracy members of the gentry controlled the vestries or local governing bodies of the established anglican church dominated the county courts political as well as judicial institutions that levied taxes and enacted local ordinances and were prominent in virginias legislature.
in the 1750s seven members of the same generation of the lee family sat in the house of burgesses.
eighteenth century virginia was a far healthier environment than in the early days of settlement.
planters could expect to pass their wealth down to the next generation providing estates for their sons and establishing family dynasties.
nearly every virginian of note achieved prominence through family connections.
the days when self made men could rise into the virginia gentry were long gone by 1770 nearly all upper class virginians had inherited their wealth.
thomas jeffersons grandfather was a justice of the peace an important local official militia captain and sheriff and his father was a member of the house of burgesses.
george washingtons father grandfather and great grandfather had been justices of the peace.
the virginia gentry used its control of provincial government to gain possession of large tracts of land as western areas opened for settlement.
grants of 20 000 to 40 000 acres were not uncommon.
robert king carter a speaker of the house of burgesses acquired 300 000 acres of land and 1 000 slaves by the time of his death in 1732.
anglicization for much of the eighteenth century the american colonies had more regular trade and communications with britain than among themselves.
elites in different regions slowly developed a common lifestyle and sense of common interests.
but rather than thinking of themselves as distinctively american they became more and more english a process historians call anglicization wealthy americans tried to model their lives on british etiquette and behavior.
somewhat resentful at living in provincial isolation at the end of the world as one virginia aristocrat put it they sought to demonstrate their status and legitimacy by importing the latest london fashions and literature sending their sons to britain for education and building homes equipped with fashionable furnishings modeled on the country estates and town houses of the english gentry.
their residences included large rooms for entertainment display cases for imported luxury goods and elaborate formal gardens.
some members of the colonial elite like george washington even had coats of arms designed for their families in imitation of english upper class practice.
desperate to follow an aristocratic lifestyle many planters fell into debt.
william byrd iii lived so extravagantly that by 1770 he had accumulated a portrait of elijah boardman a merchant in new milford massachusetts.
boardman wears the attire of a gentleman and rests his arm on his counting desk.
in the rear bolts of cloth are visible.
but boardman chose to emphasize his learning not his wealth by posing with books including two plays of shakespeare john miltons paradise lost and the london magazine.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 built in the 1750s by carter burwell grandson of the original robert king carter carters grove near williamsburg virginia was a grand plantation mansion with large formal gardens in imitation of english landscape design.
social classes in the colonies a debt of 100 000 an amount almost unheard of in england or america.
but so long as the world market for tobacco thrived so did virginias gentry.
the south carolina aristocracy the richest group of mainland colonists were south carolina planters although planters in jamaica far outstripped them in wealth.
elite south carolinians often traveled north to enjoy summer vacations in the cooler climate of newport rhode island and they spent much of the remainder of their time in charleston the only real urban center south of philadelphia and the richest city in british north america.
here aristocratic social life flourished centered on theaters literary societies and social events.
like their virginia counterparts south carolina grandees lived a lavish lifestyle amid imported furniture fine wines silk clothing and other items from england.
they surrounded themselves with house slaves dressed in specially designed uniforms.
in 1774 the per capita wealth in the charleston district was 2 300 more than four times that of tobacco areas in virginia and eight times the figure for philadelphia or boston.
but wealth in south carolina was highly concentrated.
the richest 10 percent of the colony owned half the wealth in 1770 the poorest quarter less than 2 percent.
throughout the colonies elites emulated what they saw as englands balanced stable social order.
liberty in their eyes meant in part the power to rule the right of those blessed with wealth and prominence to dominate over others.
they viewed society as a hierarchical structure in which some men were endowed with greater talents than others and destined to rule.
the social order they believed was held together by webs of influence how did patterns of class and gender roles change in eighteenth century america.
that linked patrons and those dependent on them.
each place in the hierarchy carried with it different responsibilities and ones status was revealed in dress manners and the splendor of ones home.
superiority and dependence as one colonial newspaper put it were natural elements of any society.
an image of refinement served to legitimate wealth and political power.
colonial elites prided themselves on developing aristocratic manners cultivating the arts and making productive use of leisure.
indeed on both sides of the atlantic elites viewed work as something reserved for common folk and slaves.
freedom from labor was the mark of the gentleman.
poverty in the colonies at the other end of the social scale poverty emerged as a visible feature of eighteenth century colonial life.
although not considered by most colonists part of their society the growing number of slaves lived in impoverished conditions.
among free americans poverty was hardly as widespread as in britain where in the early part of the century between onequarter and one half of the people regularly required public assistance.
but as the colonial population expanded access to land diminished rapidly especially in long settled areas.
in new england which received few immigrants the high birthrate fueled population growth.
with the supply of land limited sons who could not hope to inherit farms were forced to move to other colonies or to try their hand at a trade in the regions towns.
by mid century tenants and wage laborers were a growing presence on farms in the middle colonies.
in colonial cities the number of propertyless wage earners subsisting at the poverty line steadily increased.
in boston one third of the population in 1771 owned no property at all.
in rural augusta county carved out of virginias shenandoah river valley in 1738 land was quickly engrossed by planters and speculators.
by the 1760s two thirds of the countys white men owned no land and had little prospect of obtaining it unless they migrated further west.
taking the colonies as a whole half of the wealth at mid century was concentrated in the hands of the richest 10 percent of the population.
attitudes and policies toward poverty in colonial america mirrored british precedents.
the better off colonists generally viewed the poor as lazy shiftless and responsible for their own plight.
both rural communities and cities did accept responsibility for assisting their own.
but to minimize the burden on taxpayers poor persons were frequently set to labor in workhouses where they produced goods that reimbursed authorities for part of their upkeep.
their children were sent to work as apprentices in local homes or workshops.
and most communities adopted stringent measures to warn out unemployed and propertyless newcomers who might become dependent on local poor relief.
this involved town authorities either expelling the unwanted poor from an area or formally declaring certain persons ineligible for assistance.
in essex county massachusetts the number of poor persons warned out each year rose from 200 in the 1730s to 1 700 in the 1760s.
many were members of families headed by widowed or abandoned women.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 the middle social classes in the colonies ranks the large majority of free americans lived between the extremes of wealth and poverty.
along with racial and ethnic diversity what distinguished the mainland colonies from europe was the wide distribution of land and the economic autonomy of most ordinary free families.
the anonymous author of the book american husbandry published in 1775 reported that little freeholders who live upon their own property made up the most considerable part of the people especially in the northern colonies and the nonplantation parts of the south.
altogether perhaps two thirds of the free male population were farmers who owned their own land.
england to be sure had no class of laborers as exploited as american slaves but threefifths of its people owned no property at all.
by the eighteenth century colonial farm families viewed landownership almost as a right the social precondition of freedom.
they strongly resented efforts whether by native americans great landlords or colonial governments to limit their access to land.
a dislike of personal dependence and an understanding of freedom as not relying on others for a livelihood sank deep roots in british north america.
these beliefs after all accorded with social reality a wide distribution of property that made economic independence part of the lived experience of large numbers of white colonists.
women and the household economy in the household economy of eighteenth century america the family was the center of economic life.
most work revolved around the home and all members men women and children contributed to the familys livelihood.
the independence of the small farmer depended in considerable measure on the labor of dependent women and children.
he that hath an industrious family shall soon be rich declared one colonial saying and the high birthrate in part reflected the need for as many hands as possible on colonial farms.
most farmers concentrated first on growing food for their own consumption and acquiring enough land to pass it along to their sons.
but the consumer revolution and expanding networks of atlantic trade drew increasing numbers of farmers into production for the market as well.
as the population grew and the death rate declined family life stabilized and more marriages became lifetime commitments.
free women were expected to devote their lives to being good wives and mothers.
already enshrined in law and property relations male domination took on greater and greater social reality.
in several colonies the law mandated primogeniture meaning that estates must be passed intact to the oldest son.
as colonial society became more structured opportunities that had existed for women in the early period receded.
in connecticut for example the courts were informal and unorganized in the seventeenth century and women often represented themselves.
in the eighteenth century it became necessary to hire a lawyer as ones spokesman in court.
women barred from practicing as attorneys disappeared from judicial proceedings.
because of the desperate need for labor men and women in the seventeenth century both did various kinds of work.
in the eighteenth century the division of labor visions of freedom the van bergen overmantel.
the opportunity to achieve economic independence was central to american colonists idea of freedom.
this section is part of a sevenfoot long painting by john heaten from around 1773 probably designed to hang above a wide fireplace in the home of marten van bergen a dutch farmer in colonial new york.
the house and farm buildings are in dutch style.
the painting offers a rare contemporary view of a prosperous colonial farm with its full granary and livestock.
native americans and african american slaves as well as workers who probably were indentured servants are among the individuals depicted by the artist.
questions 1.
what does the painting suggest about gradations of freedom at the time it was created.
what indications of prosperty are evident in the painting.
3 creating anglo america 1660 1750 this portrait of the cheney family by an unknown late eighteenth century artist illustrates the high birthrate in colonial america and suggests how many years of a womans life were spent bearing and raising children.
social classes in the colonies along gender lines solidified.
womens work was clearly defined including cooking cleaning sewing making butter and assisting with agricultural chores.
the work of farmers wives and daughters often spelled the difference between a familys self sufficiency and poverty.
womens work is never done this popular adage was literally true.
even as the consumer revolution reduced the demands on many women by making available store bought goods previously produced at home womens work seemed to increase.
lower infant mortality meant more time spent in child care and domestic chores.
the demand for new goods increased the need for all family members to contribute to family income.
for most women work was incessant and exhausting.
i am dirty and distressed almost wearied to death wrote mary cooper a long island woman in her diary in 1769.
this day she continued is forty years since i left my fathers house and come here and here have i seen little else but hard labor and sorrow north america at mid century by the mid eighteenth century the area that would become the united states was home to a remarkable diversity of peoples and different kinds of social organization from pueblo villages of the southwest to tobacco plantations of the chesapeake towns and small farms of new england landholdings in the hudson valley that resembled feudal estates and fur trading outposts of the northern and western frontier.
elites tied to imperial centers of power dominated the political and economic life of nearly every colony.
but large numbers of colonists enjoyed far greater opportunities for freedom access to the vote prospects of acquiring land the right to worship as they pleased and an escape from oppressive government than existed in europe.
free colonists probably enjoyed the highest per capita income in the world.
the colonies economic growth contributed to a high birthrate long life expectancy and expanding demand for consumer goods.
in the british colonies writes one historian lived thousands of the freest individuals the western world has ever known yet many others found themselves confined to the partial freedom of indentured servitude or to the complete absence of freedom in slavery.
both timeless longings for freedom and new and unprecedented forms of unfreedom had been essential to the north american colonies remarkable development.
suggested reading suggested reading books bailyn bernard.
the peopling of british north america 1986.
a brief survey of the movement of peoples across the atlantic.
berlin ira.
many thousands gone the first two centuries of slavery in north america 1998.
the most extensive study of the origins and development of colonial slavery.
bushman richard.
the refinement of america persons houses cities 1992.
a study of how a more refined lifestyle emerged in the eighteenth century colonies.
dayton cornelia h women before the bar gender law and society in connecticut 1639 1789 1995.
examines the changing legal status of women in one american colony.
jordan winthrop d white over black american attitudes toward the negro 1550 1812 1968.
a detailed look at how ideas about race developed over time in england and the american colonies.
kidd thomas s the great awakening 2007.
an account of the religious movement that swept the american colonies in the eighteenth century.
kulikoff allan.
tobacco and slaves the development of southern cultures in the chesapeake 1680 1800 1986.
explores how the rise of slave grown tobacco affected society in the chesapeake.
lemon james t the best poor mans country a geographical study of early southeastern pennsylvania 1972.
a study of agriculture and the environment in one of the most successful farming areas of colonial america.
lepore jill.
the name of war king philips war and the origin of american identity 1998.
an examination not only of the war itself but also of its long term consequences for indian white relations.
lovejoy david s the glorious revolution in america 1972.
explores how the revolution in england in 1689 affected the american colonies.
mintz sidney.
sweetness and power the place of sugar in modern history 1985.
a global history of the significance of sugar in the making of the modern world.
morgan edmund s american slavery american freedom the ordeal of colonial virginia 1975.
an influential study of the slow development of slavery in seventeenth century virginia.
norton mary beth.
in the devils snare the salem witchcraft crisis of 1692 2002.
a study of the witch trials that places them in the context of anxieties over indian warfare on the massachusetts frontier.
saxton martha.
being good womens moral values in early america 2003.
examines social standards for womens behavior and how women tried to live up to them.
websites the atlantic slave trade and slave life in the americas virginia edu slavery index php afro louisiana history and genealogy c hapter r eview review questions 1.
both the puritans and william penn viewed their colonies as holy experiments how did they differ.
the textbook states prejudice by itself did not create american slavery examine the forces and events that led to slavery in north america and the role that racial prejudice played.
how were the actions of king james ii toward new england perceived as threats to colonial liberty.
how did king philips war bacons rebellion and the salem witch trials illustrate a widespread crisis in british north america in the late seventeenth century.
the social structure of the eighteenth century colonies was growing more open for some but not for others.
for whom was there more opportunity and for whom not.
by the end of the seventeenth century commerce was the foundation of empire and the leading cause of competition between european empires.
explain how the north american colonies were directly linked to atlantic commerce by laws and trade.
if you traveled outside of eighteenth century new england you might agree with fellow travelers that the colonies were demonstrating greater diversity in many ways.
how would you support this claim.
despite their lack of rights hard working women and children were often the key to the success of independent family farmers.
demonstrate the truth of this statement.
freedom questions 1.
english settlers insisted that true freedom for native americans meant they must abandon their traditions and accept english ways.
examine the changes to native american life by the mid eighteenth century and discuss whether native american freedom increased by any standards.
freedom and lack of freedom existed side by side in the english colonies.
using examples from pennsylvania and elsewhere demonstrate how greater freedom for some colonists in one area meant less freedom for others.
british citizens connected freedom and liberty to land ownership and not having to work for wages.
why did they make these connections and what were the consequences for the social structure.
some historians have argued that the freedoms and prosperity of the british empire were all based on slavery.
examine this statement using specific examples.
many british settlers in north america believed it was the best poor mans country and that they were the freest people in the world.
what factors would lead to such a claim.
study and review at key terms metacom p 94 r e v i e w ta b l e colonial crises in the late seventeenth century king philips war p 95 crisis origins of dates conflict action resolution mercantilist system p 95 navigation acts p 96 king philips war 1675 white settlers encroachment on indian land philips forces attack fortyfive new england towns settlers counterattack breaking indians power bacons rebellion corruption of virginias government bacon burns jamestown and takes power virginias ruling elite undertake reforms james ii threatens to restore catholicism to england a bloodless coup to overthrow james ii colonists overthrow dominion of new england protestants william and mary of orange are crowned amidst political and social tensions young girls begin to experiment with magic hundreds governor accused of dissolves the witchcraft and salem court nineteen people are hanged covenant chain p 98 yamasee uprising p 99 society of friends quakers p 100 sugar p 103 glorious revolution las siete partidas p 105 bacons rebellion p 106 slave code p 108 anglicanism p 109 glorious revolution p 109 english bill of rights p 109 salem witch trials 1691 lords of trade p 110 dominion of new england p 110 english toleration act p 111 salem witch trials p 112 redemptioners p 116 walking purchase p 120 backcountry p 120 artisans p 122 cousinocracy p 125 c hapter 4 two treatises of government act of union creating great britain slave uprising in new york city treaty of utrecht 1720 catos letters junto club founded by benjamin franklin pennsylvania gazette established 1730s great awakening georgia colony founded john peter zenger put on trial for libel stono rebellion ohio company awarded land from virginia 1754 seven years war albany plan of union drafted by benjamin franklin william pitt sits as british prime minister pontiacs rebellion british government issues proclamation of 1763 father serra establishes first mission in california slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 slavery and empire atlantic trade africa and the slave trade the middle passage chesapeake slavery freedom and slavery in the chesapeake indian slavery in early carolina the rice kingdom the georgia experiment slavery in the north slave cultures and slave resistance colonial government the rise of the assemblies politics in public the colonial press freedom of expression and its limits the trial of zenger the american enlightenment the great awakening religious revivals the preaching of whitefield the awakenings impact becoming african american african american cultures resistance to slavery the crisis of 1739 1741 imperial rivalries an empire of freedom battle for the continent british patriotism the british constitution the language of liberty republican liberty liberal freedom the middle ground the seven years war a world transformed pontiacs rebellion the proclamation line pennsylvania and the indians colonial identities the public sphere spanish north america the spanish in california the french empire the right to vote political cultures the old plantation a late eighteenth century watercolor by an unknown artist depicts slaves dancing in a plantations slave quarters perhaps at a wedding.
the scene may take place in south carolina where the painting was found.
the musical instruments and pottery are african in origin while much of the clothing is of european manufacture indicating the mixing of african and white cultures among the eras slaves.
f ocus q uestions how did african slavery differ regionally in eighteenth century north america.
what factors led to distinct african american cultures in the eighteenth century.
what were the meanings of british liberty in the eighteenth century.
what concepts and institutions dominated colonial politics in the eighteenth century.
how did the great awakening challenge the religious and social structure of british north america.
how did the spanish and french empires in america develop in the eighteenth century.
what was the impact of the seven years war on imperial and indian white relations.
l s ometime in the mid 1750s olaudah equiano the eleven year old son of a west african village chief was kidnapped by slave traders.
he soon found himself on a ship headed for barbados.
after a short stay on that caribbean island equiano was sold to a plantation owner in virginia and then purchased by a british sea captain who renamed him gustavus vassa.
he accompanied his owner on numerous voyages on atlantic trading vessels.
while still a slave he enrolled in a school in england where he learned to read and write and then enlisted in the royal navy.
he fought in canada under general james wolfe in 1758 during the seven years war.
in 1763 however equiano was sold once again and returned to the caribbean.
three years later he was able to purchase his freedom.
equiano went on to live through shipwrecks took part in an english colonizing venture in central america and even participated in an expedition to the arctic circle.
equiano eventually settled in london and in 1789 he published the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano or gustavus vassa the african which he described as a history of neither a saint a hero nor a tyrant but of a victim of slavery who through luck or fate ended up more fortunate than most of his people.
he condemned the idea that africans were inferior to europeans and therefore deserved to be slaves.
he urged the european reader to recall that his ancestors were once like the africans uncivilized and asked did nature make them inferior.
and should they too have been made slaves persons of all races he insisted were capable of intellectual improvement.
the book became the eras most widely read account by a slave of his own experiences.
equiano died in 1797.
recent scholars have suggested that equiano may actually have been born in the new world rather than africa.
in either case while his rich variety of experience was no doubt unusual his life illuminates broad patterns of eighteenth century american history.
as noted in the previous chapter this was a period of sustained development for british north america.
compared to england and scotland united to create great britain by the act of union of 1707 the colonies were growing much more rapidly.
some contemporaries spoke of british america as a rising empire that would one day eclipse the mother country in population and wealth.
it would be wrong however to see the first three quarters of the eighteenth century simply as a prelude to american independence.
as equianos life illustrates the atlantic was more a bridge than a barrier between the old and new worlds.
ideas people and goods flowed back and forth across the ocean.
even as the colonies populations became more diverse they were increasingly integrated into the british empire.
their laws and political institutions were extensions of those of britain their ideas about society and culture reflected british values their how did african slavery differ regionally in eighteenth century north america.
economies were geared to serving the empires needs.
as european powers jockeyed for advantage in north america colonists were drawn into an almost continuous series of wars with france and its indian allies which reinforced their sense of identification with and dependence on great britain.
equianos life also underscores the greatest irony or contradiction in the history of the eighteenth century the simultaneous expansion of freedom and slavery.
this was the era when the idea of the freeborn englishman became powerfully entrenched in the outlook of both colonists and britons.
more than any other principle liberty was seen as what made the british empire distinct.
yet the eighteenth century was also the height of the atlantic slave trade a commerce increasingly dominated by british merchants and ships.
one of the most popular songs of the period included the refrain britons never never never will be slaves but during the eighteenth century more than half the africans shipped to the new world as slaves were carried on british vessels.
most were destined for the plantations of the west indies and brazil but slaves also made up around 280 000 of the 585 000 persons who arrived in britains mainland colonies between 1700 and 1775.
although concentrated in the chesapeake and areas farther south slavery existed in every colony of british north america.
and unlike equiano very few slaves were fortunate enough to gain their freedom.
s l av e ry a n d e m p i r e of the estimated 7 7 million africans transported to the new world between 1492 and 1820 more than half arrived between 1700 and 1800.
the atlantic slave trade would later be condemned by statesmen and general opinion as a crime against humanity.
but in the eighteenth century it was a regularized business in which european merchants african traders and american planters engaged in complex bargaining over human lives all with the expectation of securing a profit.
the slave trade was a vital part of world commerce.
every european empire in the new world utilized slave labor and battled for control of this lucrative trade.
the asiento an the title page of olaudah equianos account of his life the best known narrative by an eighteenth century slave.
the portrait of equiano in european dress and holding a bible challenges stereotypes of blacks as savages incapable of becoming civilized.
chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 early in the 1700s tens of thousands of embittered scots irish nally abandoned ireland and came to america chiey to tolerant and deep soiled pennsylvania.
finding the best acres already taken by germans and quakers they pushed out onto the frontier making them among the rst settlers of the american west.
there many of them illegally but deantly squatted on unoccupied lands and quarreled with both indian and white owners.
when the westward owing scots irish tide lapped up against the allegheny barrier it was deected southward into the backcountry of maryland down virginias shenandoah valley and into the western carolinas.
their often rickety settlements bore the marks of scots irish restlessness.
whereas their german neighbors typically erected sturdy homes and cleared their elds meticulously the scots irish satised themselves with oorless imsy log cabins.
as betted an uprooted questing people they chopped down trees planted crops between the stumps exhausted the soil swiftly and moved on.
already experienced colonizers and agitators in ireland the scots irish proved to be superb frontiersmen though their readiness to visit violence on the indians repeatedly inamed the western districts.
by the mid eighteenth century a chain of scots irish settlements lay scattered along the great wagon road which hugged the eastern appalachian foothills from pennsylvania to georgia.
it was said somewhat unfairly that the scots irish kept the sabbath and all else they could lay their hands on.
pugnacious lawless and individualistic they brought with them the scottish secrets of whiskey distilling and dotted the appalachian hills and hollows with their stills.
they cherished no love for the british government that had uprooted them and still lorded over them or for any other government it seemed.
they led the armed march of the paxton boys on philadelphia in 1764 protesting the quaker oligarchys lenient policy toward the indians and a few years later spearheaded the regulator movement in north carolina a small but nasty insurrection against eastern domination of the colonys affairs.
many of these hotheads including the young andrew jackson eventually joined the embattled american revolutionaries.
all told about a dozen future presidents were of scots irish descent.
approximately 5 percent of the multicolored colonial population consisted of other european groups.
these embraced french huguenots welsh dutch swedes jews irish swiss and scots highlanders as distinguished from the scots irish.
except for the scots 49 english 19 african scottish 7 german 7 5 scots irish irish 3 dutch 3 other european 9 figure 5 1 ethnic and racial composition of the american people 1790 based on surnames.
source adapted from the american council of learned societies report of committee on linguistic and national stocks in the population of the united states 1932.
percentages total more than 100 percent due to rounding.
highlanders such hodgepodge elements felt little loyalty to the british crown.
by far the largest single noneng lish group was african accounting for nearly 20 percent of the colonial population in 1775 and heavily concentrated in the south.
the population of the thirteen colonies though mainly anglo saxon was perhaps the most mixed to be found anywhere in the world see figure 5 1.
the south holding about 90 percent of the slaves already the young frenchman michel guillaume jean de crvecoeur 1735 1813 wrote of the diverse population in about 1770 they are a mixture of english scotch irish french dutch germans and swedes.
from this promiscuous breed that race now called americans have arisen.
i could point out to you a family whose grandfather was an englishman whose wife was dutch whose son married a french woman and whose present four sons have now four wives of different nations.
colonial social classes displayed its historic black and white racial composition.
new eng land mostly staked out by the original puritan migrants showed the least ethnic diversity.
the middle colonies especially pennsylvania received the bulk of later white immigrants and boasted an astonishing variety of peoples.
outside of new eng land about one half the population was non eng lish in 1775.
of the fty six signers of the declaration of independence in 1776 eighteen were non eng lish and eight had not been born in the colonies.
as these various immigrant groups mingled and intermarried they laid the foundations for a new multicultural american national identity unlike anything known in europe.
the french settler michel guillaume jean de crvecoeur saw in america in the 1770s a strange mixture of blood which you will nd in no other country and he posed his classic question what then is the american this new man nor were white colonists alone in creating new societies out of diverse ethnic groups.
the african slave trade long had mixed peoples from many different tribal backgrounds giving birth to an african american community far more variegated in its cultural origins than anything to be found in africa itself.
similarly in the new eng land praying towns where indians were gathered to be christianized and in great lakes villages such as detroit home to dozens of different displaced indigenous peoples polyglot native american communities emerged blurring the boundaries of individual tribal identities.
the structure of colonial society in comparison to contemporary europe eighteenthcentury america seemed like a shining land of equality and opportunity with the notorious exception of slavery.
no titled nobility dominated society from on high and no pauperized underclass threatened it from below.
most white americans and even a handful of free blacks were small farmers.
clad in buckskin breeches they owned modest holdings and tilled them with their own hands and horses.
the cities contained a small class of skilled artisans with their well greased leather aprons as well as shopkeepers tradespeople and some unskilled day laborers.
the most remarkable feature of the social ladder was its openness.
an ambitious colonist even a former indentured servant could rise from a lower rung to a higher one a rare step in old eng land.
yet in contrast with seventeenth century america colonial society on the eve of the revolution was beginning to show signs of stratication and barriers to mobility that raised worries about the europeanization of america.
the gods of war contributed to these developments.
the armed con icts of the 1690s and early 1700s had enriched a number of merchant princes in the new eng land and middle colonies.
they laid the foundations of their fortunes with prots made as military suppliers.
roosting regally atop the social ladder these elites now feathered their nests more nely.
they sported imported clothing and dined at tables laid with eng lish china and gleaming silverware.
prominent individuals came to be seated in churches and schools according to their social rank.
by midcentury the richest 10 percent of bostonians and philadelphians owned nearly two thirds of the taxable wealth in their cities.
the plague of war also created a class of widows and orphans who became dependent for their survival on charity.
both philadelphia and new york built almshouses in the 1730s to care for the destitute.
yet the numbers of poor people remained tiny compared to the numbers in eng land where about a third of the population lived in impoverished squalor.
in the new eng land countryside the descendants of the original settlers faced more limited prospects than had their pioneering forebears.
as the supply of unclaimed soil dwindled and families grew existing landholdings were repeatedly subdivided.
the average size of farms shrank drastically.
younger sons as well as daughters were forced to hire out as wage laborers or eventually to seek virgin tracts of land beyond the alleghenies.
by 1750 boston contained a large number of homeless poor who were supported by public charity and compelled to wear a large red p on their clothing.
in the south the power of the great planters continued to be bolstered by their disproportionate ownership of slaves.
the riches created by the growing slave population in the eighteenth century were not distributed evenly among the whites.
wealth was concentrated in the hands of the largest slaveowners widening the gap between the prosperous gentry and the poor whites who were more and more likely to become tenant farmers.
in all the colonies the ranks of the lower classes were further swelled by the continuing stream of indentured servants many of whom ultimately achieved prosperity and prestige.
two became signers of the declaration of independence.
chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 present in a heavy concentration of resentful slaves and attempted to restrict or halt their importation.
but the british authorities seeking to preserve the supply of cheap labor for the colonies especially the west indies sugar plantations repeatedly vetoed all efforts to stem the transatlantic trafc in slaves.
many north american colonists condemned these vetoes as morally callous although new eng land slave traders beneted handsomely from the british policy.
the cruel complexity of the slavery issue was further revealed when thomas jefferson himself a slaveholder assailed the british vetoes in an early draft of the declaration of independence but was forced to withdraw the proposed clause by a torrent of protest from southern slavemasters.
clerics physicians and jurists a south carolina advertisement for slaves in the 1760s note the reference to these slaves origin on west africas rice coast a reminder of south carolinas reliance on african skill and labor for rice cultivation.
note too that half the slaves were said to have survived smallpox and thus acquired immunity from further infection and that care had been taken to insulate the others from a smallpox epidemic apparently then raging in charleston.
far less fortunate than the voluntary indentured servants were the paupers and convicts involuntarily shipped to america.
altogether about fty thousand jayle birds were dumped on the colonies by the london authorities.
this riffraff crowd including robbers rapists and murderers was generally sullen and undesirable and not bubbling over with goodwill for the kings government.
but many convicts were the unfortunate victims of circumstances and of a viciously unfair eng lish penal code that included about two hundred capital crimes.
some of the deportees in fact came to be highly respectable citizens.
least fortunate of all of course were the black slaves.
they enjoyed no equality with whites and dared not even dream of ascending or even approaching the ladder of opportunity.
oppressed and downtrodden the slaves were americas closest approximation to europes volatile lower classes and fears of black rebellion plagued the white colonists.
some colonial legislatures notably south carolinas in 1760 sensed the dangers most honored of the professions was the christian ministry.
in 1775 the clergy wielded less inuence than in the early days of massachusetts when piety had burned more warmly.
but they still occupied a position of high prestige.
most physicians on the other hand were poorly trained and not highly esteemed.
not until 1765 was the rst medical school established although european centers attracted some students.
aspiring young doctors served for a while as apprentices to older practitioners and were then turned loose on their victims bleeding was a favorite and frequently fatal remedy when the physician was not available a barber was often summoned.
cotton mather 1663 1728 puritan clergyman and avid scientist became frustrated with boston residents opposition to inoculation during the boston smallpox epidemic of 1721.
he wrote to a doctor friend never till now was that rule contested of two evils choose the least.
i would ask them whether it be not a most criminal ingratitude unto the god of health when he has acquainted us with a most invaluable method of the saving of our lives from so great a death to treat with neglect and contempt and multiply abuses on them who thankfully and in a spirit of obedience to him embrace his blessings.
the colonial economy epidemics were a constant nightmare.
especially dreaded was smallpox which af icted one out of ve persons including the heavily pockmarked george washington.
a crude form of inoculation was introduced in 1721 despite the objections of many physicians and some of the clergy who opposed tampering with the will of god.
powdered dried toad was a favorite prescription for smallpox.
diphtheria was also a deadly killer especially of young people.
one epidemic in the 1730s took the lives of thousands.
this grim reminder of their mortality may have helped to prepare many colonists in their hearts and minds for the religious revival that was soon to sweep them up.
at rst the law profession was not favorably regarded.
in this pioneering society which required much honest manual labor the parties to a dispute often presented their own cases in court.
lawyers were commonly regarded as noisy windbags or troublemaking rogues an early connecticut law classed them with drunkards and brothel keepers.
when future president john adams was a young law student the father of his wife to be frowned upon him as a suitor because of his chosen profession.
workaday america agriculture was the leading industry involving about 90 percent of the people.
tobacco continued to be the staple crop in maryland and virginia though wheat cultivation also spread through the chesapeake often on lands depleted by the overgrowth of tobacco.
the fertile middle bread colonies produced large quantities of grain and by 1759 new york alone was exporting eighty thousand barrels of our a year.
seemingly the farmer had only to tickle the soil with a hoe and it codshing in newfoundland ca.
1760 early european explorers were awed by the enormous schools of cod on the grand banks off newfoundland.
fish were so numerous that they sometimes impeded the progress of sailing vessels.
by the eighteenth century new englanders were aggressively exploiting the apparently limitless grand banks shery drying and salting huge catches for export to europe and the west indies.
two centuries later the accumulated predation of generations of overshing threatened to extinguish the once fabulous grand banks cod population.
chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 n 45 portsmouth n s boston s albany newport new london s n 40 new york w 70 s 50 100 km.
philadelphia s baltimore 100 mi.
atlantic of 1 ocean ation line 75w norfolk sea industries fishing whaling lam n oc forest industries pr new bern lumber and timber shipbuilding n naval stores general industries iron works n ft augusta charleston savannah rum distilleries n s s trading and shipping agriculture and trapping s cattle and grain tobacco 80w 30n rice and indigo furs and skins map 5 2 the colonial economy by the eighteenth century the various colonial regions had distinct economic identities.
the northern colonies grew grain and raised cattle harvested timber and sh and built ships.
the chesapeake colonies and north carolina were still heavily dependent on tobacco whereas the southernmost colonies grew mostly rice and indigo.
cotton so important to the southern economy in the nineteenth century had not yet emerged as a major crop.
interactive map would laugh with a harvest.
overall americans probably enjoyed a higher standard of living than the masses of any country in history up to that time.
fishing including whaling though ranking far below agriculture was rewarding.
pursued in all the american colonies this harvesting of the sea was a major industry in new eng land which exported smelly shiploads of dried cod to the catholic countries of europe.
the shing eet also stimulated shipbuilding and served as a nursery for the seamen who manned the navy and merchant marine.
a bustling commerce both coastwise and overseas enriched all the colonies especially the new england group new york and pennsylvania see map 5 2.
commercial ventures and land speculation in the absence of later get rich quick schemes were the surest avenues to speedy wealth.
yankee seamen were famous in many climes not only as skilled mariners but as tightsted traders.
they provisioned the caribbean sugar islands with food and forest products.
they also hauled spanish and portuguese gold wine and oranges to london to be exchanged for industrial goods which were then sold for a juicy prot in america.
the so called triangular trade was infamously protable though small in relation to total colonial commerce see map 5 3.
a skipper for example would leave a new eng land port with a cargo of rum and sail to the gold coast of africa.
bartering the ery liquor with african chiefs for captured african slaves he would proceed to the west indies with his sobbing and suffocating cargo sardined below deck.
there he would exchange the survivors for molasses which he would then carry to new eng land where it would be distilled into rum.
he would then repeat the trip making a handsome prot on each leg of the triangle.
manufacturing in the colonies was of only secondary importance although there was a surprising variety of small enterprises.
as a rule workers could get ahead faster in soil rich america by tilling the land.
huge quantities of kill devil rum were distilled in rhode island and massachusetts and even some of the elect of the lord developed an overfondness for it.
handsome beaver hats were manufactured in quantity despite british restrictions.
smoking iron forges including pennsylvanias valley forge likewise dotted the land and in fact were more numerous in 1775 though generally smaller than those of eng land.
in addition household manufacturing including spinning and weaving by women added up to an impressive output.
as in all pioneering countries strong backed laborers and skilled craftspeople were scarce and highly colonial commerce prized.
in early virginia a carpenter who had committed a murder was freed because his woodworking skills were needed.
lumbering was perhaps the most important single manufacturing activity.
countless cartloads of freshfelled timber were consumed by shipbuilders at rst chiey in new eng land and then elsewhere in the colonies.
by 1770 about four hundred vessels of assorted sizes were splashing down the ways each year and about one third of the british merchant marine was american built.
colonial naval stores such as tar pitch rosin and turpentine were highly valued for britain was anxious to gain and retain a mastery of the seas.
london offered generous bounties to stimulate production of these items otherwise britain would have had to turn to the uncertain and possibly hostile baltic areas.
towering trees ideal as masts for his majestys navy were marked with the kings broad arrow for future use.
the luckless colonist who was caught cutting down this reserved timber was subject to a ne.
even though there were countless unreserved trees and the blazed ones were being saved for the common defense this shackle on free enterprise engendered considerable bitterness.
americans held an important ank of a thriving many sided atlantic economy by the dawn of the eighteenth century.
yet strains appeared in this complex network as early as the 1730s.
fast breeding americans map 5 3 colonial trade patterns ca.
1770 future president john adams noted about this time that the commerce of the west indies is a part of the american system of commerce.
they can neither do without us nor we without them.
the creator has placed us upon the globe in such a situation that we have occasion for each other 100w hudson 80w bay 60w 40w s ve s guadeloupe lve si r ru cartagena south america 1000 mi.
es sl av es peru bahia potos o rs e h ns f wi ruit ne e win mediterra ne an sea tropic of cancer africa s sla major trade route lisbon cadiz n ivory coast gold coast slave coast brazil lima intercoastal trade route cts t silver m barbados slav major points of trade ea du uc rop ro np po r t u g al madeira islands rod es europe dp 500 1000 km.
ss e c tu re ola eu martinique pac i f ic oc ean equator s ug m ar hispaniola n caribbean d i e s sea gold 0 las great britain london n eth er l an ds bristol manuf a i mo r fr e sla t s a ug ses s 20e glasgow spa i n uit sugar gold c of fe e es jamaica slaves m olasse ric w 20n cuba tock lives fish r lumber ses olas flou es m slav charleston 0 li n l stores rs nava ctured fish fu manufa cts cts rodu produ cts red p newport boston produ factu d u re n a tu m fac new york manu cco meat fish rum philadelphia toba lumber grain english manufactu o red colonies indig w i ne products rice furs 40n interactive map 20w at l a n t i c o c ea n north america ves luanda at l a n t i c o c ea n angola chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 demanded more and more british products yet the slow growing british population early reached the saturation point for absorbing imports from america.
this trade imbalance raised a question how could the colonists sell the goods to make the money to buy what they wanted in britain.
the answer was obvious by seeking foreign non british markets.
by the eve of the revolution the bulk of chesapeake tobacco was lling pipes in france and in other european countries though it passed through the hands of british re exporters who took a slice of the prots for themselves.
more important was the trade with the west indies especially the french islands.
west indian purchases of north american timber and foodstuffs provided the crucial cash for the colonists to continue to make their own purchases in britain.
but in 1733 bowing to pressure from inuential british west indian planters parliament passed the molasses act aimed at squelching north american trade with the french west indies.
if successful this scheme would have struck a crippling blow to american international trade and to the colonists standard of living.
american merchants responded to the act by bribing and smuggling their way around the law.
thus was foreshadowed the impending imperial crisis when headstrong americans would revolt rather than submit to the dictates of the far off parliament apparently bent on destroying their very livelihood.
horsepower and sailpower all sprawling and sparsely populated pioneer communities are cursed with oppressive problems of transportation.
america with a scarcity of both money and workers was no exception.
not until the 1700s did roads connect even the major cities and these dirt thoroughfares were treacherously decient.
a wayfarer could have rumbled along more rapidly over the roman highways in the days of julius caesar nearly two thousand years earlier.
it took young benjamin franklin nine long rain drenched days in 1720 to journey from boston to philadelphia traveling by sailing sloop rowboat and foot.
news of the declaration of independence in 1776 reached charleston from philadelphia twenty nine days after the fourth of july.
roads were often clouds of dust in the summer and quagmires of mud in the winter.
stagecoach travelers braved such additional dangers as tree strewn roads sign of the pine tree inn 1768 inns like joseph read iiis in lisbon connecticut not only provided food drink shelter and entertainment for colonial americans but also were raucous arenas for debating political issues.
this sign with its circular yellow orb sun over a pine tree may have been intended as a veiled reference to the sons of liberty an extralegal resistance organization that had adopted as its symbol the liberty tree.
the date of 1768 coincided with the british enactment of the townshend acts which ignited a new wave of colonial resistance to british rule.
colonial religion rickety bridges carriage overturns and runaway horses.
a traveler venturesome enough to journey from philadelphia to new york for example would not think it amiss to make a will and pray with the family before departing.
where man made roads were wretched heavy reliance was placed on god grooved waterways.
population tended to cluster along the banks of navigable rivers.
there was also much coastwise trafc and although it was slow and undependable it was relatively cheap and pleasant at least in fair weather.
taverns sprang up along the main routes of travel as well as in the cities.
their attractions customarily included such amusements as bowling alleys pool tables bars and gambling equipment.
before a cheerful roaring log re all social classes would mingle including the village loafers and drunks.
the tavern was yet another cradle of democracy.
gossips also gathered at the taverns which were clearinghouses of information misinformation and rumor frequently stimulated by alcoholic refreshment and impassioned political talk.
a successful politician like the wire pulling samuel adams was often a man who had a large alehouse fraternity in places like bostons green dragon tavern.
taverns were important in crystallizing public opinion and proved to be hotbeds of agitation as the revolutionary movement gathered momentum.
an intercolonial postal system was established by the mid 1700s although private couriers remained.
some mail was handled on credit.
service was slow and infrequent and secrecy was problematic.
mail carriers serving long routes would sometimes pass the time by reading the letters entrusted to their care.
dominant denominations two established or tax supported churches were conspicuous in 1775 see table 5 1 the anglican and the congregational.
a considerable segment of the population surprisingly enough did not worship in any church.
and in those colonies that maintained an established religion only a minority of the people belonged to it see table 5 2.
the church of eng land whose members were commonly called anglicans became the ofcial faith in georgia north and south carolina virginia maryland and a part of new york.
established also in england it served in america as a major prop of kingly table 5 1 established tax supported churches in the colonies 1775 colonies massachusetts incl.
maine connecticut new hampshire new york maryland virginia north carolina south carolina georgia rhode island new jersey delaware pennsylvania churches year disestablished congregational anglican in new york city and three neighboring counties anglican none note the persistence of the congregational establishment in new eng land.
table 5 2 estimated religious census 1775 name congregationalists anglicans presbyterians german churches incl.
lutheran dutch reformed quakers baptists roman catholics methodists jews est.
total membership est.
total population percentage church members number chief locale 575 000 500 000 410 000 new eng land n y south frontier 200 000 75 000 40 000 25 000 pa n y n j pa n j del.
r i pa n j del.
scattered n y r i 25 000 5 000 2 000 1 857 000 2 493 000 74 chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 authority.
british ofcials naturally made vigorous attempts to impose it on additional colonies but they ran into a stone wall of opposition.
in america the anglican church fell distressingly short of its promise.
secure and self satised like its parent in eng land it clung to a faith that was less erce and more worldly than the religion of puritanical new eng land.
sermons were shorter hell was less scorching and amusements like virginia fox hunting were less scorned.
so dismal was the reputation of the anglican clergy in seventeenth century virginia that the college of william and mary was founded in 1693 to train a better class of clerics.
the inuential congregational church which had grown out of the puritan church was formally established in all the new eng land colonies except independent minded rhode island.
at rst massachusetts taxed all residents to support congregationalism but later relented and exempted members of other well known denominations.
presbyterianism though closely associated with congregationalism was never made ofcial in any colonies.
ministers of the gospel turning from the bible to this sinful world increasingly grappled with burning political issues.
as the early rumblings of revolution against the british crown could be heard sedition owed freely from pulpits.
presbyterianism congregationalism and rebellion became a neo trinity.
many leading anglican clergymen aware of which side their tax provided bread was buttered on naturally supported their king.
benjamin franklins 1706 1790 poor richards almanack contained such thoughts on religion as these a good example is the best sermon many have quarreled about religion that never practiced it serving god is doing good to man but praying is thought an easier service and therefore more generally chosen how many observe christs birthday how few his precepts.
tis easier to keep holidays than commandments.
anglicans in the new world were seriously handicapped by not having a resident bishop whose presence would be convenient for the ordination of young ministers.
american students of anglican theology had to travel to eng land to be ordained.
on the eve of the revolution there was serious talk of creating an american bishopric but the scheme was violently opposed by many non anglicans who feared a tightening of the royal reins.
this controversy poured holy oil on the smoldering res of rebellion.
religious toleration had indeed made enormous strides in america at least when compared with its halting steps abroad.
roman catholics were still generally discriminated against as in eng land even in ofceholding.
but there were fewer catholics in america and hence the anti papist laws were less severe and less strictly enforced.
in general people could worship or not worship as they pleased.
the great awakening in all the colonial churches religion was less fervid in the early eighteenth century than it had been a century earlier when the colonies were rst planted.
the puritan churches in particular sagged under the weight of two burdens their elaborate theological doctrines and their compromising efforts to liberalize membership requirements.
churchgoers increasingly complained about the dead dogs who droned out tedious overerudite sermons from puritan pulpits.
some ministers on the other hand worried that many of their parishioners had gone soft and that their souls were no longer kindled by the hell re of orthodox calvinism.
liberal ideas began to challenge the old time religion.
some worshipers now proclaimed that human beings were not necessarily predestined to damnation and might save themselves by leading a life of good works.
most threatening to the calvinist doctrine of predestination was arminianism named after the dutch theologian jacobus arminius who preached that individual free will not divine decree determined a persons eternal fate and that all humans not just the elect could be saved if they freely accepted gods grace.
pressured by these heresies a few churches grudgingly conceded that spiritual conversion was not necessary for church membership.
together these twin trends toward clerical intellectualism and lay liberalism were sapping the spiritual vitality from many denominations.
the stage was thus set for a rousing religious revival.
known as the great awakening it exploded in religious revivals george whiteeld preaching americans of both genders and all races and regions were spellbound by whiteelds emotive oratory.
the 1730s and 1740s and swept through the colonies like a re through prairie grass.
the awakening was rst ignited in northampton massachusetts by a tall delicate and intellectual pastor jonathan edwards.
perhaps the deepest theological mind ever nurtured in america edwards proclaimed with burning righteousness the folly of believing in salvation through good works and af rmed the need for complete dependence on gods grace.
warming to his subject he painted in lurid detail the landscape of hell and the eternal torments of the damned.
sinners in the hands of an angry god was the title of one of his most famous sermons.
he believed that hell was paved with the skulls of unbaptized children edwardss preaching style was learned and closely reasoned but his stark doctrines sparked a warmly sympathetic reaction among his parishioners in 1734.
four years later the itinerant eng lish parson george whiteeld loosed a different style of evangelical preaching on america and touched off a conagration of religious ardor that revolutionized the spiritual life of the colonies.
a former alehouse attendant whiteeld was an orator of rare gifts.
his magnicent voice boomed sonorously over thousands of enthralled listeners in an open eld.
one of eng lands greatest actors of the day commented enviously that whiteeld could make audiences weep merely by pronouncing the word mesopotamia and that he would give a hundred guineas if i could only say o like mr whiteeld jonathan edwards 1703 1758 preached hellre notably in one famous sermon the god that holds you over the pit of hell much as one holds a spider or some loathsome insect over the re abhors you and is dreadfully provoked.
his wrath toward you burns like re he looks upon you as worthy of nothing else but to be cast into the re.
chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 triumphally touring the colonies whiteeld trumpeted his message of human helplessness and divine omnipotence.
his eloquence reduced jonathan edwards to tears and even caused the skeptical and thrifty benjamin franklin to empty his pockets into the collection plate.
during these roaring revival meetings countless sinners professed conversion and hundreds of the saved groaned shrieked or rolled in the snow from religious excitation.
whiteeld soon inspired american imitators.
taking up his electrifying new style of preaching they heaped abuse on sinners and shook enormous audiences with emotional appeals.
one preacher cackled hideously in the face of hapless wrongdoers.
another naked to the waist leapt frantically about in the light of ickering torches.
orthodox clergymen known as old lights were deeply skeptical of the emotionalism and the theatrical antics of the revivalists.
new lights on the other hand defended the awakening for its role in revitalizing american religion.
congregationalists and presbyterians split over this issue and many of the believers in religious conversion went over to the baptists and other sects more prepared to make room for emotion in religion.
the awakening left many lasting effects.
its emphasis on direct emotive spirituality seriously undermined the older clergy whose authority had derived from their education and erudition.
the schisms it set off in many denominations greatly increased the number and the competitiveness of american churches.
it encouraged a fresh wave of missionary work among the indians and even among black slaves many of whom also attended the mass open air revivals.
it led to the founding of new light centers of higher learning such as princeton brown rutgers and dartmouth.
perhaps most signicant the great awakening was the rst spontaneous mass movement of the american people.
it tended to break down sectional boundaries as well as denominational lines and contributed to the growing sense that americans had of themselves as a single people united by a common history and shared experiences.
schools and colleges a time honored eng lish idea regarded education as a blessing reserved for the aristocratic few not for the unwashed many.
education should be for leadership not citizenship and primarily for males.
only slowly and painfully did the colonists break the chains of these ancient restrictions.
puritan new eng land largely for religious reasons was more zealously interested in education than any other section.
dominated by the congregational church it stressed the need for bible reading by the individual worshiper.
the primary goal of the clergy was to make good christians rather than good citizens.
a more secular approach was evident late in the eighteenth century when some children were warned in the following verse he who neer learns his a b c.
forever will a blockhead be.
but he who learns his letters fair shall have a coach to take the air.
education principally for boys ourished almost from the outset in new eng land.
this densely populated region boasted an impressive number of graduates from the eng lish universities especially cambridge the intellectual center of eng lands puritanism.
new eng landers at a relatively early date established primary and secondary schools which varied widely in the quality of instruction and in the length of time that their doors remained open each year.
back straining farm labor drained much of a youths time and energy.
fairly adequate elementary schools were also hammering knowledge into the heads of reluctant scholars in the middle colonies and in the south.
some of these institutions were tax supported others were privately operated.
the south with its white and black population diffused over wide areas was severely handicapped by geography in attempting to establish an effective school system.
wealthy families leaned heavily on private tutors.
john adams ca.
1736 1826 the future second president wrote to his wife the education of our children is never out of my mind.
i must study politics and war that my sons may have the liberty to study mathematics and philosophy.
my sons ought to study mathematics and philosophy geography natural history naval architecture navigation commerce and agriculture in order to give their children a right to study painting poetry music architecture statuary tapestry and porcelain.
education and culture table 5 3 colonial colleges name 1.
harvard william and mary yale princeton pennsylvania columbia brown rutgers dartmouth begun as an indian missionary school original name if different college of new jersey the academy kings college rhode island college queens college location cambridge mass.
williamsburg va new haven conn princeton n j philadelphia pa new york n y providence r i new brunswick n j hanover n h.
the general at mosphere in the colonial schools and colleges continued grim and gloomy.
most of the emphasis was placed on religion and on the classical languages latin and greek.
the focus was not on experiment and reason but on doctrine and dogma.
the age was one of orthodoxy and independence of thinking was discouraged.
discipline was quite severe with many a mischievous child being sadistically birched with a switch cut from a birch tree.
sometimes punishment was in icted by indentured servant teachers who could themselves be whipped for their failures as workers and who therefore were not inclined to spare the rod.
opened or founded denomination congregational anglican congregational presbyterian nonsectarian anglican baptist dutch reformed congregational college education at least at rst in new england was geared toward preparing men for the ministry.
after all churches would wither if a new crop of ministers was not adequately trained to lead the regions spiritual ocks.
annoyed by this exclusively religious emphasis many well to do families especially in the south sent their boys abroad to acquire a real meaning a re ned and philosophical education in elite eng lish institutions.
for purposes of convenience and economy nine local colleges were established during the colonial era see table 5 3.
student enrollments were small numbering about two hundred boys at the most and at one the college of new jersey at princeton 1764 later known as princeton university it was chartered in 1746 by the presbyterian synod though open to students of all religious persuasions.
the fourth college to be founded in british north america it met in elizabeth and newark new jersey until a gift of ten acres of land precipitated a move to princeton in 1756.
all classes were held in the large building nassau hall.
here the continental congress met for three months during the summer of 1783 making princeton for a short time the capital of the nation.
this copper engraving based on a drawing by one of princetons earliest students was part of a series of college views that reected colonial americans growing pride in institutions of higher learning.
chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 time a few lads as young as eleven were admitted to harvard.
instruction was poor by present day standards.
the curriculum was still heavily loaded with theology and the dead languages although by 1750 there was a distinct trend toward live languages and other modern subjects.
a signicant contribution was made by benjamin franklin.
he had never attended college but played a major role in launching what became the university of pennsylvania the rst american college free from denominational control.
a provincial culture when it came to art and culture colonial americans were still in thrall to european tastes especially british.
the simplicity of pioneering life had not yet bred many homespun patrons of the arts.
one aspiring painter john trumbull 1756 1843 of connecticut was discouraged in his youth by his fathers chilling remark connecticut is not athens like so many of his talented artistic contemporaries trumbull was forced to travel to london to pursue his ambitions.
charles willson peale 1741 1827 best known for his portraits of george washington ran a museum stuffed birds and practiced dentistry.
gifted benjamin west 1738 1820 and precocious john singleton copley 1738 1815 succeeded in their ambitions to become famous painters but like trumbull they had to go to eng land to complete their training.
only abroad could they nd subjects who had the leisure to sit for their portraits and the money to pay handsomely for them.
copley was regarded as a loyalist during the revolutionary war and west a close friend of george iii and ofcial court painter was buried in londons st pauls cathedral.
architecture was largely imported from the old world and modied to meet the peculiar climatic and religious conditions of the new world.
even the lowly log cabin was apparently borrowed from sweden.
the red bricked georgian style so common in the prerevolutionary decades was introduced around 1720 and is best exemplied by the beauty of now restored williamsburg virginia.
colonial literature like art was generally undistinguished and for many of the same reasons.
one noteworthy exception was the precocious poet phillis wheatley ca.
1753 1784 an enslaved girl brought to boston at age eight and never formally educated.
taken to eng land when twenty years of age she published a book of verse and subsequently wrote other polished poems that revealed the inuence of alexander pope.
colonial craftsmanship in the pennsylvania dutch country parents gave daughters painted wooden chests to hold their precious dowry linens at marriage.
the horsemen unicorns and ower patterns on this dower chest conrm its origins in berks county pennsylvania.
her verse compares favorably with the best of the poetry poor colonial period but the remarkable fact is that she could overcome her severely disadvantaged background and write any poetry at all.
versatile benjamin franklin often called the rst civilized american also shone as a literary light.
although his autobiography is now a classic he was best known to his contemporaries for poor richards almanack which he edited from 1732 to 1758.
this famous publication containing many pithy sayings culled from the thinkers of the ages emphasized such homespun virtues as thrift industry morality and common sense.
examples are what maintains one vice would bring up two children plough deep while sluggards sleep honesty is the best policy and fish and visitors stink in three days poor richards was well known in europe and was more widely read in america than anything except the bible.
dispensing witty advice to old and young alike franklin had an incalculable inuence in shaping the american character.
science rising above the shackles of superstition was making some progress though lagging behind that of the old world.
a few botanists mathematicians and astronomers had won some repute but benjamin franklin was perhaps the only rst rank scientist produced in the american colonies.
franklins spectacular but dangerous experiments including the famous kiteying episode proving that lightning was a form of the press and politics the magnetic dispensary ca.
1790 this british painting made sport of the eras faddish preoccupations with electricity.
following franklins experiments static electricity generated here by the machine on the right was employed for medicinal purposes as well as for tingling entertainments.
electricity won him numerous honors in europe.
but his mind also had a practical turn.
among his numerous inventions were bifocal spectacles and the highly efcient franklin stove.
his lightning rod perhaps not surprisingly was condemned by some stodgy clergymen who felt it was presuming on god by attempting to control the artillery of the heavens pioneer presses stump grubbing americans were generally too poor to buy quantities of books and too busy to read them.
a south carolina merchant in 1744 advertised the arrival of a shipment of printed books pictures maps and pickles a few private libraries of fair size could be found especially among the clergy.
the byrd family of virginia enjoyed perhaps the largest collection in the colonies consisting of about four thousand volumes.
bustling benjamin franklin established in philadelphia the rst privately supported circulating library in america and by 1776 there were about fty public libraries and collections supported by subscription.
hand operated printing presses cranked out pamphlets leaets and journals.
on the eve of the revolution there were about forty colonial newspapers chiey weeklies that consisted of a single large sheet folded once.
columns ran heavily to somber essays frequently signed with such pseudonyms as cicero philosophicus and pro bono publico for the public good.
the news often lagged many weeks behind the event especially in the case of overseas happenings in which the colonists were deeply interested.
newspapers proved to be a powerful agency for airing colonial grievances and rallying opposition to british control.
a celebrated legal case in 1734 1735 involved john peter zenger a newspaper printer.
signicantly the zenger trial arose in new york reecting the tumultuous give and take of politics in the middle colonies where so many different ethnic groups jostled against one another.
zengers newspaper had assailed the corrupt royal governor.
charged with seditious libel the accused was hauled into court where he was defended by a former indentured servant now a distinguished philadelphia lawyer andrew hamilton.
zenger argued that he had printed the truth but the bewigged royal chief justice instructed the jury not to consider the truth or falsity of zengers statements the mere fact of printing irrespective of the truth was enough to convict.
hamilton countered that the very liberty of both exposing and opposing arbitrary power was at stake.
chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 andrew hamilton ca.
1676 1741 concluded his eloquent plea in the zenger case with these words the question before the court and you gentlemen of the jury is not of small nor private concern.
it is not the cause of a poor printer nor of new york alone which you are now trying.
it may in its consequence affect every freeman that lives under a british government on the main land of america.
it is the best cause.
it is the cause of liberty.
swayed by his eloquence the jurors deed the bewigged judges and daringly returned a verdict of not guilty.
cheers burst from the spectators.
the zenger decision was a banner achievement for freedom of the press and for the health of democracy.
it pointed the way to the kind of open public discussion required by the diverse society that colonial new york already was and that all america was to become.
although contrary to existing law and not immediately accepted by other judges and juries in time it helped establish the doctrine that true statements about public ofcials could not be prosecuted as libel.
newspapers were thus eventually free to print responsible criticisms of powerful ofcials though full freedom of the press was unknown during the prerevolutionary era.
the great game of politics american colonists may have been backward in natural or physical science but they were making noteworthy contributions to political science.
the thirteen colonial governments took a variety of forms.
by 1775 eight of the colonies had royal governors who were appointed by the king.
three maryland pennsylvania and delaware were under proprietors who themselves chose the governors.
and two connecticut and rhode island elected their own governors under self governing charters.
practically every colony utilized a two house legislative body.
the upper house or council was normally appointed by the crown in the royal colonies and by the proprietor in the proprietary colonies.
it was chosen by the voters in the self governing colonies.
the lower house as the popular branch was elected by the people or rather by those who owned enough property to qualify as voters.
in several of the colonies the backcountry elements were seriously underrepresented and they hated the ruling colonial clique perhaps more than they did kingly authority.
legislatures in which the people enjoyed direct representation voted such taxes as they chose for the necessary expenses of colonial government.
self taxation through representation was a precious privilege that americans had come to cherish above most others.
governors appointed by the king were generally able men sometimes outstanding gures.
some unfortunately were incompetent or corrupt broken down politicians badly in need of jobs.
the worst of the group was probably impoverished lord cornbury rst cousin of queen anne who was made governor of new york and new jersey in 1702.
he proved to be a drunkard a spendthrift a grafter an embezzler a religious bigot and a vain fool who was accused probably inaccurately of dressing like a woman.
even the best appointees had trouble with the colonial legislatures basically because the royal governor embodied a bothersome transatlantic authority some three thousand miles away.
the colonial assemblies found various ways to assert their authority and independence.
some of them employed the trick of withholding the governors salary unless he yielded to their wishes.
he was normally in need of money otherwise he would not have come to this godforsaken country so the power of the purse usually forced him to terms.
but one governor of north carolina died with his salary eleven years in arrears.
the london government in leaving the colonial governor to the tender mercies of the legislature was guilty of poor administration.
in the interests of simple efciency the british authorities should have arranged to pay him from independent sources.
as events turned out control over the purse by the colonial legislatures led to prolonged bickering which proved to be one of the persistent irritants that generated a spirit of revolt.
administration at the local level was also varied.
county government remained the rule in the plantation south town meeting government predominated in new eng land and a modication of the two developed in the middle colonies.
in the town meeting with parliament nally arranged for separate payment of the governors through the townshend taxes of 1767 but by then the colonists were in such an ugly mood over taxation that this innovation only added fresh fuel to the ames.
governance in the colonies junius the pseudonym for a critic or critics of the british government from 1768 to 1772 published a pointed barb in criticizing one new appointee it was not virginia that wanted a governor but a court favorite that wanted a salary.
its open discussion and open voting direct democracy functioned at its best.
in this unrivaled cradle of selfgovernment americans learned to cherish their privileges and exercise their duties as citizens of the new world commonwealths.
yet the ballot was by no means a birthright.
religious or property qualications for voting with even stiffer qualications for ofceholding existed in all the colonies in 1775.
the privileged upper classes fearful of democratic excesses were unwilling to grant the ballot to every biped of the forest perhaps half of the adult white males were thus disfranchised.
but because of the ease of acquiring land and thus satisfying property requirements the right to vote was not beyond the reach of most industrious and enterprising colonists.
yet somewhat surprisingly eligible voters often did not exercise this precious privilege.
they frequently acquiesced in the leadership of their betters who ran colonial affairs though always reserving the right to vote misbehaving rascals out of ofce.
by 1775 america was not yet a true democracy socially economically or politically.
but it was far more democratic than eng land and the european continent.
colonial institutions were giving freer rein to the democratic ideals of tolerance educational advantages equality of economic opportunity freedom of speech freedom of the press freedom of assembly and representative government.
and these democratic seeds planted in rich soil were to bring forth a lush harvest in later years.
colonial folkways everyday life in the colonies may now seem glamorous especially as reected in antique shops.
but judged by modern standards it was drab and tedious.
for most people the labor was heavy and constant from can see to cant see food was plentiful though the diet could be coarse and monotonous.
americans probably ate more boun tifully especially of meat than any people in the old world.
lazy or sickly was the person whose stomach was empty.
basic comforts now taken for granted were lacking.
churches were not heated at all except for charcoal foot warmers that the women carried.
during the frigid new eng land winters the preaching of hell re may not have seemed altogether unattractive.
drafty homes were poorly heated chiey by inefcient replaces.
there was no running water in the houses no indoor plumbing and probably not a single bathtub in all of colonial america.
candles and whale oil lamps provided faint and ickering illumination.
garbage disposal was primitive.
long snouted hogs customarily ranged the streets to consume refuse while buzzards protected by law apped greedily over tidbits of waste.
amusement was eagerly pursued where time and custom permitted.
the militia assembled periodically for musters which consisted of several days of drilling liberally interspersed with merrymaking and irting.
on the frontier plea sure was often combined with work at house raisings quilting bees husking bees and apple parings.
funerals and weddings every where afforded opportunities for social gatherings which customarily involved the swilling of much strong liquor.
winter sports were common in the north whereas in the south card playing horse racing cockghting and fox hunting were favorite pastimes.
george washington not surprisingly was a superb rider.
in the nonpuritanical south dancing was the rage jigs square dances the virginia reel and the agile washington could swing his fair partner with the best of them.
other diversions beckoned.
lotteries were universally approved even by the clergy and were used to raise money for churches and colleges including harvard.
stage plays became popular in the south but were frowned upon in quaker and puritan colonies and in some places forbidden by law.
many of the new england clergy saw playacting as time consuming and immoral they preferred religious lectures from which their ocks derived much spiritual satisfaction.
holidays were every where celebrated in the american colonies but christmas was frowned upon in new eng land as an offensive reminder of popery yuletide is fooltide was a common puritan sneer.
thanksgiving day came to be a truly american festival for it combined thanks to god with an opportunity for jollication gorging and guzzling.
by the mid eighteenth century britains several north american colonies despite their differences chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 the popular game of billiards most likely brought over by dutch and english settlers billiards provided amusement in local taverns throughout the colonies.
by the nineteenth century americans like the british and french who had long dominated the sport had become obsessed with these games of cues and balls.
the most popular form of pool eight ball was not invented until 1900 revealed some striking similarities.
all were basically eng lish in language and customs and protestant in religion while the widespread presence of other peoples and faiths compelled every colony to cede at least some degree of ethnic and religious toleration.
compared with contemporary europe they all afforded to enterprising individuals unusual opportunities for social mobility.
they all possessed some mea sure of selfgovernment though by no means complete democracy.
communication and transportation among the colo nies were improving.
british north america by 1775 looked like a patchwork quilt each part slightly different but stitched together by common origins common ways of life and common beliefs in toleration economic development and above all self rule.
fatefully all the colonies were also separated from the seat of imperial authority by a vast ocean moat some three thousand miles wide.
these simple facts of shared history culture and geography set the stage for the colonists struggle to unite as an independent people.
chronology college of william and mary founded princeton college founded yale college founded britain vetoes south carolina anti slave trade mea sures smallpox inoculation introduced first edition of franklins poor richards almanack paxton boys march on philadelphia brown college founded rutgers college founded jonathan edwards begins great awakening 1734 1768 regulator protests zenger free press trial in new york dartmouth college founded george whiteeld spreads great awakening varying viewpoints key terms people to know paxton boys 90 regulator movement 90 triangular trade 94 molasses act 96 arminianism 98 great awakening 98 old lights 100 new lights 100 poor richards almanack 102 zenger trial 103 royal colonies 104 proprietary colonies 104 michel guillaume jean de crvecoeur jacobus arminius jonathan edwards george whiteeld john trumbull john singleton copley phillis wheatley john peter zenger colonial america communities of conict or consensus.
t he earliest historians of colonial society portrayed close knit homogeneous and hierarchical communities.
richard bushmans from puritan to yankee 1967 challenged that traditional view when he described colonial new eng land as an expanding opening society.
in this view the colonists gradually lost the religious discipline and social structure of the founding generations as they poured out onto the frontier or sailed the seas in search of fortune and adventure.
rhys isaac viewed the great awakening in the south as similar evidence of the erosion of the social constraints and deference that once held colonial society together.
unbridled religious enthusiasm directed by itinerant preachers both north and south encouraged the sort of quest for personal autonomy that eventually led americans to demand national independence.
other scholars have focused on the negative aspects of this alleged breakdown in the traditional order particularly on the rise of new social inequalities.
social historians like kenneth lockridge have argued that the decline of cohesive communities population pressure on the land and continued dominance of church and parental authority gave rise to a landless class forced to till tenant plots in the countryside or nd work as manual laborers in the cities.
gary nash in the urban crucible 1979 likewise traced the rise of a competitive individualistic social order in colonial cities marking the end of the patronage and paternalism that had once bound communities together.
increasingly nash contended class antagonisms split communities.
the wealthy abandoned their traditional obligations toward the poor for more selsh capitalistic social relations that favored their class peers.
the consequent politicization of the laboring classes helped motivate their participation in the american revolution.
some scholars have disputed that declension undermined colonial communities.
christine heyrman in particular has argued in commerce and culture 1984 that the decline of traditional mores has been overstated religious beliefs and commercial activities coexisted throughout the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
similarly jack greene has suggested that the obsession with the decline of deference has obscured the fact that colonies outside of new england like virginia and maryland actually experienced a consolidation of religious and social authority throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries becoming more hierarchical and paternalistic.
like greene many historians have focused on sectional differences between the colonies and the peculiar nature of social equality and inequality in each.
much of the impetus for this inquiry stems from an issue that has long perplexed students of early america the simultaneous evolution of a rigid racial caste system alongside democratic political institutions.
decades ago when most historians came from yankee stock they resolved the apparent paradox by locating the seeds of democracy in new eng land.
the aggressive independence of the people best expressed by the boisterous town meetings spawned chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 the american obsession with freedom.
on the other hand this view holds the slave societies of the south were hierarchical aristocratic communities under the sway of a few powerful planters.
more recently some historians have attacked this simple dichotomy noting many undemocratic features in colonial new eng land and arguing that while the south may have been the site of tremendous inequality it also produced most of the founding fathers.
washington jefferson and madison the architects of american government with its foundation in liberty all hailed from slaveholding virginia.
in fact nowhere were republican principles stronger than in virginia.
some scholars notably edmund s morgan in american slavery american freedom 1975 consider the willingness of wealthy planters to concede the equality and freedom of all white males a device to ensure racial solidarity and to mute class con ict.
in this view the concurrent emergence of slavery and democracy was no paradox.
white racial solidarity mufed animosity between rich and poor and fostered the devotion to equality among whites that became a hallmark of american democracy.
histori ans of latin america point out that other new world societies like brazil and mexico had far sharper class divisions than the british colonies with lasting consequences for their social integrity and political stability.
few historians still argue that the colonies offered boundless opportunities for inhabitants white or black.
but scholars disagree vigorously over what kinds of inequalities and social tensions most shaped eighteenth century society and contributed to the revolutionary agitation that eventually consumed and transformed colonial america.
even so whether one accepts morgans argument that americans bought their independence with slave labor or those interpretations that point to rising social con ict between whites as the salient characteristic of colonial society on the eve of the revolution the oncecommon assumption that america was a world of equality and consensus no longer reigns undisputed.
yet because ones life chances were still unquestionably better in america than in europe immigrants continued to pour in imbued with high expectations about america as a land of opportunity.
to learn more bernard bailyn the peopling of british north america 1986 richard l bushman from puritan to yankee character and social order in connecticut 1690 1765 1967 king and people in provincial massachusetts 1985 john butler becoming america the revolution before 1776 2000 benjamin franklin autobiography 1868 james henretta the evolution of american society 1700 1815 1973 rhys isaac landon carters uneasy kingdom revolution and rebellion on a virginia plantation 2004 jill lepore new york burning 2005 william moraley the infortunate the voyage and adventures of william moraley edited by susan klepp 1992 marcus rediker between the devil and the deep blue sea merchant seamen pirates and the anglo american maritime world 1700 1750 1987 gordon wood the americanization of benjamin franklin 2004 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the duel for north america 1608 1763 a torch lighted in the forests of america set all europe in conagration.
a s the seventeenth century neared its sunset a titanic struggle was shaping up for mastery of the north american continent.
the contest involved three old world nations eng land france and spain and it unavoidably swept up native american peoples as well.
from 1688 to 1763 four bitter wars convulsed europe.
all four of those con icts were world wars.
they amounted to a death struggle for domination in europe as well as in the new world and they were fought on the waters and soil of two hemispheres.
counting these rst four clashes nine world wars have been waged since 1688.
the american people whether as british subjects or as american citizens proved unable to stay out of a single one of them.
and one of those wars known as the seven years war in europe and sometimes as the french and indian war in america set the stage for americas independence.
after the union of eng land and scotland in 1707 the nations ofcial name became great britain france finds a foothold in canada like eng land and holland france was a latecomer in the scramble for new world real estate and for basically the same reasons.
it was convulsed during the 1500s by foreign wars and domestic strife including the frightful clashes between roman catholics and protestant huguenots.
on st bartholomews day 1572 over ten thousand huguenots men women and children were butchered in cold blood.
a new era dawned in 1598 when the edict of nantes issued by the crown granted limited toleration to french protestants.
religious wars ceased and in the new century france blossomed into the mightiest and most feared nation on the european continent led by a series of brilliant ministers and by the vainglorious king louis xiv.
enthroned as a ve year old boy he reigned for no less than seventy two years 1643 1715 surrounded by a glittering court and scheming this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website 256 chapter 10 1620 1650 1680 1710 1740 1770 1800 1830 1860 year population growth 1620 1860 from its tiny beginnings in the seventeenth century the american population grew rapidly and dramatically so that by 1860 with more than 31 million people the united states was one of the most populous countries in the world.
how did this growing population contribute to the nation s economic transformation.
total immigration during 347 five year periods in thousands 41 1821 1825 1826 1830 1831 1835 1836 1840 year immigration 1821 1840 among the sources of the nations growing population in the nineteenth century was rapidly increasing immigration.
this graph shows how rapidly immigration to the united states increased in the 1820s and 1830s.
the 347 000 immigrants in the second half of the 1830s were almost nine times the number in the first half of the 1820s.
where did most of these new immigrants settle.
immigration choked off by wars in europe and economic crises in america contributed little to the american population in the first three decades of the nineteenth century but rapidly revived beginning in the 1830s.
of the total 1830 population of nearly 13 million the foreign born numbered fewer than 500 000.
but the number of immigrants climbed by 60 000 in 1832 and nearly 80 000 in 1837.
reduced transportation costs and increasing economic opportunities helped stimulate the immigration boom as did deteriorating economic conditions in some areas of europe.
the migrations introduced new groups to the united states.
in particular the number of immigrants arriving from the southern counties of ireland began to grow marking the beginning of a tremendous influx of irish catholics that would continue through the three decades before the civil war.
much of this new european immigration flowed into the rapidly growing cities of the northeast.
but urban growth was a result of substantial internal migration as well.
as the agricultural regions of new england and other areas grew less profitable more and more people picked up stakes and moved some to more promising agricultural regions in the west but many to eastern cities.
in 1790 one person in thirty had lived in a city defined as a community of 8 000 or more in 1820 one in twenty and in 1840 one in twelve.
the rise of new york city was particularly dramatic.
by 1810 it was the largest city in the united states.
that was partly a result of its superior natural harbor.
it was also a result of the erie canal completed in 1825 which gave the city unrivaled access to the interior and of liberal state laws that made the city attractive for both foreign and domestic commerce.
immigration and urban growth 1840 1860 the growth of cities accelerated even more dramatically between 1840 and 1860.
the population of new york for exam rapid ple rose from 312 000 to 805 000.
new urbanization yorks population would have numbered 1 2 million in 1860 if brooklyn which was then a separate municipality had been included in the total.
philadelphia s population grew over the same twenty year pe riod from 220 000 to 565 000 bostons from 93 000 to 177 000.
by 1860 26 percent of the population of the free states was living in towns places of 2 500 people or more or cities 8 000 people or more up from 14 percent in 1840.
that percentage was even higher for the industrializing states americas economic revolution 257 1 all others sources of immigration 1820 1840 this pie chart shows where the large numbers of immigrants portrayed in the previous chart came from.
note the very large number of irish immigrants.
why were the irish among the most likely immigrant groups to become part of the industrial workforce.
of the northeast.
in the south by contrast the increase of urban residents was only from 6 percent in 1840 to 10 percent in 1860.
the booming agricultural economy of the western regions of the nation produced significant urban growth as well.
between 1820 and 1840 communities that had once been small western villages or trading posts became major cities st louis pittsburgh cincinnati louisville.
all of them benefited from strategic positions on the mississippi river or one of its major tributaries.
all of them became centers of the growing carrying trade that connected the farmers of the midwest with new orleans and through it the cities of the northeast.
after 1830 however substantial shipping began from the mississippi river to the great lakes creating major new urban centers that gradually superseded the river ports.
among them were buffalo detroit milwaukee cleveland and most important chicago.
the enlarged urban population was in part a reflection of the growth of the national population as a whole which rose by more than a third from 23 million to over 31 million in the decade of the 1850s alone.
by 1860 the american population was larger than britains and quickly approaching that of france and germany.
urban growth was also a result of the increasing flow of people into cities from the farms of the northeast.
american population density 1820 the population of the united states in 1820 populated really densely states although settlement was growing in the ohio river valley to the west.
note how few areas of the country populated really densely.
around new york city and the area in maryland adjoining baltimore.
what accounts for the density in these areas.
still overwhelmingly rural and agrarian and was still concentrated largely in the original thirteen small area in northeastern massachusetts the area 258 chapter 10 ja n ur rz r broadway in 1836 this image of the area of new york city s broadway in what is now lower manhattan suggests the way in which new york was becoming an increasingly important center of trade and commerce and a densely urban place in the 1830s.
the granger collection new york 1 llibllblil.
p cinc ocean x persons per square mile hj 90 and over 18 89 2 17 fewer than 2 n gulf of mexico q 5 0 mi 500 1000 km american population density 1860 by 1860 the population of the united states had spread more evenly across the entire country.
communities that had once been small trading posts emerged as major cities.
among them were st louis pittsburgh cincinnati and louisville.
in the meantime the erie canal had opened up a large and prosperous market area for new york city.
note the larger and more numerous areas of dense population including many in the midwest.
what accounts for the growing population density in some areas of the south.
americas economic revolution 259 immigration from abroad continued to increase as well.
between 1840 and 1850 more than 1 5 million europeans moved to surging america three times the number of arrivals immigration in the 1830s.
still greater numbers arrived in the 1850s over 2 5 million.
almost half the residents of new york city in the 1850s were recent immigrants.
in st louis chicago and milwaukee the foreign born outnumbered those of native birth.
few immigrants settled in the south.
only 500 000 lived in the slave states in 1860 and a third of these were concentrated in missouri mostly in st louis.
the newcomers came from many different countries and regions england france italy scandinavia poland and holland.
german and but the verwhelming majority came from irish ireland and germany.
in 1850 the irish immigrants constituted approximately 45 percent and the germans over 20 percent of the foreign born in america.
by 1860 there were more than 1 5 million irish born and approximately 1 million german born people in the united states.
in germany the economic dislocations of the industrial revolution had caused widespread poverty and the collapse of the liberal revolution there in 1848 also persuaded many germans to emigrate.
in ireland the oppressiveness and unpopularity of english rule drove many people out.
but even more important was the greatest disaster in irelands history a catastrophic failure of the potato crop and other food crops that caused the devastating potato famine of 1845 1849.
nearly a million people died of starvation and disease.
well over a million more emigrated to the united states.
the great majority of irish immigrants settled in the eastern cities where they swelled the ranks of unskilled labor.
most german immigrants moved on to the northwest where they became farmers or went into business in the western towns.
one reason for the difference was wealth german immigrants generally arrived with at least some money the irish had practically none.
another important reason was gender.
most german immigrants were members of family groups or were single men for whom movement to the agricultural frontier was both possible and attractive.
many irish immigrants were young single women for whom movement west was much less plausible.
they were more likely to stay in the eastern cities where factory and domestic work was available.
the rise of nativism some native born americans welcomed the new immigration which provided a large supply of cheap labor that they believed would help keep wage rates low.
land speculators and others with investments in the sparsely populated west hoped that immigrants would move into the region and help expand the population and thus the market for land and goods there.
political leaders in western states and territories wanted the im migrants to swell their population which would increase the political influence of the region.
wisconsin for example permit ted foreign born residents to become voters as soon as they had declared their intention of seeking citizenship and had resided m the state for a year other western states soon followed its lead.
in eastern cities too urban political organizations eagerly courted immigrant voters hoping to enhance their own political strength.
other americans however viewed the growing foreign born population with alarm.
their fears led to the rise of what is known as nativism a defense of native born people and a hostility to the foreign born usually combined with a desire to stop or slow immigration.
the emerging nativism took many forms.
some of it was a result of simple racism.
many nativists conveniently overlooking their own immigrant heritage argued that the new immigrants were inherently inferior to older stock americans.
some viewed them with the same contempt and prejudice and the same low estimate of their potential abilities with which they viewed african americans and indians.
many nativists avoided racist arguments but argued nevertheless that the newcomers were socially unfit to live alongside people of older stock that they did not bring with them sufficient standards of civilization.
evidence for that they claimed was the wretched urban and sometimes rural slums in which they lived.
many nativists seemed to assume that such wretchedness was something immigrants chose rather than the result of their extreme poverty.
others especially workers complained that because foreigners were willing to work for low wages they were stealing jobs from the native labor force.
protestants observing the success of irish catholics in establishing footholds in urban politics warned that the catholic church and the pope were gaining a foothold in total immigration during 1 748 1841 1845 1846 1850 1851 1855 1856 1860 year immigration 1841 1860 immigration continued to increase in the forty years before the civil war.
this chart illustrates the much higher levels of growth than in the previous forty years.
the low point in this era was the first half of the 1840s in which 430 000 new immigrants entered the united states.
that was significantly higher than the largest number of the previous twenty years.
in the early 1850s the number of immigrants grew to nearly 2 million.
comstock images alamy what events in europe contributed to this increase in immigration.
consider the source imiifiiimiiiimiiiiiiiitiimimmmiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniimimiimimuiiitmiihiiittitmimti lljtlliliilillllillll anti immigration sentiment nativism and anti immigration sentiment and nativism have long been present in the nation as indicated by the first two items below an 1852 broadside announcing publication of the american patriot a nativist newspaper and a cartoon from 1850.
the broadside issues a dire warning already the enemies of our dearest institutions like the foreign spies in the trojan horse of old are within our gates.
they are disgorging themselves upon us at the rate of hundreds of thousands every year.
they aim at nothing short of conquest and supremacy over us fast forward to april 2010 when arizona senate bill 1070 was signed into law by governor jan brewer.
provisions of the law include the right of law enforcement agents to ask for a person s immigration documents during routine stops and a mandate that any illegal immigrant convicted of a crime or misdemeanor be turned over to federal immigration agents.
critics claim that the law is a product of nativism and anti immigration sentiment directed specifically at those of hispanic origin which will result in persecution of both legal and undocumented immigrants.
some of the most insightful critiques of the law have come from political cartoonists.
see two examples on p 261.
american citizens.
pa in thv tr jtn h r p i reman cathuheiim.
foreigners holding nunneriea and the jeauiu.
to u used for the support of foreign f f ra mitllona of dollars yearly.
thepatmoti l f r s l dlr 1 w are burdened with taaea by foreigner we are corrupted m the moral of oar youth.
we are interfered with in our government.
we are forced into eollbdona with other naliona.
m e arc tampered with in our religion v we are injured in our labor.
h e are aaaailrd in our freedom of sjwech.
historicus inc anti immigration sentiment 1850 1852 and germans steal the ballot box the granger collection new york understand analyze and evaluate 1.
what complaints against immigrants are stated in the broadside.
to whom in particular is the american patriot opposed.
why is there such strong opposition to these immigrants.
what does the depiction of the immigrants in the cartoon suggest about them.
what specific grievance against the immigrants is expressed.
reactions to arizona senate bill 1070 2010 activities arouse suspicion by nick anderson nick anderson editorial cartoon used with the permission of nick anderson the washington post writers group and the cartoonist group all rights reserved.
and liberty by daryl cagle source 2010 daryl cagle msnbc and make connections 1.
what attitude toward the arizona law is reflected in these two cartoons.
do the cartoons suggest the same attitude toward the law.
what differences if any do you detect.
how do the cartoonists portray immigrants or those most affected by the arizona law.
in what ways does the nativist sentiment reflected in the nineteenth century documents differ from the attitude toward immigration behind the arizona law.
261 262 chapter 10 native american party american government.
whig politicians were outraged because so many of the newcomers voted democratic.
others complained that the immigrants corrupted politics by selling their votes.
many older stock americans of both parties feared that immigrants would bring new radical ideas into national life.
out of these tensions and prejudices emerged a number of new secret societies created to combat what nativists had come to call the alien menace most of them originated in the northeast.
some later spread to the west and even to the south.
the first of these the native american association began agitating against immigration in 1837.
in 1845 nativists held a convention in philadelphia and formed the native american party unaware that the term they used to describe themselves would one day become a common label for american indians.
many of the nativist groups combined in 1850 to form the supreme order of the star spangled banner.
it endorsed a list of demands that included banning catholics or the foreign born from holding public office more restrictive naturalization laws and literacy tests for voting.
the order adopted a strict code of secrecy which included the secret password used in lodges across the country t know nothing ultimately members of the movement became known as the know nothings gradually the know nothings turned their attention to party politics and after the election of 1852 they created a new political organization that they called the american party.
in the east the new organization scored an immediate and astonishing success in the elections of 1854 the know nothings cast a the know nothings tux t l isaac m.
other northern european 5 cto pre.
i all others 12 the lament of the irish emigrant this poem written by helen selina blackwood and set to music by william r dempster captures the painful time in ireland during the potato famine from the mid 1840s to the early 1850s.
during this period an estimated 1 million people died of starvation and another million emigrated many to the united states.
the protagonist of the poem sings of his grief from having lost his wife and his promise to remember her in the new land.
the library of congress lc usz62 41030 english 16 irish 40 german x 27 sources of immigration 1840 1860 although the extent of immigration increased dramatically in the two decades after 1840 the sources of it remained remarkably stable.
note how closely the distribution of immigrant groups portrayed in this pie chart parallels that in the similar chart for the 1820 1840 period on p 257.
what were some of the differences between what german and irish immigrants did once they arrived in america.
large vote in pennsylvania and new york and won control of the state government in massachusetts.
elsewhere the progress of the know nothings was modest.
western members of the party because of the presence of many german voters in the area found it expedient not to oppose naturalized protestants.
after 1854 the strength of the know nothings declined.
transportation communications and technology just as the industrial revolution needed a growing population it also required an efficient system of transportation and co munications.
such a system was essential in creating regional.
national and ultimately international markets.
progress in this area required not just significant investment but also important advances in technological knowledge.
the canal age from 1790 until the 1820s the so called turnpike era americans had relied largely on roads for internal transportation.
but in a country as large as the united states was becoming roads alone and the mostly horse drawn vehicles that used them were not adequate for the nations expanding needs.
and so in the 1820s and 1830s americans began to turn to other means of transportation as well.
the larger rivers especially the mississippi and the ohio had been important transportation routes for years but most of the traffic on them consisted of flat barges little more than rafts that floated downstream laden with cargo and were broken up at the end of their journeys because they could not navigate back upstream.
to return north shippers had to send goods by land or by agonizingly slow upstream vessels that sometimes took up to four months to travel the length of the mississippi.
these rivers became vastly more important by the 1820s steamboats as steambats grew in number and improved in design.
the new riverboats carried the corn and wheat of northwestern farmers and the cotton and tobacco of southwestern planters to new orleans in a fraction of the time of the old barges.
from new orleans oceangoing americas economic revolution 263 know nothing soap this illustrated advertising label for soap manufactured in boston alludes to the know nothing or nativist movement.
the indians depicted in the foreground and the teepees and camp in the background symbolize the movement s prejudice against foreigners.
the library of congress lc uszcn4 182 x rr 5 b 1 of the enormous engineering challenges faced by the builders of the erie canal.
this picture shows a deep cutting at connected new york to the great lakes via the hudson river.
the granger collection new york the erie canal this lithograph suggests something lockport new york.
the canal was completed in 1825 and 264 chapter 10 ships took the cargoes on to eastern ports.
steamboats also developed a significant passenger traffic and companies built increasingly lavish vessels to compete for this lucrative trade.
but neither the farmers of the west nor the merchants of the east were wholly satisfied with this pattern of trade.
farmers would pay less to transport their goods and eastern consumers would pay less to consume them if they could ship them directly eastward to market rather than by the roundabout river sea route and northeastern merchants too could sell larger quantities of their manufactured goods if they could transport their merchandise more directly and economically to the west.
new highways across the mountains provided a partial solution to the problem.
but the costs of hauling goods overland although lower than before were still too high for anything except the most compact and valuable merchandise.
the thoughts of some merchants and entrepreneurs began therefore to turn to an alternative canals.
a team of four horses could haul one and a half tons of goods eighteen miles a day on the turnpikes.
but the same four horses walking along the towpaths next to canals while yoked to barges could draw a boatload of a hundred tons twenty four miles a day.
by the 1820s the economic advantages of canals had economic advantages of canals generated a booming interest in expanding the water routes to the west.
canal building was too expensive for private enterprise and the job of digging canals fell largely to the states.
the ambitious state governments of the northeast took the lead in constructing them.
new york was the first to act.
it had the natural advantage of a good land route between the hudson river and lake erie through the only real break in the appalachian chain.
but the engineering tasks were still imposing.
the distance was more than 350 miles several times the length of any of the existing canals in america.
the route was interrupted by high ridges and a wilderness of woods.
after a long public debate over whether the scheme was practical canal advocates prevailed when de witt clinton a late but ardent convert to the cause became governor in 1817.
digging began on july 4 1817.
the building of the erie canal was the greatest construction project the united states had ever undertaken.
the canal itself was simple a ditch forty feet wide and four feet deep with the erie towpaths along the banks.
but hundreds of canal difficult cuts and fills some of them enor mous were required to enable the canal to pass through hills and over valleys stone aqueducts were ml antic ocean canals in the northeast 1823 1860 the great success of the erie canal which opened in 182s inspired decad f th s map illustrates.
but none of the new canals had anything like the impact of the original erie canal and thus none of new yn ener9e c buiwin9 many areas lhe uni ed were able to displace it as the nation s leading commercial center.
r 1 y s competitors among them baltimore philadelphia and boston what form of transportation ultimately displaced the canals.
americas economic revolution 265 necessary to carry it across streams and eighty eight locks of heavy masonry with great wooden gates were needed to permit ascents and descents.
the erie canal was not just an engineering triumph but an immediate financial success as well.
it opened in october 1825 amid elaborate ceremonies and celebrations and traffic was soon so heavy that within about seven years tolls had repaid the entire cost of construction.
by providing a route to the great lakes the canal gave new york city direct access to chicago and the growing markets of the west.
new york city could now compete with and increasingly replace new orleans as a destination for agricultural goods particularly wheat and other products of the west and as a source for manufactured goods to be sold in the region.
the system of water transportation and the primacy of new york city extended farther when the states of ohio and indiana inspired by the success of the erie canal provided water connections between lake erie and the ohio river.
these canals helped connect them by an inland water route all the way to new york although it was still necessary to transfer cargoes several times between canal lake and river craft.
one of the immediate results of these new transportation routes was increased white settlement in the northwest because canals made it easier for migrants to make the westward journey and to ship their goods back to eastern markets.
rival cities along the atlantic seaboard took alarm at the prospect of new yorks acquiring so vast a hinterland.
but they had limited success in catching up.
boston its way to the hudson river blocked by the berkshire mountains did not even try to connect itself to the west by canal its hinterland would remain confined largely to new england.
philadelphia and baltimore had the still more formidable allegheny mountains to contend with.
they made a serious effort at canal building nevertheless but with discouraging results.
pennsylvanias effort ended in an expensive failure.
maryland constructed part of the chesapeake and ohio canal beginning in 1828 but completed only the stretch between washington d c and cumberland maryland and thus never crossed the mountains.
in the south richmond and charleston also aspired to build water routes to the ohio valley but never completed them.
in the end canals did not provide a satisfactory route to the west for any of new yorks rivals.
some cities however saw their opportunity in a different and newer means of transportation.
even before the canal age had reached its height the era of the railroad was already beginning.
the early railroads eventually railroads became the primary transportation system for the united states and they remained so until the construction of the interstate highway system in the midtwentieth century.
railroads emerged from a combination of technological and entrepreneurial innovations.
the technological breakthroughs included the invention of tracks the cre technological basis of the ation of steam powered locomotives and railroad the development of railroad cars that could serve as public carriers of passengers and freight.
by 1804 both english and american inventors had experimented with steam engines for propelling land vehicles.
in 1820 john stevens ran a locomotive and cars around a circular track on his new jersey estate.
and in 1825 the stockton and darlington railroad in england opened a short length of track and became the first line to carry general traffic.
american entrepreneurs especially in those northeastern cities that sought better communication with the west quickly grew interested in the english experiment.
the first company to begin actual operations was the baltimore and ohio which opened a thirteen mile stretch of track in 1830.
in new york the mohawk and hudson began running trains along the sixteen miles between schenectady and albany in 1831.
by 1836 more than a thousand miles of track had been laid in eleven states.
but there was not yet a true railroad system.
even the longest of the lines was comparatively short in the 1830s and most of them served simply to connect water routes not to link one railroad to another.
even when two lines did connect the tracks often differed in gauge width so that cars from one line often could not fit onto the tracks of another.
k as a philanthropist and as the founder of the cooper union in new york city was also a successful iron radng on the railroad peter cooper who n later years wa test k own as a p ntanufacturer.
cooper designed and built the first were ocomohve am thumb against a horse drawn railroad car.
this sketch depicts the 266.
chapter 10 schedules were erratic and wrecks were frequent.
but railroads made some important advances in the 1830s and 1840s.
the introduction of heavier iron rails improved the roadbeds.
steam locomotives became more flexible and powerful.
redesigned passenger cars became stabler more comfortable competition between railroads and canals and larger.
railroads and canals were soon competing bitterly.
for a time the chesapeake and ohio canal company blocked the advance of the baltimore and ohio railroad through the narrow gorge of the upper potomac which it controlled and the state of new york prohibited railroads from hauling freight in competition with the erie canal and its branches.
but railroads had so many advantages that when they were able to compete freely with other forms of transportation they almost always prevailed.
the triumph of the rails after 1840 railroads gradually supplanted canals and all other modes of transport.
in 1840 there were 2 818 miles of railroad tracks in the united states by 1850 there were 9 021.
an unparalleled burst of railroad construction followed in the 1850s tripling the amount of trackage in just ten years.
the most comprehensive and efficient system was in the northeast which had twice as much trackage per square mile as the northwest and four times as much as the south.
but the expansion of the rails left no region untouched.
railroads were even reaching west of the mississippi which was spanned at several points by great iron bridges.
one line ran from hannibal to st joseph on the missouri river and another was under construction between st louis and kansas city.
an important change in railroad development was the trend toward the consolidation of short lines into longer lines known as trunk lines.
by 1853 four major railroad consolidation a ll.
trunk lines had crossed the appalachian mountains to connect the northeast with the northwest.
the new york central and the new york and erie gave new york city access to the lake erie ports.
the pennsylvania railroad linked philadelphia and pittsburgh and the baltimore and ohio connected baltimore with the ohio river at wheeling.
from the terminals of these lines other railroads into the interior touched the mississippi river at eight points.
chicago became the rail center of the west served by fifteen lines and more than a hundred daily trains.
the appearance of the great trunk lines tended to divert traffic from the main water routes the erie canal and the mississippi river.
by lessening the dependence of the west on the mississippi the railroads helped weaken further the connection between the northwest and the south.
capital to finance the railroad boom came from many sources.
private american investors provided part of the necessary funding and railroad companies borrowed large sums from abroad.
but local governments states counties cities towns also often contributed capital because they were eager to have railroads serve them.
the railroads obtained substantial additional assistance from the federal government in the form of public land grants.
in 1850 senator stephen a douglas of illinois and other railroad minded politicians persuaded congress to grant federal lands to aid the illinois central which was building from chicago toward the gulf of mexico.
other states and their railroad promoters demanded the same privileges and by 1860 congress had allotted over 30 million acres to eleven states to assist railroad construction.
innovations in communications ano journalism critical to the railroads was an important innovation in communications the magnetic telegraph.
telegraph lines extended along the tracks connecting one station with another and aiding the scheduling and routing of trains.
but the telegraph also permitted instant communication between distant cities tying the nation together as never before.
at the same time it helped reinforce the schism between the north and the south.
like railroads telegraph lines were far more extensive in the north than in the south and they helped similarly to link the north to the northwest and thus to separate the northwest further from the south.
jhe the telegraph burst into american life telegraph in 1844 when samuel f b morse after several years of experimentation succeeded in transmitting from baltimore to washington d c the news of james k polk s nomination for the presidency.
the relatively low cost of constructing wire systems made the morse telegraph system seem the ideal answer to the problems of long distance communication.
by 1860 more than 50 000 miles of wire connected most parts of the country and a year later the pacific telegraph with 3 595 miles of wire opened between new york city and san francisco.
by then nearly all the independent lines had joined in one organization the western union telegraph company.
new forms of journalism also drew communities into a common communications system.
in 1846 richard hoe invented the yhe steam cylinder rotary press making it possi associated t0 print newspapers rapidly and cheaply.
press the development of the telegraph together with the introduction of the rotary press made possible much speedier collection and distribution of news than ever before.
in 1846 newspaper publishers from around the nation formed the associated press to promote cooperative news gathering by wire no longer did they have to depend on the cumbersome exchange of newspapers for out of town reports.
major metropolitan newspapers began to appear in the larger cities of the northeast.
in new york alone there were horace greeleys tribune james gordon bennetts herald henry j raymonds times and others.
all gave serious attention to national and even international events and had substantial circulations beyond the city.
in the long run journalism would become an important unifying factor in american life.
in the 1840s and 1850s however the rise of the new journalism helped to feed sectional discord.
most of the major magazines and newspapers were in americas economic revolution.
267 fh dramatic qrowth in the extent of american railroads in the 1850s.
note the particularly extensive increase in mileage in the railroad growth 1850 1860 these two maps il ustra e e.
in ra road mileaqe in the south.
railroads forged a close economic relationship between the upper midwest upper midwest known at the time as the northwest.
note too the relatively smaller increase and the northeast and weakened the midwest s relationship to the south.
how did he growth railroads in the north contribute to the south s growing sense of insecuritg within the union.
268 chapter 10 the telegraph the telegraph provided rapid communication across the country and eventually across oceans for the first time.
samuel f b morse was one of a number of nineteenth century inventors who helped create the telegraph but morse was the most commercially successful of the rivals hence his greater reputation than others who helped create it.
the library of congress lcuszc4 5040 the north reinforcing the south s sense of subjugation.
fueling southern newspapers tended to have sectional smaller budgets and reported largely local discord news.
few had any impact outside their immediate communities.
the combined circulation of the tribune and the herald exceeded that of all the daily newspapers published in the south put together.
commerce and industry by the middle years of the nineteenth century the united states had developed the beginnings of a modern capitalist impact of the economy and an advanced industrial capac market ity this emerging economy created enor economy mous wealth and changed the face of all areas of the nation.
but it did not of course affect everyone equally.
some classes and regions benefited from the economic development far more than others.
advantages of the corporation the expansion of business 1820 1840 american business grew rapidly in the 1820s and 1830s partly because of population growth and the transportation revolution but also because of the daring imagination and ruthlessness of a new generation of entrepreneurs whose enormous wealth allowed for lifestyles of conspicuous consumption one important change came in the retail distribution of goods.
in the larger cities stores specializing in groceries dry goods hardware and other lines appeared although residents of smaller towns and villages still depended on general stores stores that did not specialize.
in these less populous areas many people did much of their business by barter.
the organization of business was also changing.
individuals or limited partnerships continued to operate most businesses and the dominating figures were still the great merchant capitalists who generally had sole ownership of their enterprises.
in some larger businesses however the individual merchant capitalist was giving way to the corporation.
corporations began to develop particularly rapidly in the 1830s when some legal obstacles to their formation were removed.
previously a corporation could obtain a charter only by a special act of the state legislature a cumbersome process that stifled corporate growth.
by the 1830s however states were beginning to pass general incorporation laws under which a group could secure a charter merely by paying a fee.
the new laws also permitted a system of limited liability which meant that individual stockholders risked losing only the value of their own investment if a corporation should fail and that they were not liable as they had been in the past for the corporation s larger losses.
the rise of these new corporations made possible the accumulation of much greater amounts of capital and hence made possible much larger manufacturing and business enterprises.
investment alone however still provided too little capital to meet the demands of the most ambitious businesses.
such inadequate businesses relied heavily on credit and credit their borrowing often created dangerous instability.
credit mechanisms remained very crude in the early nineteenth century.
the government alone could issue official currency but the official currency consisted only of gold and silver or paper certificates backed literally by gold and silver and there was thus too little of it to support the growing demand for credit.
under pressure from corporate promoters many banks issued large quantities of bank notes unofficial currency that circulated in much the same way that government currency did but was of much less stable value.
but the notes had value only to the degree that the bank could sustain public confidence in their value and some banks issued so many notes that their own reserves could not cover them.
as a result bank failures were frequent and bank deposits were often insecure.
the difficulty of obtaining credit for business investment remained therefore an impediment to economic growth.
americas economic revolution 269 the emergence of the factory the most profound economic development in mid nineteenth century america was the rise of the factory.
before the war of 1812 most of what manufacturing there was in the united states took place within private households or in small individually operated workshops.
men and women built or made products by hand or with simple machines such as hand operated looms.
gradually however improved technology and increasing demand produced a fundamental change.
it came first in the new england textile industry.
there entrepreneurs were beginning to make use of new and larger machines driven by water power that allowed them to bring textile operations together under a single roof.
this factory system as it came to be known spread rapidly in the 1820s and began to make serious inroads into the old home based system of spinning thread and weaving cloth.
factories also penetrated the shoe industry concentrated in eastern massachusetts.
shoes were still largely handmade but manufacturers were beginning to transformation of the shoe employ workers who specialized in one industry or another of the various tasks involved in production.
some factories began producing large numbers of identical shoes in ungraded sizes and without distinction as to rights and lefts.
by the 1830s factory production was spreading from textiles and shoes into other industries and from new england to other areas of the northeast.
between 1840 and 1860 american industry experienced even more dramatic growth as the factory system spread rapidly.
in 1840 the total value of manufactured goods produced in the united states stood at 483 million ten years later the figure had climbed to over 1 billion and in 1860 it reached close to 2 billion.
for the first time the value of manufactured goods was approximately equal to that of agricultural products.
of the approximately 140 000 manufacturing establishments in the country in 1860 74 000 were located in the northeast.
the northeast plants were so large that the region produced more than two thirds of the nations manufactured goods.
of the 1 311 000 workers in man ufacturing in the united states about 938 000 were employed in the mills and factories of new england and the mid atlantic states.
the industrial northeast advances in technology even the most highly developed industries were still immature by later standards.
american cotton manufacturers for example produced goods of coarse grade fine items continued to come from england.
but machine technology advanced more rapidly in the united states in the mid nineteenth century than in any other country in the world.
the american economy was growing so rapidly that the rewards of technological innovation were very great.
change was so rapid in fact that some manufacturers built their new machinery out of wood by the time the wood wore out they reasoned improved u rk n river illustrates the rapid growth of the city in the 1850s as it was becoming the great trading center of the central cargo in chicago this engraving of cargo ships docked in the l icag part of the united states.
f archive photos getty image 270 chapter 10 interchangeable north had tried to interchangeable parts technology would have made the machine obsolete.
by the beginning of the 1830s american technology had become so advanced particularly in textile manufacturing that industrialists in britain and europe were beginning to travel to the united states to learn new techniques instead of the other way around.
the manufacturing of machine tools the tools used to make machinery parts was an important contribution to manufacturing.
the government supported much of the research and development of machine tools often in connection with supplying the military.
for example a government armory in springfield massachusetts developed two important tools the turret lathe used for cutting screws and other metal parts and the universal milling machine which replaced the hand chiseling of complicated parts and dies early in the nineteenth century.
the precision grinding machine which became critical to among other things the construction of sewing machines was designed in the 1850s to help the united states army produce standardized rifle parts.
the federal armories such as those at springfield and harpers ferry virginia became the breeding ground for many technological discoveries and a magnet for craftsmen and factory owners looking for ideas that could be useful to them.
by the 1840s the machine tools used in the factories of the northeast were already better than those in most european factories.
parts which eli whitney and simeon introduce into gun factories now found their way into many industries.
eventually interchangeability would revolutionize watch and clock making the manufacturing of locomotives and steam engines and the making of many farm tools.
it would also help make possible such newer devices as bicycles sewing machines typewriters cash registers and eventually the automobile.
industrialization was also profiting from the introduction of new sources of energy.
coal was replacing wood and water power as fuel for many factories.
the production of coal most of it mined around pittsburgh in western pennsylvania leaped from 50 000 tons in 1820 to 14 million tons in 1860.
the new power source made it possible to locate mills away from running streams and thus permitted industry to expand still more widely.
the great technological advances in american industry owed much to american inventors as the patent records of technological the time make clear in 1830 the num innovations ber of inventions patented was 544 by 1850 the figure had risen to 993 and in 1860 it stood at 4 778.
in 1839 charles goodyear a new england hardware merchant discovered a method of vulcanizing rubber treating it to give it greater strength and elasticity by 1860 his process had found over 500 uses and had helped create a major american rubber industry.
in 1846 elias howe of massachusetts constructed a sewing machine isaac singer made improvements on it and the howe singer machine was soon being used in the manufacture of ready to wear clothing.
for all the technological innovations that characterized the early factory system most american industry remained dependent on the most traditional source of power water.
in the 1820s and 1830s water power remained the most important source of power for manufacturing.
the first important factory towns in new england lawrence lowell and others emerged where they did because of the natural waterfalls that could be channeled to provide power for the mills built along their banks.
this sometimes required factories to close for periods in the winter when rivers were frozen.
that was one reason factory owners began to look for alternative forms of energy that could be used throughout the year which led them by the late 1830s to rely more and more on steam and other transportable forms of energy that could be fueled by wood coal or later petroleum.
men and women at work however sophisticated industrial firms became technologically and administratively manufacturers still relied above all on a supply of labor.
in the 1820s and 1830s factory labor came primarily from the native born population.
after 1840 the growing immigrant population became the most important new source of workers.
recruiting a native workforce recruiting a labor force was not an easy task in the early years of the factory system.
ninety percent of americans in the 1820s still lived and worked on farms and many urban residents were skilled artisans independent crafts workers who owned and managed their own shops as small businessmen they were not likely to flock to factory jobs.
the available unskilled workers were not numerous enough to form a reservoir from which the new industries could draw.
the beginnings of an industrial labor supply came instead from the transformation of american agriculture in the nineteenth century.
the opening of vast fertile new farmlands in transformation the midwest the improvement of trans portation systems the development of new farm machinery all combined to increase food production dramatically.
new farming methods were also less labor intensive than the of american agriculture old ones the number of workers required to produce large crops in the west was much smaller than the number required to produce smaller crops in the less fertile northeast.
no longer did each region have to feed itself entirely from its own farms it could import food from other regions.
as as result farmers and their families began to abandon some of the relatively unprofitable farming areas of the east.
in the northeast especially in new england where poor land had always placed harsh limits on farm productivity rural people began leaving the land to work in the factories.
two systems of recruitment emerged to bring this new labor supply to the expanding textile mills.
one common in the americas economic revolution 271 women at work this wood engraving from an american newspaper of 1859 shows women working in a skirt factory.
aside from the crowdedness of the factory none of the usual primitive and unsafe conditions characteristic of many work environments of the time are shown.
the granger collection new york mid atlantic states especially in such major manufacturing centers as new york city and philadelphia brought whole families from the farm to the mill.
parents tended looms alongside their children some of whom were no more than four or five years old.
the second system common in massachusetts enlisted young women mostly farmers daughters in their late teens and early twenties.
it was known as the lowell or waltham system after the factory towns in which it first emerged.
many of these women worked for several years in the factories saved their wages and returned home to marry and raise children.
others married men they met in the factories or in town and remained part of the industrial world but often stopped working in the mills to take up domestic roles instead.
labor conditions in these early years of the factory system were significantly better than those in english industry better too than they would ultimately become in much of the united states.
the employment of young children created undeniable hardships.
but the misery was not as great as in european factories since working children in america usually remained under the supervision of their parents.
in england by contrast asylum authorities often hired out orphans to factory owners who showed little concern for their welfare and kept them in something close to slavery.
even more different from the european labor pattern was the lowell system which relied heavily indeed almost thf 1 own exclusively on young unmarried women.
system in england and other areas of industrial europe the conditions of work for women were often horrifyingly bad.
a british parliamentary investigation revealed for example that women workers in the coal mines endured unimaginably wretched conditions.
some had to crawl on their hands and knees naked and filthy through cramped narrow tunnels pulling heavy coal carts behind them.
it was little wonder that english visitors to america considered the lowell mills a female paradise by contrast.
the lowell workers lived in clean boardinghouses and dormitories which the factory owners maintained for them.
they were well fed and carefully supervised.
because many new englanders considered the employment of women to be vaguely immoral the factory owners placed great emphasis on maintaining a proper environment for their employees enforcing strict curfews and requiring regular church attendance.
employers quickly dismissed women suspected of immoral conduct.
wages for the lowell workers were generous by the standards of the time.
the women even found time to write and publish a monthly magazine the lowell offering.
yet even these relatively well treated workers often found the transition from farm life to factory work difficult even traumatic.
uprooted from everything familiar forced to live women among strangers in a regimented environ workers ment many women suffered from severe loneliness and disorientation.
still more had difficulty adjusting to the nature of factory work the repetition of fixed tasks hour after hour day after day.
that the women had to labor from sunrise to sunset was not in itself a new experience many of them had worked similarly long days on the farm.
but that they now had to spend those days performing tedious unvarying chores and that their schedules did not change from week to week or season to season made the adjustment to factory work especially painful.
but however uncomfortable women may have found factory work they had few other options.
they were barred from such manual labor as construction or from work as sailors or on the docks.
most of society considered it unthinkable i consider the source lltltlilllllllllllllilllil tiiiiiiiiiifiiitiitihimiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiifiiihimhiii strict rules governed the working life of the young women rules for employees who worked in the textile mills in lowell massachusetts in the first half of the nineteenth century.
equally strict rules regulated their time away from work what little leisure time they enjoyed in the company supervised boardinghouses in which they lived.
the excerpts from the handbook to lowell from 1848 that follow suggest the tight supervision under which the lowell mill girls worked and lived.
many companies today publish employee handbooks that provide information about employee responsibilities including working hours and days and expectations of employee performance.
they may also outline employee benefits such as compensation vacation policies and medical benefits.
some companies issue formal rules of conduct and ethics by which their employees must abide.
the example from the simpson manufacturing company which makes building products provides an interesting comparison to the lowell guidelines.
handbook to lowell 1848 handbook to lowell factory rules i i regulations to be observed by all persons employed in the factories of the hamilton manufacturing company.
the overseers are to be always in their rooms at the starting of the mill and not absent unnecessarily during working hours.
they are to see that all those employed in their rooms are in their places in due season and keep a correct account of their time and work.
they may grant leave of absence to those employed under them when they have spare hands to supply their places and not otherwise except in cases of absolute necessity.
all persons in the employ of the hamilton manufacturing company are to observe the regulations of the room where they are employed.
they are not to be absent from their work without the consent of the overseer except in cases of sickness and then they are to send him word of the cause of their absence.
they are to board in one of the houses of the company and give information at the counting room where they board when they begin or whenever they change their boarding place and are to observe the regulations of their boarding house.
those intending to leave the employment of the company are to give at least two weeks notice thereof to their overseer.
all persons entering into the employment of the company are considered as engaged for twelve months and those who leave sooner or do not comply with all these regulations will not be entitled to a regular discharge.
the company will not employ anyone who is habitually absent from public worship on the sabbath or known to be guilty of immorality.
a physician will attend once in every month at the counting room to vaccinate all who may need it free of expense.
anyone who shall take from the mills or the yard any yarn cloth or other article belonging to the company will be considered guilty of stealing and be liable to prosecution.
payment will be made monthly including board and wages.
the accounts will be made up to the last saturday but one in every month and paid in the course of the following week.
1 these regulations are considered part of the contract with which all persons entering into the hamilton manufacturing company engage to comply.
employment of the boarding house rules regulations for the boarding hoi jsf nfrbo u i a a.
uses or the hamilton manufacturing company.
the tenants of the boarding houses are not to board or permit any part of their hnncoc jk i.
y h tiieir nouses to be occupied by any person except those in the employ of the company without special permission.
they will be considered answerable for any improper conduct in their houses and are not to permit their boarders to have company at unseasonable hours.
the doors must be closed at ten o clock in the evening and no person admitted after that time without some reasonable excuse.
the keepers of the boarding houses must give an account of the number names and employment of their boarders when required and report the names of such as are guilty of any improper conduct or are not in the regular habit of attending public worship.
the buildings and yards about them must be kept clean and in good order and if they are injured otherwise than from ordinary use all necessary repairs will be made and charged to the occupant.
the sidewalks also in front of the houses must be kept clean and free from snow which must be removed from them immediately after it has ceased falling if neglected it will be removed by the company at the expense of the tenant.
it is desirable that the families of those who live in the houses as well as the boarders who have not had the kine pox should be vaccinated which will be done at the expense of the company for such as wish it.
some suitable chamber in the house must be reserved and appropriated for the use of the sick so that others may not be under the necessity of sleeping in the same room.
john avery agent.
source the handbook to lowell 1848 understand analyze and evaluate 1.
what do these rules suggest about the everyday lives of the mill workers.
what do the rules suggest about the companys attitude toward the workers.
do the rules offer any protections to the employees or are they all geared toward benefiting the employer.
why would the company enforce such strict rules.
why would the mill workers accept them.
simpson manufacturing code of conduct 2011 simpson manufacturing code of business conduct and ethics november 1 2011 a simpson manufacturing co inc and its subsidiaries company.
w expert that all of our employees office and directors will treat each other our cnsiomer.
and our suppliers wuh goodwill trust and respect as a company we value honesty high ethical standard and compliance wuh laws rules and regulations the following provides guidance on the application of these prin p compliance with laws rules and regulations 273 accounting requirements follow the accepted rules and controls required by the u s securities commission sec financial accounting standards board fasb and new york stock exchange nys.
or a i lonal information on these rules and controls contact the companys chief financial officer.
equal employment opportunity eeo and discrimination laws it continues to be the practice o t e ompany to employ positive business and personnel practices designed to ensure the full realization of equal emp oyment opportu nity.
further we expect all employees to accomplish their work in a businesslike manner with a concern or t e well being of their co workers.
harassment of any employee by any other employee is prohibited regar ess o t eir working relationship.
any employee who experiences harassment should bring it to the attention of his her supervisor or branch manager.
if the employee is not satisfied that the matter has been appropriately addressed the employee should feel free to contact the president of simpson strong tie or the president of simpson manufacturing.
securities laws all employees of the company are prohibited from transacting in the company s securities for themselves family members friends or any other person while in the possession of material nonpublic inside information concerning the company.
in addition employees must not give inside information to anyone.
inside information is information that the company has not made public about any company activities such as earnings estimates the commencement or outcome of litigation mergers and acquisitions or any other information that could affect the companys fortunes and therefore the price of the stock.
for more detailed information please refer to insider trading policies and procedures available from the companys chief financial officer.
antitrust laws we do not discuss our prices with our competitors.
we do not enter into illegal agreements or engage in illegal practices in restraint of trade.
for additional information on antitrust laws contact the president of simpson strong tie or the president of simpson manufacturing.
anti corruption laws our officers directors employees and agents are expected to comply with all u s and foreign laws while conducting business outside the united states including but not limited to the united states foreign corrupt practices act cfcpa.
health and safety the company seeks to provide a clean safe and healthy place to work.
all employees are expected to observe all safety rules and practices and to follow instructions concerning safe work practices.
record keeping and reporting of information all records and reported information must be accurate complete honest and timely.
conflicts of interest every employee officer and director is expected to make decisions in the best interest of the company and not for personal gain.
a conflict of interest can arise when an employee officer or director takes action or has a personal interest that may make it difficult to perform his or her work for the company objectively and effectively.
this may include outside business interests outside employment outside investments and business relationships with friends or relatives that could cause a conflict of interest.
employees officers and directors should report potential conflicts of interest and are prohibited from taking for themselves personally opportunities that are discovered or may be available through the use of the company s property information or position.
employees are prohibited from accepting meals entertainment travel gratuities merchandise or promotional material that could influence objectivity in making business decisions.
employees are generally prohibited from accepting any such item worth more than 50.
certain business events may require an employees participation in excess of this amount.
these must be approved by their supervisor.
fair dealing employees officers and directors should endeavor to deal fairly with the companys customers and suppliers and each other.
no one should take unfair advantage of anyone else through manipulation or misrepresentation of material facts.
quality products that meet our quality standards are essential to our success.
everyone in the company is responsible for product nnle comzjs ntt c effectiveness of the qualiv management system.
for more information on the company s quality principles please see your supervisor.
protection and proper use of company assets all employees officers and directors should protect the companys assets and ensure their efficient use.
i confidentiality f employees officers and directors should maintain the confidentiality of information entrusted to them by the company j its customers and its vendors and suppliers except when disclosure is authorized or legally mandated.
confidential information includes all non public information.
i encouraging the reporting of any illegal or unethical behavior many areas of the law such as securities and antitrust are very complicated.
the company encourages employees to talk to supervisors managers or other appropriate personnel when in doubt about the best course of action in a particular situation.
additionally employees should report violations of laws rules regulations or the code of business conduct and ethics to the president of the company or the subsidiary or an ombudsman appointed for this purpose.
there will be no retaliation against anyone who presents this type of information in good faith.
waiver of the code of business conduct and ethics there will be no waivers to the code of business conduct and ethics.
copyright 2011 simpson manufacturing co inc all rights reserved.
reprinted by permission.
i make connections 1.
what attitude toward its employees is reflected in simpson manufacturing s code of business conduct and ethics.
is the attitude noticeably different from that evident in the handbook to lowell.
what image of its own status does the simpson manufacturing code present.
what might account for the change in employee employer relations evident in these two documents.
275 276 chapter 10 lowell massachusetts 1832 lowell was one of the leading manufacturing centers of new england in the 1830s and one of the largest textile centers in america.
lowell relied heavily on women workers.
company owners in deference to popular uneasiness about women working outside the home created a paternalistic system of boardinghouses for them where they could be carefully supervised.
this map shows the clusters of boardinghouses adjacent to groups of factories.
note how concentrated the manufacturing center of the town was and how the transportation system rail and water served the factories.
note also the many churches which women workers were usually required to attend.
what happened to this labor system in the 1840s and 1850s.
decline of the lowell system for women to travel the country alone as many men did in search of opportunities.
work in the mills was in many cases the only alternative to returning to farms that could no longer support them.
the paternalistic factory system of lowell did not in any case survive for long.
in the competitive textile market as it developed in the 1830s and 1840s a market prey to the booms and busts that afflicted the american economy as a whole manufacturers found it difficult to maintain the high living standards and the attractive working conditions with which they had begun.
wages declined the hours of work lengthened the conditions of the boardinghouses deteriorated as the buildings decayed and overcrowding increased.
in 1834 mill workers in lowell organized a union the factory girls association which staged a strike to protest a 25 percent wage cut.
two years later the association struck again against a rent increase in the boardinghouses.
both strikes failed and a recession in 1837 virtually destroyed the organization.
eight years later the lowell women led by the militant sarah bagley created the female labor reform association and began demanding a ten hour day some women worked twelve hour shifts and for improvements in conditions in the mills.
the new association not only made demands of management it also turned to state government and asked for legislative investigation of conditions in the mills.
by then however the character of the factory workforce was changing again.
the young women who had worked in the mills were gradually moving into other occu pations teaching or domestic service or they got married.
and textile manufacturers were turning to a less contentious labor supply immigrants.
the immigrant workforce the rapidly increasing supply of immigrant workers after 1840 was a boon to manufacturers and other entrepreneurs.
at last they had access to a source of labor that was both large and inexpensive.
these new workers because of their vast numbers and unfamiliarity with their new country had less leverage than the women they at times displaced.
as a result they often encountered far worse working conditions.
construction americas economic revolution 277 four women weavers this tintype shows four young women employed in the textile factories of lowell massachusetts.
neatly dressed in matching uniforms they conveyed the image the factory managers wanted the public to absorb that women could work in the mills and still be protected from the rough and tumble world of industrialization.
american textile history museum lowell ma.
economic advantages of immigrant labor gangs made up increasingly of irish immigrants performed the heavy unskilled work on turnpikes canals and railroads under often intolerable conditions.
because most of these workers had no marketable skills and because of native prejudice against them they received wages so low and so intermittently since the work was seasonal and uncertain that they generally did not earn enough to support their families in even minimal comfort.
many of them lived in flimsy shanties in grim conditions that endangered the health of their families and reinforced native preju dices toward the shanty irish.
the arrival of irish workers accelerated the deterioration of working conditions in new england.
there was far less social pressure on owners to provide a decent environment for irish workers than there had been for native women.
employers began paying piece rates wages tied to how much a worker produced rather than a daily wage and employed other devices to speed up production and use the labor force more profitably and efficiently.
by the mid 1840s the town of lowell once a model for foreign visitors of enlightened industrial development had become a squalid slum.
similarly miserable working class neighborhoods were emerging in other northeastern cities.
conditions were still not as bad as in most factory towns in england and europe but in almost all industrial areas factories themselves were becoming large noisy unsanitary and often dangerous places to work.
harsh work conditions the average workday was ex tending to twelve often fourteen hours.
wages were declining so that even skilled male workers could hope to earn only from 4 to 10 per week while unskilled laborers were likely to earn only about 1 to 6 per week.
women and children whatever their skills also earned less than most men.
the factory system and the artisan tradition it was not only the mill workers who suffered from the transition to the modern factory system.
it was also the skilled artisans whose trades the factories were displacing.
the artisan tradition was as much a part of the older republican vision of america as the tradition of sturdy independent yeoman farmers.
independent craftsmen considered themselves embodiments of the american ideal they clung to a vision of economic life that was in some ways very different from what the new capitalist class was promoting.
skilled artisans valued their independence they also valued the stability and relative equality within their economic world.
the factory system threatened that world with obsolescence.
de skilling some artisans made successful transitions into small scale industry.
but others found themselves unable to compete with the new factory made goods that sold for a fraction of the artisans prices.
in the face of this competition from industrial capitalists craftsmen began early in the nineteenth century to form organizations workingmen s political parties and the first american labor unions to protect their endangered positions and to resist the new economic order.
as early as the 1790s printers and cordwainers makers of high quality boots and shoes took the lead.
members of other skilled trades carpenters joiners masons plasterers hatters and shipbuilders felt similarly vulnerable.
in such cities as philadelphia baltimore boston and new york the skilled workers of each craft formed societies for mutual aid.
during the 1820s and 1830s the trade unions craft societies began to combine on a citywide basis and set up central organizations known as trade unions.
with the widening of markets the 278 chapter 10 economies of cities were interconnected so workers soon realized there were advantages in joining forces.
they established national unions or federations of local ones.
in 1834 delegates from six cities founded the national trades union and in 1836 the printers and the cordwainers set up their own national craft unions.
this early craft union movement fared poorly.
labor leaders struggled against the handicap of hostile laws and hostile courts.
the common law as interpreted by the courts in the industrial states viewed a combination among workers as an illegal conspiracy.
the panic of 1837 a dramatic financial collapse that produced a severe recession weakened the movement further.
fighting for control commonwealth v hunt workers at all levels of the emerging industrial economy attempted to improve their lots.
they tried with little success to persuade state legislatures to pass laws setting a maximum workday.
two states new hampshire in 1847 and pennsylvania in 1848 passed ten hour laws limiting the workday unless the workers agreed to an express contract calling for more time on the job.
such measures were virtually without impact however because employers could simply require prospective employees to sign the express contract as a condition of hiring.
three states massachusetts new hampshire and pennsylvania passed laws regulating child labor.
but again the results were minimal.
the laws simply limited the workday to ten hours for children unless their parents agreed to something longer employers had little difficulty persuading parents to consent to additional hours.
perhaps the greatest legal victory of industrial workers came in massachusetts in 1842 when the supreme court of the state in commonwealth v hunt declared that unions were lawful organizations and that the strike was a lawful weapon.
other state courts gradually accepted the principles of the massachusetts decision.
on the whole however the union movement of the 1840s and 1850s remained generally ineffective.
some workers were reluctant to think of themselves as members of a permanent laboring force and resisted joining unions.
but even those unions that did manage to recruit significant numbers of industrial workers were usually not large enough or strong enough to stage strikes and even less frequently strong enough to win them.
artisans and skilled workers despite their setbacks in the 1830s had somewhat greater success than did factory workers.
but their unions often had more in common with preindustrial guilds than with modern labor organizations.
in most cases their primary purpose was to protect the favored position of their members in the labor force by restricting admission to the skilled trades.
the organizing effort that had floundered in the 1830s revived impressively in the 1850s.
among the new organizations skilled workers created were the national typographical union founded in 1852 the stone cutters in 1853 the hat finishers in 1854 and the molders and the machinists both in 1859.
virtually all the early craft unions excluded women even though female workers were numerous in almost every industry and craft.
as a result women began es pjjtcctjve tablishing their own protective unions by unions the 1850s often with the support of mid dle class female reformers.
like the male craft unions the female protective unions had little power in dealing with employers.
they did however serve an important role as mutual aid societies for women workers.
despite these persistent efforts at organization and protest the american working class in the 1840s and 1850s was notable for its relatively modest power.
in england workers were becoming a powerful united and often violent economic and political force.
they were creating widespread social turmoil and helping to transform the nations political structure.
in america nothing of the sort happened.
many factors combined to inhibit the growth of effective labor resistance.
among the most important was the flood of immigrant laborers into the country.
the newcomers were usually willing to work for lower wages than native workers.
because they were so numerous manufac turers had little difficulty replacing disgruntled or striking workers with eager immigrants.
ethnic divisions and tensions both between natives and immigrants and among the various immigrant groups themselves often led workers to channel their resentments into internal bickering rather than into their shared grievances against employers.
there was too the sheer strength of the industrial capitalists who had not only economic but also political and social power and could usually triumph over even the most militant challenges.
americas divided working class w i free labor despite the many obstacles and challenges that faced northern workers in the first half of the nineteenth century nothing was more important than the idea of personal freedom.
most workers had hard lives but they were proud of their personal freedoms and considered themselves what some people called the sovereign individual people who could at least in theory make choices and change their lives.
modern notions of freedom are much more robust than those of the early nineteenth century when only a few men and no women were able to vote when workers were sometimes bound to their employers for years when husbands subjugated their wives and when of course millions of african americans were living with almost no freedom.
but even in the early years of american history the belief in the freedom of the individual was strong.
in the north in particular pen sonal liberty was growing exponentially for more and more americans.
by the mid nineteenth century most white americans identified themselves as free individuals no matter what their occupations or means.
americas economic revolution 279 some of the great philosophers of nineteenth century america argued that the independency of the individual required free people to escape from the market economy and find freedom in solitude and the wonders of nature as henry david thoreau tried to do in his famous retreat to live alone in a cabin on walden pond in concord massachusetts see p 318.
but for most americans the opportunities for solitude and communion with nature were slim.
for most northern workers freedom meant the absence of slavery.
it meant that they could leave jobs they did not want move to new areas of the country and seek opportunities to change their lives.
their material circumstances were sometimes far worse than those of many slaves in the south.
still they believed that their lives were better than those who lacked freedom.
and when the great debate over slavery began in the 1840s and 1850s northern laborers however bad their own lots abhorred slavery both because it was the antithesis of freedom and because they feared that slavery threatened the jobs of free laborers.
not only slaves were denied the freedom that most americans valued.
the more than 200 000 free black men and women living in the north and a few in the south remained ineligible to vote and were not considered legal citizens.
many of the free blacks in the north were people who had been skilled crafts workers as slaves and who bought or were given their freedom.
but their lots were in many ways worse than when they were working in the south.
in the northern cities to which many free blacks moved there were many white craftsmen already who saw black workers as rivals.
most free blacks worked in menial jobs and as domestic servants.
patterns of industrial society the industrial revolution made the united states and particularly its more economically developed regions dramatically wealthier almost every year.
it was also making society more unequal and it transformed social relationships and everyday life at almost every level from the workplace to the family.
the rich and the poor the commercial and industrial growth of the united states greatly elevated the average income of the american people.
but this increasing wealth was being distributed highly un equally.
substantial groups of the population shared hardly at all in the economic growth slaves indians landless farmers and many of the unskilled workers on the fringes of the manufacturing system.
but even among the rest of the population disparities of income were marked.
wea t had always been unequally distributed in the united states to be sure.
even in the era of the revolution according to some estimates 45 percent of the wealth was concentrate in increasing inequality in wealth the hands of about 10 percent of the population.
but by the mid nineteenth century that concentration had become far more pronounced.
in boston in 1845 for example 4 percent of the citizens are estimated to have owned more than 65 percent of the wealth in philadelphia in 1860 1 percent of the population possessed more than half the wealth.
among the american people overall in 1860 according to scholarly estimates 5 percent of the families possessed more than 50 percent of the wealth.
there had been wealthy classes in america almost from the beginning of european settlement.
but the extent and character of wealth were changing in response to the commercial revolution of the mid nineteenth century.
merchants and industrialists were accumulating enormous fortunes and because there was now a significant number of rich people living in cities a distinctive culture of wealth began to emerge.
in large cities people of great wealth gathered together in neighborhoods of great opulence.
they founded clubs and developed elaborate social rituals.
they looked increasingly for ways to display their wealth in the great mansions they built the showy carriages in which they rode the lavish household goods they accumulated the clothes they wore the elegant social establishments they patronized.
new york city which had more wealthy families than anywhere else developed a particularly elaborate high society.
poverty in new york city this wood engraving from 1869 shows squatters and their dilapidated shanties.
this group of extremely poor people lived on hilly land near new york city s new central park an urban retreat designed for the city s wealthier classes.
compare the circumstances of these homeless people with those of the aristocrats shown in the picture on page 280.
the granger collection new york 280 chapter 10 central park to affluent new yorkers the construction of the city s great central park was important because it provided them with an elegant setting for their daily carriage rides an activity ostensibly designed to expose the riders to fresh air but that was really an occasion for them to display their finery to their neighbors.
private collection the bridgeman art library new yorkers in 1857 were trying to make the city as important as london and paris.
to achieve this goal they decided to build a great park that would impart elegance to the city and draw new yorkers to the upper part of the city where new real estate was available.
two great landscape architects frederick law olmsted and calvert vaux devel oped a vast part of manhattan displacing people from their houses in the process.
the result was one of the largest parks in america.
olmsted called central park a central park r place or great importance as the first real park in this country designed with hills lakes paths bridges and elegant buildings it began as a place for wealthy new yorkers but very soon became important to almost everyone in the city.
there was also a significant population of genuinely desti the urban tute peop e emerging in the growing urban poor centers of the nation.
these were people who were not merely poor in the sense of having to struggle to sustain themselves most americans were poor in that sense.
they were almost entirely without resources often homeless dependent on charity or crime or both for survival.
some of these paupers as contemporaries called them were recent immigrants who had failed to find work or to adjust to life in the new world.
some were widows and orphans stripped of the family structures that allowed most working class americans to survive.
some were people suffering from alcoholism or mental illness unable to work.
others were victims of native prejudice barred from all but the most menial employment because of race or ethnicity.
the irish were particular victims of such prejudice.
among the worst off were free blacks.
african american communities in antebellum northern cities were small by later standards but most major urban areas had significant african black populations.
some of these african american americans were descendants of families poverty that had lived in the north for generations.
others were former slaves who had escaped from the south or been released by their masters or had bought their freedom some former slaves once free then worked to buy the freedom of relatives left behind.
in material terms at least life was not always much better for them in the north than it had been in slavery.
most had access only to very menial jobs which usually paid too little to allow workers to support their families or educate their children in bad times many had access to no jobs at all.
in most parts of the north blacks could not vote could not attend public schools indeed could not use any of the public services available to white americas economic revolution 281 residents.
still most blacks preferred life in the north how ever arduous to life in the south because it permitted them at least some level of freedom.
social mobility one might expect the contrasts between conspicuous wealth and conspicuous poverty in antebellum america to have encouraged more class conflict than actually occurred.
but a number of factors operated to limit resentments.
for one thing however much the relative economic position of american workers may have been declining the absolute living standard of most laborers was improving.
life in material terms at least was usually better for factory workers than it had been on the farms or in the european societies from which they had migrated.
they ate better they were often better clothed and housed and they had greater access to consumer goods.
there was also a significant amount of mobility within the working class which helped to limit discontent.
oppor social tunities for social mobility for working mobility ones way up the economic ladder were relatively modest.
a few workers did manage to move from poverty to riches by dint of work ingenuity and luck a very small number but enough to support the dreams of those who watched them.
and a much larger number of workers managed to move at least one notch up the ladder for example becoming in the course of a lifetime a skilled rather than an unskilled laborer.
such people could envision their children and grandchildren mov ing up even further.
more common than social mobility was geographic mobility which was even more extensive in the united states than in europe where it was considerable.
america had a huge expanse of uncultivated land in the west much of it open for settlement for the first time in the 1840s and 1850s.
some workers saved money bought land and moved west to farm it.
the historian frederick jackson turner later referred to the availability of western lands as a safety valve for discontent a basic explanation for the relative lack of social conflict in the antebellum united states.
but few urban workers and even fewer poor ones could afford to make such a move or had the expertise to know how to work land even if they could.
much more common was the movement of laborers from one industrial town to another.
restless questing sometimes hopeful sometimes despairing these frequently moving people were often the victims of layoffs looking for better opportunities elsewhere.
their searches may seldom have led to a marked improvement in their circumstances but the rootlessness of this large segment of the workforce one of the most distressed segments made effective organization and protest difficult.
there was finally another safety valve for working class discontent politics.
economic opportunity may not have greatly expanded in the nineteenth century but opportuni ties to participate in politics did.
and to many white ma e working people access to the ballot seemed to offer a way to help guide their society and to feel like a significant part of their communities.
middle class life for all the visibility of the very rich and the very poor in antebellum society the fastest growing group in america was the middle class.
the expansion of the middle class was in part a result of the growth of the industrial economy and the increasing commercial life that accompanied it.
economic development opened many more opportunities for people to rapidly own or wor in businesses to own shops expanding t0 ena8e in trade to enter professions middle class and to administer organizations.
in earlier times when ownership of land had been the only real basis of wealth society had been divided between people with little or no land people europeans generally called peasants and a landed gentry which in europe usually meant an inherited aristocracy.
once commerce and industry became a source of wealth these rigid distinctions broke down and many people who did not own land could become prosperous by providing valuable services to the new economy or by owning capital other than land.
middle class life in the years before the civil war rapidly established itself as the most influential cultural form of urban america.
middle class families lived in solid and often substantial homes which like the wealthy they tended to own.
workers and artisans were increasingly becoming renters a relatively new phenomenon in american cities that spread widely in the early nineteenth century.
middle class women tended to remain in the home and care for the children and the household although increasingly they were also able to hire servants usually young unmarried immigrant women who put in long hours of arduous work for very little money.
one of the aspirations of middle class women in an age when doing the familys laundry could take an entire day was to escape from some of the drudgery of housework.
new household inventions altered and greatly improved the character of life in middle class homes.
perhaps the most important was the invention of the cast household iron stove which began to replace fire inventions places as the principal vehicle for cooking and also as an important source of heat.
these wood or coal burning devices were hot clumsy and dirty by the standards of the twenty first century but compared to the inconvenience and danger of cooking on an open hearth they seemed a great luxury.
stoves gave cooks more control over the preparation of food and allowed them to cook several things at once.
middle class diets were changing rapidly in the antebellum years and not just because of the wider range of cooking the stove made possible.
the expansion and diversification of american agriculture and the ability of farmers to ship goods to urban markets by rail from distant regions greatly 282 chapter 10 increased the variety of food available in cities.
fruits and vegetables were difficult to ship over long distances in an age with little refrigeration but families had access to a greater variety of meats grains and dairy products than they had had in the past.
a few households acquired iceboxes in the years before the civil war and the sight of wagons delivering large chunks of ice to wealthy and middle class homes began to become a familiar part of urban life.
iceboxes allowed their owners to keep fresh meat and dairy products for as long as several days without spoilage.
most families however did not yet have any kind of refrigeration.
preserving food for them meant curing meat with salt and preserving fruits in sugar.
diets were generally much heavier and starchier than they are today and middle class people tended to be considerably stouter than would be fashionable in the twenty first century.
middle class homes came to differentiate themselves from those of workers and artisans in other ways as well.
they growing were more elaborately decorated and fur class nished with household goods made avail distinctions able for the first time through factory production.
houses that had once had bare walls and floors now had carpeting wallpaper and curtains.
the spare simple styles of eighteenth century homes gave way to the much more elaborate even baroque household styles of the early victorian era styles increasingly characterized by crowded even cluttered rooms dark colors lush fabrics and heavy furniture and draperies.
middle class homes also became larger.
it became less common for children to share beds and less common for all family members to sleep in the same room.
parlors and dining rooms separate from the kitchen once a luxury reserved largely for the wealthy became the norm for the middle class as well.
some urban middle class homes had indoor plumbing and indoor toilets by the 1850s a significant advance over the outdoor wells and privies that had been virtually universal only a few years earlier and that remained common among working class people.
the changing family the new industrializing society of the northern regions of the united states produced profound changes in the nature and function of the family.
at the heart of the transformation was the movement of families from farms to urban areas where jobs not land were the most valued commodities.
the patriarchal system of the countryside whereby fathers controlled their childrens futures by controlling the distribution of land to them could not survive the move to a city or town.
sons and daughters were much more likely to leave the family in search of work than they had been in the rural world.
another important change was the shift of income earning work out of the home and into the shop mill or factory.
in the early decades of the nineteenth century and for many years before that the family had been the principal unit of economic activity.
family farms family shops and family industries were the norm throughout most of the united states.
men women and children worked together sharing tasks and jointly earning the income that sustained the family.
but as farming spread to the fertile lands of the northwest and as the size and profitability of farms expanded declining agricultural work became more commer role ofthe cialized.
farm owners in need of labor be family gan to rely less on their families which often were not large enough to satisfy the demand and more on hired male workers.
these farmhands performed many of the tasks that on smaller farms had once been the jobs of the women and children of the family.
as a result farm women tended to work increasingly at domestic tasks cooking sewing gardening and dairying a development that spared them from some heavy labor but that also removed them from the principal income producing activities of the farm.
see chapter 11 for a discussion of family relations in the agrarian south.
in the industrial economy of the rapidly growing cities there was an even more significant decline in the traditional economic function of the family.
the urban household became less important as a center of production.
instead most income earners left home each day to work elsewhere.
a sharp distinction began to emerge between the public world of the work place the world of commerce and industry and the private world of the family.
the world of the family was now more often dominated not by production but by housekeeping child rearing and other primarily domestic concerns.
it was also a world dominated by women.
accompanying and perhaps in part caused by the chang ing economic function of the family was falling birth rates a decline in the birth rate.
in 1800 the average american woman could be expected to give birth to approximately seven children during her childbearing years.
by 1860 the average woman bore five children.
the birth rate fell most quickly in urban areas and among middle class women.
mid nineteenth century americans had access to some birth control devices which undoubtedly contributed in part to the change.
there was also a significant rise in abortions which remained legal in some states until after the civil war and which according to some estimates may have terminated as many as 20 percent of all pregnancies in the 1850s.
but the most important cause of the declining birth rate was changes in sexual behavior including increased abstinence.
women and the cult of domesticity the emerging distinction between the public and private worlds between the workplace and the home led to increasingly sharp distinctions between the social roles of men and women.
those distinctions affected not only factory workers and farmers but members of the growing middle class as well there had of course always been important differences between pastoral america 1848 this painting by the american artist edward hicks suggests the degree to which americans continued to admire the peaceable kingdom the name of another more famous hicks work of the agrarian world.
hicks titled this work an indian summer view of the farm w stock of james c cornell of northampton bucks county pennsylvania.
that took the premium in the agricultural society october the 12 1848.
it portrays the diversified farming of a prosperous pennsylvania family shown here in the foreground with their cattle sheep and workhorses.
in the background stretches a field ready for plowing and another ready for harvesting.
courtesy national gallery of art washington the male and female spheres in american society.
women had long been denied many legal and political rights enjoyed by men within the family the husband and father had traditionally ruled and the wife and mother had generally bowed to his demands and desires.
it had long been practically impossible for most women to obtain divorces although divorces initiated by men were often easier to arrange.
men were also far more likely than women to win custody of children in case of a divorce.
in most states husbands retained almost absolute authority over both the property and persons of their wives.
wife beating was illegal in only a few areas and the law did not acknowledge that rape could occur within marriage.
women traditionally had very little access to the worlds of business or politics.
indeed in most communities custom dictated that women never speak in public before audiences that included men.
most women also had much less access to education than men a situation that survived into the mid nineteenth cen female turv although they were encouraged to education attend school at the elementary level they were strongly discouraged and in most cases effectively barred from pursuing higher education.
oberlin in ohio became the first college in america to accept female students it permitted four to enroll in 1837 despite criticism that coeducation was a rash experiment approximating free love.
oberlin authorities were confident that the mutual influence of the sexes upon each other is decidedly happy in the cultivation of both mind manners but few other institutions shared their views.
coeducation remained extraordinarily rare until long after the civil war and only a very few womens colleges such as mount holyoke founded in massachusetts by mary lyon in 1837 emerged.
no longer income producers middle class women became guardians of the domestic virtues their role as mothers entrusted with the nurturing of the young new roles for seemed more central to the family than it had in the past.
and their role as wives as companions and helpers to their husbands grew more important as well.
middle class women also became more important as consumers.
they learned to place a high value on keeping a clean comfortable and well appointed home on entertaining and on dressing elegantly and stylishly.
family time consider the source a how a family spends time together has been a favorite subject of artists for centuries.
studying where families gather how they celebrate and how they interact and communicate when relaxing or playing is a powerful way to gather information about conventional roles of mothers fathers extended family members children and sometimes servants.
the two images following are separated by 172 years yet strive to tell a similar story about family life.
the first image of a parlor in antebellum philadelphia appeared in godey s lady s book in may 1842.
focused on the lives of better off white women godeys lady s book featured advice columns on fashion manners home decoration and child rearing.
the second by photographer eric audras is set in present day america.
audras who chronicles the joys and struggles of modern families has a keen eye for catching what fascinates parents and children today.
much is communicated in the small details of each composition the style of dress the type of activities being pursued and the spatial organization of family members.
when such details are collectively analyzed they tell us about the evolution of family life in america.
family time 1842 family devotion morning archive photos getty images understand analyze and evaluate 1.
what does this picture tell us about the organization of family life.
what does it suggest about the social roles of different family members.
how does the artist communicate the high importance given to reading by families of this era.
family time 2013 make connections 1.
how would you describe the organization of family life in this image.
how does it compare with the first image.
study the different activities family members are pursuing in this photograph.
how are they different from those in the 1842 image.
what connections can you draw between how families spend time together today and the ways they did in the antebellum era.
onoky getty images rf 1 285 286 chapter 10 nathan hawley and family nathan hawley seated at center in this 1801 painting was typical of many early nineteenth century fathers in having a very large family.
nine members are visible here.
hawley at the time was the warden of the albany county jail in new york and the painting was by william wilkie one of the inmates there.
the painting suggests that hawley was a man of modest but not great means.
his family is fashionably dressed and there are paintings on the walls signs of style and affluence.
but the house is very simply furnished without drapes for the windows with a simple painted floor cloth in the front room and a bare floor in the back.
nathan hawley and family william wilkie ca 1801.
albany new york.
watercolor on paper 15 3 4 x 20 signed lower right william wilkie fecit inscribed in lower margin nathan hawley and family novr.
albany institute of history and art purchase 1951 58 womens separate sphere occupying their own separate sphere some women began to develop a distinctive female culture.
friendships among women became increasingly intense women began to form their own social networks and ultimately to form female clubs and associations that were of great importance to the advancement of various reforms.
a dis tinctive feminine literature began to emerge to meet the demands of middle class women.
there were womens magazines of which the most prominent was godeys lady s book edited after 1837 by sarah hale.
the magazine scrupulously avoided dealing with public controversies or political issues and focused instead on fashions shopping and homemaking advice and other purely domestic concerns.
politics and religion were inappropriate for the magazine hale explained in 1841 because other subjects are more important for our sex and more proper for our sphere by the standards of a later era the increasing isolation of women from the public world seems to be a form of oppression and discrimination.
and it is true that few men considered women fit for business politics or the professions.
on the other hand most middle class men and many middle class omen as well considered the new female sphere a vehicle benefits and costs for expressing special qualities that made women in some ways superior to men.
women were to be the custodians of morality and benevolence just as the home shaped by the influence of women was to be a refuge from the harsh compet itive world of the marketplace.
it was womens responsibility to provide religious and moral instruction to their children and to counterbalance the acquisitive secular impulses of their husbands.
thus the cult of domesticity as some scholars have called it brought both benefits and costs to middle class women.
it allowed them to live lives of greater material comfort than in the past and it placed a higher value on their female virtues and on their roles as wife and mother.
at the same time it left women increasingly detached from the public world with few outlets for their other interests and energies.
the costs of that detachment were particularly clear among unmarried women of the middle class.
by the 1840s the ideology of domesticity had grown so powerful that few genteel women would any longer consider working as many had in the past in shops or mills and few employers would consider hiring them.
but unmarried women nevertheless required some income producing activity.
they had few americas economic revolution 287 choices.
some could become teachers or nurses professions that seemed to call for the same female qualities that made women important within the home and both of those professions began in the 1840s and 1850s to attract significant numbers of women although not until the civil war did females begin to dominate them.
otherwise unmarried females were largely dependent on the generosity of relatives or hired as governesses for children or companions for widows and other women.
middle class people gradually came to consider work by women outside the household to be unseemly something working characteristic of the lower classes as class women indeed it was.
but working class women could not afford to stay home and cultivate the domestic virtues they had to produce income for their families.
they continued to work in factories and mills but under conditions far worse than those that the original more respectable women workers had once enjoyed.
they also frequently found employment in middle class homes.
domestic service became one of the most frequent sources of female employment.
in other words now that production had moved outside the household women who needed to earn money had to move outside their own households to do so.
leisure activities leisure time was scarce for all but the wealthiest americans in the mid nineteenth century.
most people worked long hours.
saturday was a normal working day.
vacations paid or unpaid were rare.
for most people sunday was the only respite from work and was generally reserved for religion and rest.
almost no commercial establishments did any business on sunday and even within the home many families frowned upon playing games or engaging in other kinds of entertainment on the sabbath.
for working class and middle class people therefore holidays took on a special importance.
that was one reason for the strikingly elaborate fourth of july celebrations throughout the country.
the celebrations were not just expressions of patriotism.
they were also a way of enjoying one of the few holidays from work available to virtually all americans.
in rural america where most people still lived the erratic pattern of farmwork gave many people some relief from the relentless work schedules of city residents.
for urban people however leisure was something to be seized in what few free moments they had.
men gravitated to taverns for drinking talking and game playing.
women gathered in one another s homes for conversation or card games or to share work on such household tasks as sewing.
for educated people whose numbers were rapidly expanding reading became one of the prin cipal leisure activities.
newspapers and magazines proliferated rapidly and books novels histories autobiographies biogra phies travelogues and others became staples of affluent homes.
women were particularly avid readers and women writers created a new genre of fiction specifically for females the sentimental novel which often offered idealized visions of womens lives and romances see p 336.
there was also a vigorous culture of public leisure even if many families had to struggle to find time or means to participate in it.
in larger cities theaters were becoming increasingly popular and while some of them catered to particular minstrel social groups others attracted audiences shows crossed class lines.
wealthy people middle class people workers and their families all could sometimes be found watching a performance of shakespeare or a melodrama based on a popular novel or an american myth.
minstrel shows in which white actors mimicked and ridiculed african american culture became increasingly popular see p 420.
public sporting events boxing horse racing cockfighting already becoming controversial and others often attracted considerable crowds.
baseball not yet organized into professional leagues was beginning to attract large crowds when played in city parks or fields on the edges of towns see p 384.
a particularly exciting event in many communities was the arrival of the circus a traveling entertainment with roots in the middle ages that continued to entertain delight and bamboozle chil dren and adults alike.
popular tastes in public spectacle tended toward the bizarre and the fantastic.
most men and women lived in a constricted world of familiar things.
relatively few people traveled and in the absence of film radio television or even much photography they hungered for visions of unusual phenomena that contrasted with their normal experiences.
people going to the theater or the circus or the museum wanted to see things that amazed and even frightened them.
perhaps the most celebrated provider of such experiences p t barnum was t ie famous ard unscrupulous showman p t barnum who opened the american museum in new york city in 1842 not a showcase for art or nature but a great freak show populated by midgets the most famous named tom thumb siamese twins magicians and ventriloquists.
barnum was a genius in publicizing his ventures with garish posters and elaborate newspaper announcements.
only later in the 1870s did he launch the famous circus for which he is still best remembered.
but he was always a pioneer in exploiting public tastes for the wild and exotic.
one of the ways barnum tried to draw visitors to his museum was by engaging lecturers.
he did so because he understood that the lecture was one of the most popular forms of entertainment in nineteenth century america.
men and women flocked in enormous numbers to lyceums churches schools and auditoriums to hear lecturers explain the latest advances in science to describe their visits to exotic places to provide vivid historical narratives or to rail against the evils of alcohol or slavery.
messages of social uplift and reform attracted rapt audiences particularly among women eager for guidance as they adjusted to the often jarring changes in the character of family life in the industrializing world.
288 chapter 10 p t barnum and tom thumb p t barnum circus producer next to a table on which stands charles stratton a little person who came to be known as general tom thumb.
hoping to capitalize on the popular fascination with the bizarre and the fantastic barnum hired stratton at the age of five to tour the country with his circus.
stratton sang danced and impersonated famous people such as napoleon bonaparte.
corbis the agricultural north even in the rapidly urbanizing and industrializing northeast and more so in what nineteenth century americans called the northwest and what americans today call the midwest most people remained tied to the agricultural world.
but agriculture rise of in ustry an commerce was becoming commercial increasingly a part of the new capitalist agriculture economy linked to the national and inter national market.
where agriculture could not compete in this new commercial world it declined.
where k could compete it simultaneously flourished and changed.
truck farming in the northeast northeastern agriculture the story of agriculture in the northeast after 1840 is one of decline and transformation.
the reason for the decline was simple the farmers of the section could no longer compete with the new and richer soil of the northwest.
centers of production were gradually shifting westward for many of the farm goods that had in the past been most important to northeastern agriculture wheat corn grapes cattle sheep and hogs.
some eastern farmers responded to these changes by moving west themselves and establishing new farms.
still others moved to mill towns and became laborers.
some farmers however remained on the land and managed to hold their own.
as the eastern urban centers increased in population many farmers turned to the task of supplying food to nearby cities they raised vegetables truck farming or fruit and sold it in local towns.
new york for example led all other states in apple production.
the rise of cities also stimulated the rise of profitable dairy farming.
approximately half the dairy products of the country were produced in the east most of the rest came from the west where ohio was the leading dairy state.
partly because of the expansion of the dairy industry the northeast led other sections in the production of hay.
new york was the leading hay state in the nation pennsylvania and new england grew large crops as well.
the northeast also exceeded other areas in producing potatoes.
but while agriculture in the region remained an important part of the economy it was steadily becoming less important than the industrial growth of the northeast itself.
as a result the rural population in many parts of the northeast continued to decline.
the old northwest there was some industry in the states of the northwest more than in the south and in the two decades before the civil war the region experienced steady industrial growth.
by 1860 it had 36 785 manufacturing establishments employing 209 909 workers.
there was a flourishing industrial and commercial area along the shore of lake erie with cleveland at its center.
another manufacturing region was in the ohio river valley the meatpacking city of cincinnati was its nucleus.
farther west the rising city of chicago destined to become the great metropolis of the region was emerging as the national center of the agricultural machinery and meatpacking industries.
most of the major industrial activities of the west either served agriculture as in the case of farm machinery or relied on agricultural products as in flour milling meatpacking whiskey distilling and the making of leather goods.
as this su88ests industry was much less important in the northwest than farming.
industrialization in the old northwest americas economic revolution 289 some areas of the northwest were not yet dominated by whites.
indians remained the most numerous inhabitants of much of the upper third of the great lakes states until after the civil war.
in those areas hunting and fishing along with some sedentary agriculture remained the principal economic activities of both whites and native americans.
but the tribes did not become integrated into the new commercialized econ omy that was emerging elsewhere in the northwest.
for the white and occasionally black settlers who populated the lands farther south the northwest was primarily an agricultural region.
its rich and plentiful lands made farming a lucrative and expanding activity there in contrast to the declining agrarian northeast.
thus the typical citizen of the northwest was not an industrial worker or poor marginal farmer but the owner of a reasonably prosperous family farm.
the average size of western farms was 200 acres the majority owned by the people who worked them.
rising farm prices around the world provided a strong incentive for these western farmers to engage in commercial agriculture.
that usually meant concentrating on a single crop for market corn wheat cattle sheep hogs and others.
in the early years of white settlement in the northwest farm prices rose because of the debilitation of european agriculture in the.
aftermath of the napoleonic wars and the specialization growing urban population and hence the growing demand for food of industrializing areas of europe.
the northwest with good water routes on the mississippi for getting its crops to oceangoing vessels prof ited from this international trade.
but industrialization in both the united states and europe provided the greatest boost to agriculture.
with the growth of factories and cities in the northeast the domestic market for farm goods increased dramatically.
the growing national and worldwide demand for farm products resulted in steadily rising farm prices.
for most farmers the 1840s and early 1850s were years of increasing prosperity.
to meet the increasing demand for its farm products residents of the northwest worked strenuously and often frantically to increase their productive capacities.
many tried to take advantage of the large areas of still uncultivated land and to enlarge the area of white settlement during the 1840s.
by 1850 the growing western population was moving into the prairie regions both east and west of the mississippi into areas of indiana michigan illinois missouri iowa and minnesota.
residents cleared forest lands or made use of fields the indians had cleared many years earlier.
and they began to develop a timber industry to make use of the forests that remained.
wheat was the staple crop of the region but other crops corn potatoes and oats and livestock were also important.
the northwest increased production not only by expanding the area of settlement but also by adopting new agricultural technologies that greatly reduced the labor necessary for pro ducing a crop and slowed the exhaustion of new the regions rich soil.
farmers began to cul agricultural tivate new varieties of seed notably technologies mediterranean wheat which was hardier cyrus mccormicks automatic reaper cyrus mccormick invented an automatic reaper in 1831 and had it patented in 1834.
the machine drawn by a horse cut wheat corn or other crops and left it lying in swaths in the field where farmworkers would gather it up and store it in stacks.
the reaper allowed one worker to harvest as much wheat in a day as five could harvest using earlier methods.
hulton archive getty images mccormick reaper than the native type and they imported better breeds of animals such as hogs and sheep from england and spain to take the place of native stock.
most important were improved tools and farm machines which american inventors and manufacturers produced in rapidly increasing numbers.
during the 1840s more efficient grain drills harrows mowers and hay rakes came into wide use.
the cast iron plow an earlier innovation remained popular because its parts could be replaced when broken.
an even better tool appeared in 1847 when john deere established at moline illinois a factory to manufacture steel plows which were more durable than those made of iron.
two new machines heralded a coming revolution in grain production.
the most important was the automatic reaper the invention of cyrus h mccormick of virginia.
the reaper enabled one worker to harvest as much wheat or any other small grain in a day as five could harvest using older methods.
mccormick who had patented his device in 1834 established a factory at chicago in the heart of the grain belt in 1847.
by 1860 more than 100 000 reapers were in use on western farms.
almost as important to the grain grower was the thresher a machine that separated the grain from the wheat stalks.
threshers appeared in large numbers after 1840.
before that farmers generally flailed grain by hand seven bushels a day was a good average for a farm or used farm animals to tread it twenty bushels a day on the average.
a threshing machine such as those manufactured by the jerome i.
case factory in racine wisconsin could thresh twenty five bushels or more in an hour.
the northwest considered itself the most democratic section of the country.
but its democracy was based on a defense of economic freedom and the rights of property a white middle class vision of democracy that was becoming common 290 chapter 10 in many other parts of the country as well.
abraham lincoln an illinois whig voiced the economic opinions of many of the people of his section.
i take it that it is best for all to leave each man free to acquire property as fast as he can said lincoln.
some will get wealthy.
i dont believe in a law to prevent a man from getting rich it would do more harm than good.
when one starts poor as most do in the race of life free society is such that he knows he can better his condition he knows that there is no fixed condition of labor for his whole life rural life life for farming people was very different from life in towns and cities.
it also varied greatly from one farming region to another.
in the more densely populated farm areas east of the appalachians and in the easternmost areas of the northwest farmers were usually part of vibrant communities and made extensive use of the institutions of those communities the churches schools stores and taverns.
as white settlement moved farther west farmers became isolated and had to struggle to find any occasions for contact with people outside their own families.
religion drew farm communities together perhaps more than any other force particularly since so many farm areas were populated by people of common ethnic and therefore religious backgrounds.
town or village churches were popular meeting places for both services and social events most of them dominated by women.
even in areas with no organized churches farm families and importance of religion in rural communities again women in particular gathered in one anothers homes for prayer meetings bible readings and other religious activities.
weddings baptisms and funerals also brought communities together in celebration or mourning.
but religion was only one of many reasons for interaction.
farm people joined together frequently to share tasks that a single family would have difficulty performing on its own festive barn raisings were among the most frequent.
women prepared large suppers while the men worked on the barn and the children played.
large numbers of families also gathered together at harvest time to help bring in crops husk corn or thresh wheat.
women came together to share domestic tasks as well holding bees in which groups of women joined together to make quilts baked goods preserves and other products.
but despite the many social gatherings farm families managed to create they lived in a world with much less contact with popular culture and public social life than people who lived in towns and cities.
rural people often even more than urban ones treasured their links to the outside world letters from relatives and friends in distant places newspapers and magazines from cities they had never seen catalogs advertising merchandise that their local stores never had.
yet many also valued their separation from urban culture and cherished the relative autonomy that farm life gave them.
one reason many rural americans looked back nostalgically on country life once they moved to the city was that they sensed that in the urban world they did not have as much control over the patterns of their daily lives as they had once known.
looking back between the 1820s and the 1850s the american economy experienced the beginnings of an industrial revolution a change so profound that in the united states as in europe it transformed almost every area of life in fundamental ways.
the american industrial revolution was a result of many things population growth through both natural increase and immigration advances in transportation and communication new technologies that spurred the development of factories capable of mass producing goods the recruiting of a large industrial labor force and the creation of corporate bodies capable of managing large enterprises.
the new economy created great wealth expanding the ranks of the wealthy and helping to create a large new middle class.
it also created high levels of inequality which were particularly visible in the growth of a large industrial working class.
culture in the industrializing areas of the north changed too and there were important changes in the structure and behavior of the family in the role of women and in the way people used their leisure time and encountered popular culture.
the changes were often alluring often disorienting and often both.
they helped widen the gap in experience and understanding between the generation of the revolution and the generation of the mid nineteenth century.
they also helped widen the gap between north and south.
key terms people places events commonwealth v hunt 278 cult of domesticity 282 cyrus h mccormick 289 de witt clinton 264 erie canal 264 factory system 269 godeys ladys book 286 know nothings 262 lowell system 271 machine tools 270 nativism 259 p t barnum 287 samuel f b morse 266 sarah bagley 276 trunk lines 266 recall and reflect 1.
what were the political responses to immigration in mid nineteenth century america.
do you see any parallels to responses to immigration today.
why did the rail system supplant the canal system as the nations major transportation network.
how did the industrial workforce change between the 1820s and the 1840s.
what were the effects on american society of changes in the workforce.
how did americas industrial revolution and the factory system change family life and womens social and economic roles.
how did agriculture in the north change as a result of growing industrialization and urbanization.
americas economic revolution 291 significant events 1813 lowell establishes textile mill at waltham massachusetts 1817 1825 erie canal constructed 1830 baltimore and ohio becomes first american railroad to begin operations 1830s major immigration from southern catholic ireland begins first national craft unions founded 1832 cholera plague 1834 cyrus mccormick patents mechanical reaper women workers at lowell mills stage strike 1837 native american association begins efforts to restrict immigration oberlin becomes first american coeducational college mt.
holyoke college for women opens 1842 massachusetts supreme court in commonwealth v hunt declares unions and strikes legal 292 chapter 10 significant events i8 samuel f b morse sends first telegraph message 1845 irish potato famine begins spurring major emigration to america native american party formed to combat immigration female labor reform association established at lowell 1846 rotary press invented making possible rapid printing of newspapers 184.
john deere begins manufacturing steel plows 1848 failed revolution in germany spurs emigration to america 1852 american party know nothings formed 1850 nativists form supreme order of the star spangled banner to oppose immigration n cotton slavery and the old south the old plantation this painting by an unidentified folk artist of the early nineteenth century suggests the importance of music in the lives of plantation slaves in america.
the banjo which the black musician at right is playing was originally an african instrument.
the granger colletion new york looking ahead 1.
how did slavery shape the southern economy and society and how did it make the south different from the north.
what was the myth and what was the reality of white society in the south.
why was the myth so pervasive and widely believed.
how did slaves resist their enslavement.
how successful were their efforts.
what was the response of whites.
setting the stage the south like the north experienced dramatic growth in the middle years of the nineteenth century.
southerners fanned out into the territories of the southwest and established new communities new states and new markets.
the southern agricultural economy grew increasingly productive and prosperous.
trade in such staples as sugar rice tobacco and above all cotton made the south a major force in international commerce and created substantial wealth within the region.
it also tied the south securely emerging capitalist world of the united states and its european trading partners.
yet despite its expansion and growth the south experienced a much less fundamental transformation in these years than did the north.
the south had begun the nineteenth century a primarily agricultural region it remained overwhelmingly agrarian in 1860.
it had begun the century with few important cities and little industry so it remained sixty years later.
in 1800 a plantation system dependent on slave labor had dominated the southern economy by 1860 that system had only strengthened its grip on the region.
as the south grew and expanded it became increasingly unlike the north and increasingly sensitive to what it considered threats to its distinctive way of life.
one historian has written the south grew but it did not develop.
the cotton economy the most important economic development in the mid nineteenth century south was the shift of economic power from the upper south the original southern states along the atlantic coast to the lower south the expanding agricultural regions in the new states of the southwest.
that shift reflected above all the growing dominance of cotton in the southern economy.
the rise of king cotton decline of the tobacco economy much of the upper south continued in the nineteenth century to rely as it always had on the cultivation of tobacco.
but the market for that crop was notoriously unstable.
tobacco prices were subject to frequent depressions including a prolonged one that began in the 1820s and extended into the 1850s.
tobacco also rapidly exhausted the land on which it grew it was difficult for most growers to remain in business in the same place for very long.
by the 1830s therefore many farmers in the old tobacco growing regions of virginia maryland and north carolina were shifting to other crops notably wheat while the center of tobacco cultivation was moving westward into the piedmont area.
the southern regions of the coastal south south carolina georgia and parts of florida continued to rely on the cultivation of rice a more stable and lucrative crop than tobacco.
rice however demanded substantial irrigation and needed an exceptionally long growing season nine months so cultivation of that staple remained restricted to a relatively small area.
sugar growers along the gulf coast similarly enjoyed a reasonably profitable market for their crop.
but sugar cultivation required intensive and debilitating labor and a long growing time.
only relatively wealthy planters could afford to engage in it and they faced major competition from the great sugar plantations of the caribbean.
sugar cultivation therefore did not spread much beyond a small area in southern louisiana and eastern texas.
long staple sea island cotton was another lucrative crop but like rice and sugar it could grow only in a limited area the coastal regions of the southeast.
the decline of the tobacco economy in the upper south and the limits of the sugar rice and long staple cotton economies farther south might have forced the region to shift its attention in short staple the nineteenth century to other nonagricultural pursuits had it not been for cotton the rowing importance of a new product that soon overshadowed all else short staple cotton.
this was a hardier and coarser strain of cotton that could grow successfully in a variety of climates and in a variety of soils.
it was harder to process than the long staple variety its seeds were more difficult to remove from the fiber.
but the 1793 invention of the cotton gin see p 189 had largely solved that problem.
cotton slavery and the old south 295 the new orleans cotton exchange edgar degas the french impressionist painted this scene of cotton traders examining samples in the new orleans cotton exchange in 1873.
by this time the cotton trade was producing less impressive profits than those that had made it the driving force of the booming southern economy of the 1850s.
degas s mother came from a creole family of cotton brokers in new orleans and two of the artist s brothers depicted here reading a newspaper and leaning against a window joined the business in america.
musee des beaux arts pau france giraudon the bridgeman art library demand for cotton was growing rapidly.
the growth of the textile industry in britain in the 1820s and 1830s and in new england in the 1840s and 1850s created an enormous new demand for the crop.
as a result ambitious men and women rapidly moved into previously uncultivated lands many of them newly open to planter settlement after the relocation of the tribes in the 1820s and 1830s to establish new cottongrowing regions.
beginning in the 1820s therefore cotton production spread rapidly.
from the western areas of south carolina and georgia production moved steadily westward first into alabama and mississippi then into northern louisiana texas and arkansas.
by the 1850s cotton had become the linchpin of the southern economy.
in 1820 the south had produced about 500 000 bales of cotton.
by 1850 it was producing nearly 3 million bales a year and by 1860 nearly 5 million.
there were periodic fluctuations in cotton prices resulting generally from overproduction periods of boom frequently gave way to abrupt busts.
but the cotton economy continued to grow even if in fits and starts.
by the time of the civil war cotton constituted nearly two thirds of the total export trade of the united states and was bringing in nearly 200 million a year.
the annual value of the rice crop in contrast was 2 million.
it was little wonder that southern politicians now proclaimed cotton is king cotton production dominated the more recently settled areas of what came to be known as the lower south or in a later era spread of cotton production the deep south.
many people began to call this region the cotton kingdom settlement of the area resembled in some ways the rush of gold seekers to a new strike.
the prospect of tremendous profits from growing cotton drew white settlers to the lower south by the thousands.
some were wealthy planters from the older states who transferred their assets and slaves to a cotton plantation.
most were small slaveholders or slaveless farmers who hoped to move into the planter class.
a similar shift if an involuntary one occurred in the slave population.
between 1820 and 1860 the number of slaves in expansion of alabama leaped from 41 000 to 435 000 slavery and in mississippi from 32 000 to 436 000.
in the same period the increase in virginia was only from 425 000 to 490 000.
between 1840 and 1860 according to some estimates 410 000 slaves moved from the upper south to the cotton states either accompanying masters who were themselves migrating to the southwest or more often sold to planters already there.
indeed the sale of slaves to the southwest became an important economic activity in the upper south and helped the troubled planters of that region compensate for the declining value of their crops.
weak manufacturing sector southern trade and industry in the face of this booming agricultural expansion other forms of economic activity developed slowly in the south.
the business classes of the region the manufacturers and merchants were not unimportant.
there was growing activity in flour milling and in textile and iron manufacturing particularly in the upper south.
the tredegar iron works in richmond for example compared favorably with the best iron mills in the northeast.
but industry remained an insignificant force in comparison with the agricultural economy.
the total value of southern textile manufactures in 1860 was 4 5 million a threefold increase over the value of those goods twenty years 68 chapter 3 in the 1670s the flow began to decline substantially.
a decrease in the english birth rate and an increase in english prosperity reduced the pressures on many men and women who might otherwise have considered emigrating.
after 1700 those who did travel to america as indentured servants generally avoided the southern colonies where working conditions were arduous and prospects for advancement were slim and took advantage of the better opportunities in the mid atlantic colonies especially pennsylvania and new york.
in the chesapeake landowners themselves began to find the indenture system less attractive in part because they were troubled by the instability that former servants created or threatened to create.
that was one reason for the increasing centrality of african slavery in the southern agricultural economy.
birth and death at first new arrivals in most colonies whatever their background or status could anticipate great hardship inadequate food frequent epidemics and in an appalling number of cases early death.
gradually however conditions improved enough to allow the non indian population to begin to expand.
by the end of the seventeenth century the non indian population in the english colonies of north america had grown to over a quarter of a million of whom about 25 percent were africans.
population thousands 2 780 2 148 1 594 1 171 906 629 ij jo m m 466 ifjj f o 332 i ib ifb ill bb8w ll b n 1700 1710 1720 1730 1740 1750 1760 1770 1780 year the non indian population of north america 1700 1780 the european population of north america grew much more dramatically in the eighteenth century than it had in the seventeenth exceeding 2 million by 1770.
but unlike in the seventeenth century the most important reason for this expansion was natural increase children born in america replacing immigration from europe.
why was the natural increase so much larger than in the past.
o s i s c ro ihc south carolina gazette i to be sold on board the georga tiram galley thomas cra ifrattc mailer lying at frank lantfs wharff fundry etiglijh serfsints men and women well recommended amongft whom are tradef men hulbandmen.
indented for four tears.
likcwife iundry englijh provifions and a parcel of new iron bound iizable water calks handy for the ifcji india trade fundry old sails l ome linail carriage guns pipes earthen ware cheefc cflljctcfls the subfcriber intends to depart this p rinvc carlv in the next spring he defires all pcrfons indebted to him or the hon.
benjamin uhitaker efq to difeharge or at leaft fettle their refpetlive debts to his satisfaction oner be fore the firlt day of january next and thofe who have any demands on the subfcriber or the faid mr whitaker arc requelt ed to bring them in that they may be fatisfied by william george freeman.
3 mpo the loy grozrum 0f t jianncl blar kn s huttand tons i a jocky ut itnntm kuckaba arracl inrst nail jad r fond rt zr 7 1 j alt f ttt bt jl unt ana fur houfe 3mi servants for sale the south carolina gazette of charles town ran this advertisement in november 1749 to announce the arrival of a group of english indentures men and women who had accepted passage to america in exchange for their agreement to sell themselves as servants for a fixed period of years once they arrived.
indentures were the most common form of labor in most of the colonies during much of the seventeenth century but by 1749 the system was already beginning to die out replaced in the south by the enslavement of africans.
charleston library society charleston sc altnougu immigration remained for a time the greatest source of population increase marked improvement in the re production rate began in new england and the mid atlantic colonies in the second half of the seventeenth century.
after the 1650s natural increase became the most important source of population.
the new england population more than quadru pled through reproduction alone in the second half of the sev exceptional enteenth century.
this was less a result ol unusual fertility families in new englanc and in other regions were probably equalb fertile than of exceptional longevity indeed the average life spans of residents of some areas of nev england were nearly equal to those of people in the twentietl century.
in the first generation of american born colonists ac cording to one study men who survived infancy lived to ai average age of seventy one women to seventy.
the next gener ations life expectancy declined somewhat to sixty five fo men who survived infancy but remained at least ten year higher than the english equivalent and approximately twenv years higher than life expectancy in the south.
scholars dis longevity in new england agree on the reasons for these remarkable life spans but contributing factors probably included the cool climate and the relatively disease free environment it produced clean water a stark contrast to england in these years and the absence of arge population centers that might breed epidemics.
conditions improved much more slowly in the south.
the mortality rates for whites in the chesapeake region remained markedly higher than those elsewhere until the mid eighteenth century and the mortality rates for africans higher still.
throughout the seventeenth century the average life expectancy for white men in the region was just over forty years and for white women slightly less.
one in four children died in infancy and fully half died before the age of twenty.
the high death rate among adults meant that only about a third of all marriages lasted more than ten years thus those children who survived infancy often lost one or both of their parents before reaching maturity.
widows widowers and orphans formed a substantial proportion of the white population of the chesapeake.
the continuing ravages of disease particularly malaria and the prevalence of salt contaminated water kept the death rate high in the south only after the settlers developed immunity to the local diseases a slow process known as seasoning did life expectancy increase significantly.
population growth was substantial in the region but largely as a result of immigration.
natural increases in the population wherever they occurred were largely a result of a steady improvement in the sex ratio through the seventeenth century.
in the early years of settlement more than three quarters of the white population of the chesapeake consisted of men.
and even in new england which from the beginning had attracted more fami more balanced lies t us more women than the sex ratio southern colonies 60 percent of the white inhabitants in 1650 were male.
gradually however more women began to arrive in the colonies and increasing birth rates which of course produced roughly equal numbers of males and females contributed to shifting the sex ratio as well.
not until well into the eighteenth century did the ratio begin to match that in england where women were a slight majority but by the late seventeenth century the proportion of males to females in all the colonies was becoming more balanced.
medicine in the colonies the very high death rates of women who bore children illustrate the primitive nature of medical knowledge and practice in the colonies.
seventeenth and eighteenth century physicians had little or no understanding of infection and sterilization.
as a result many people died from infections contracted during childbirth or surgery from dirty instruments or dirty hands.
because communities were unaware of bacteria many were plagued with infectious diseases transmitted by garbage or unclean water.
one result of the limited extent of medical knowledge was that it was relatively easy for people to enter the medical field even without professional training.
the biggest beneficiaries of m this ease of access were women who estab midwives themselves in considerable numbers as midwives.
midwives assisted women in childbirth but they also dispensed other medical advice usually urging their society and culture in provincial america 69 patients to use herbs or other natural remedies.
midwives were popular because they were usually friends and neighbors of the people they treated unlike physicians who were few and therefore not often well known to their patients.
male doctors felt threatened by the midwives and struggled continually to drive them from the field although they did not make substantial progress in doing so until the nineteenth century.
midwives and doctors alike practiced medicine on the basis of the prevailing assumptions of their time most of them derived from the theory of humoralism popularized by the second century roman physician galen.
galen argued that the human body was governed by four humors that were lodged in four bodily fluids yellow bile or choler black bile melancholy blood and phlegm.
in a healthy body the four humors existed in balance.
illness represented an imbalance and suggested the need for removing from the body the excesses of whatever fluid was causing the imbalance.
that was the rationale that lay behind the principal medical techniques of the seventeenth century purging expulsion and bleeding.
bleeding was the most extreme of the treatments and the most destructive and it was practiced mostly by male physicians.
midwives preferred more homeopathic treatments and favored pukes and laxatives.
the great majority of early americans however had little contact with physicians or even midwives and sought instead to deal with illness on their own confident that their abilities were equal to those of educated physicians which given the state of medical knowledge was often true.
that seventeenth century medicine rested so much on ideas produced 1 400 years before is evidence of how little support there was for the scientific method which rests on experimentation and observation rather than on inherited faiths in england and america at the time.
bleeding for example had been in use for hundreds of years during which time there had been no evidence that it helped people recover from illness indeed if anyone had chosen to look for it there was considerable evidence that bleeding could do great harm.
but what would seem in later eras to be the simple process of testing scientific assumptions was not yet a common part of western thought.
only with the birth of the enlightenment in the late seventeenth century with its faith in human reason and its belief in the capacity of individuals and societies to create better lives would the scientific method begin to find acceptance.
women and families in the chesapeake the importance of reproduction in the labor scarce society of seventeenth century america had particularly significant effects on women.
the high sex ratio meant that few women remained unmarried for long.
the average european woman in america male authority married for the first time at twenty or undermined twenty one years of age considerably earlier than in england in some areas of the chesapeake the average bride was three to four years younger.
in the chesapeake the most important factor affecting women 70 chapter 3 and families remained until at least the mid eighteenth century the extraordinarily high mortality rate.
under those circumstances the traditional male centered family structure of england by which husbands and fathers exercised firm even dictatorial control over the lives of their wives and children was difficult to maintain.
because so few families remained intact for long rigid patterns of male authority were constantly undermined.
standards of sexual behavior were also more flexible in the south than they were in england or other parts of america.
because of the large numbers of indentured servants who were forbidden to marry until their terms of service expired premarital sexual relationships were frequent.
female servants who became pregnant before the expiration of their terms could expect harsh treatment heavy fines whippings if no one could pay the fines an extra year or two of service added to their contract and the loss of their children after weaning.
bastard children were themselves bound out as indentures at a very early age.
on the other hand a pregnant woman whose term of service expired before the birth of her child or whose partner was able to buy her remaining time from her master might expect to marry quickly.
over a third of chesapeake marriages occurred with the bride already pregnant.
women in the chesapeake could anticipate a life consumed with childbearing.
the average wife became pregnant every two years.
those who lived long enough bore an average of eight children apiece up to five of whom typically died in infancy or early childhood.
since childbirth was one of the most frequent causes of female death relatively few women survived to see all their children grow to maturity.
for all the hardships women encountered in the seventeenth century south they also enjoyed more power and greater independence in the south a greater level of freedom than women in other parts of america or than southern women in later years.
because men were plentiful and women scarce females had considerable latitude in choosing husbands.
they also often had no fathers or other male relatives nearby trying to control their choices.
because women generally married at a much younger age than men they often outlived their husbands even though female life expectancy was somewhat shorter than male.
widows were often left with several children and with responsibility for managing a farm or plantation a circumstance of enormous hardship but one that also gave them significant economic power.
widows seldom remained unmarried for long however.
those who had no grown sons to work the tobacco farms and plantations had particular need for male assistance and marriage was the surest way to secure it.
since many widows married men who were themselves widowers complex combinations of households were frequent.
with numerous stepchildren half brothers and half sisters living together in a single household women often had to play the role of peacemaker a role that may have further enhanced their authority within the family.
by the early eighteenth century the character of the chesapeake population was beginning to change and with it the nature of the typical family.
life expectancy was increasing indentured servitude was in decline and natural repro duction was becoming the principal source revival of r h h patriarchy w ite population increase.
the sex ratio was becoming more equal.
one result of these changes was that life for white people in the region became less perilous and less arduous.
another result was that guide to the seasons among their many purposes almanacs sought to help farmers predict weather and plan for the demands of changing seasons.
this illustration part of a calendar of farming images shows a man and a woman tending fields in july in preparation for the coming harvest.
american antiquarian society society and culture in provincial america 71 women lost some of the power that their small numbers had once given them.
as families grew more stable traditional patterns of male authority revived.
by the mid eighteenth century southern families were becoming highly patriarchal that is dominated by the male head of the family.
women and families in new england in new england where many more immigrants arrived with family members and where death rates declined quickly family structure was much more stable than it was in the chesapeake and hence much more traditional.
because the sex ratio was reasonably balanced most men could expect to marry.
women however remained in the minority and as in the chesapeake they married young began producing children early and continued to do so well into their thirties.
in contrast to the south however northern children were more likely to survive the average family raised six to eight children to maturity and families were more likely to remain intact.
fewer new england women became widows and those who did generally lost their husbands later in life.
hence women were less often cast in roles independent of their husbands.
young women moreover had less control over the conditions of marriage both because there were fewer unmarried men vying for them and because their fathers were more often alive and able to exercise control over their choice of husbands.
among other things increased longevity meant that unlike in the chesapeake where three fourths of all children lost at least one parent before the age of twenty one white parents in new england usually lived to see their children and even their grandchildren grow to maturity.
still the lives of most new england women were nearly as consumed by childbearing and child rearing as those of women in the chesapeake.
even women who lived into their sixties spent the majority of their mature years with young chil dren in the home.
the longer lives in new england also meant that parents continued to control their children far longer than did parents in the south.
although they were less likely than parents in england to arrange marriages for their children few sons and daughters could choose spouses entirely independent of their parents wishes.
men usually depended on their fathers for land generally a prerequisite for beginning families of their own.
women needed dowries from their parents if they were to attract desirable husbands.
stricter parental supervision of children meant too that fewer women became pregnant before marriage than in the south although even in puritan new england the premarital pregnancy rate was not insubstantial as high as 20 percent in some communities.
puritanism placed a high value on the family which was the principal economic and religious unit within every com munity.
at the same time however p p v purinism enforced the dea o need absolute male authority and the assumption of female weakness and inferiority.
women were life spans expected to be modest and submissive.
such popular girls names as prudence patience chastity and comfort suggest something about puritan expectations of female behavior.
a wife was expected to devote herself to serving the needs of her husband and household.
the beginnings of slavery in british america almost from the beginning of european settlement in north america there was a demand for african workers to supplement the always scarce southern labor supply.
the demand grew rapidly once tobacco cultivation became a staple of the chesapeake economy.
but the supply of african laborers was limited during much of the seventeenth century because the atlantic slave trade did not at first serve the english colonies in america.
portuguese slavers who had dominated the trade since the sixteenth century shipped captive men and women from the west coast of africa to the new european colonies in south america and the caribbean.
gradually dutch and french navigators joined the slave trade.
but a substantial commerce in slaves grew up within the americas particularly between the caribbean islands and the southern colonies of british america.
by the late seventeenth century the supply of african workers in north america was becoming plentiful.
as the commerce in slaves grew more extensive and sophisticated it also grew more horrible.
before it ended in the nineteenth century it was responsible for the forced immigration of as many as 11 million africans to the new world.
until the late eighteenth century the number of african immigrants to the middle americas was higher than that of passage europeans.
native african chieftains captured members of enemy tribes in battle tied them together in long lines or coffles and sold them in the flourishing slave marts on the african coast.
then after some haggling on the docks between the european traders and the african suppliers the terrified victims were packed into the dark filthy holds of ships for the horrors of the mid dle passage the journey to america.
for weeks sometimes even months the african prisoners remained chained in the bowels of the slave ships.
conditions varied from one ship to another.
some captains took care to see that their potentially valuable cargo remained reasonably healthy.
others accepted the deaths of numerous africans as inevitable and tried to cram as many as possible into their ships to ensure that enough would survive to yield a profit at journeys end.
on such ships the african prisoners were sometimes packed together in such close quarters that they were unable to stand hardly able to breathe.
some ships supplied them with only minimal food and water.
women were often victims of rape and other sexual abuse.
those who died en route were simply thrown overboard.
upon arrival in the new world slaves were auctioned off to white landowners and transported frightened and bewildered to their new homes.
debating the past the origins of slavery m t t c debate among historians over how and why white americans created a system of slave x h u labor in the seventeenth century and how and why they determined that people of african descent and no others should populate that system has been a long and unusually heated one.
at its center is the question of whether slavery was a result of white racism or whether slavery created racism.
in 1950 oscar and mary handlin published an influential article origins of the southern labor system comparing slavery to other systems of unfreedom in the colonies.
what differentiated slavery from other conditions of servitude they argued was that it was restricted to people of african descent it was permanent and it passed from one generation to the next.
the unique characteristics of slavery the handlins maintained were part of an effort by colonial legislatures to increase the available labor force.
white laborers needed an incentive to come to america black laborers forcibly imported from africa did not.
the distinction between the conditions of white workers and the conditions of black workers was therefore based on legal and economic motives not on racism.
racism emerged to justify slavery it did not cause slavery.
winthrop d jordan was one of a number of historians who later challenged the handlins thesis and argued that white racism more than economic interests produced african slavery.
in white over black 1968 and other works jordan argued that europeans had long viewed people of color and black africans in particular as inferior beings appropriate for serving whites.
those attitudes migrated with white europeans to the new world and white racism shaped the treatment of africans in america and the nature of the slave labor system from the beginning.
george fredrickson echoed jordan s emphasis on the importance of racism as an independent factor reinforcing slavery but unlike jordan he argued that racism did not precede slavery.
the treatment of blacks he wrote engendered a cultural and psycho social racism that after a certain point took on a life of its own racism although the child of slavery not only outlived its parent but grew stronger and more independent after slavery s demise.
in black majority 1974 a study of seventeenth century south carolina peter wood moved the debate away from racism and back toward social and economic conditions.
wood demonstrated that blacks and whites often worked together on relatively equal terms in the early years of settlement.
but as rice cultivation expanded finding white laborers willing to do the arduous work became more difficult.
the forcible importation of african workers and the creation of a system of permanent bondage was a response to a growing demand for labor and to fears among whites that without slavery a black labor force would be difficult to control.
edmund morgan argued similarly in american slavery american freedom 1975 that the southern labor system was at first relatively flexible and later grew more rigid.
in colonial virginia he claimed white settlers did not at first intend to create a system of permanent bondage.
but as the tobacco economy grew and created a high demand for cheap labor white landowners began to feel uneasy about their dependence on a large group of dependent white workers since such workers were difficult to recruit and control.
thus slavery was less a result of racism than of the desire of white landowners to find a reliable and stable labor force.
in the making of new world slavery 1996 robin blackburn argued that while race was a factor in allowing whites to justify to themselves the enslavement of africans the real reasons for slavery were hardheaded economic decisions by ambitious entrepreneurs who realized early on that a slave labor system in the labor intensive agricultural world of the american south and the caribbean was more profitable than a free labor system.
slavery served the interests of a powerful combination of groups planters merchants governments industrialists and consumers.
race may have been a rationale for slavery allowing planters and traders to justify to themselves the terrible human costs of the system.
but the most important reason for the system was not just racism but the pursuit of profit and the success of the system in producing it.
blackburn concluded that slavery was not an antiquated remnant of an older world but rather a recognizably modern labor system that however ugly served the needs of an emerging market economy.
understand analyze and evaluate 1.
what do historians say is the relationship between racism and slavery.
what are the economic arguments put forward by historians to explain the system of slave labor that developed in america.
do these arguments account fully for the development of slavery.
why was slavery more successful than other labor systems in meeting the labor needs of colonial americas market economy.
the first african laborers arrived in english north america before 1620 and as english seamen began to establish themselves in the slave trade the flow of africans to the colonies gradually increased.
but north america was always a much less important market for africans than were other parts of the new world especially the caribbean islands and brazil whose labor intensive sugar economies created an especially large demand for slaves.
less than 5 percent of the africans imported to the americas went directly to the english colonies on the mainland.
most blacks who ended up in what became the united states spent time first in the west indies.
not until the 1670s did traders start importing blacks directly from africa to north america.
even then however the flow remained small for a time mainly because a single group the royal african company of england maintained a monopoly on trade in the mainland colonies and managed as a result to keep prices high and supplies low.
v cunntig uuil m me nistory oi the african population in north america came in the mid 1690s when the roval african companys monopoly was finally broken.
with the trade now opened to english and colonial merchants on a competitive basis prices fell and the number of africans arriving in north america rapidly increased.
by the end of the seventeenth cen growing tury only about one in ten of the residents slave f the colonies were africans about 25 06b population in all.
but because africans were so heavily concentrated in a few southern colo nies they were already beginning to outnumber europeans in some areas.
the high ratio of men to women among african immigrants there were perhaps two males to one female in most areas retarded the natural increase of the black population.
but in the chesapeake at least more new slaves were being born by 1700 than were being imported from africa.
in south carolina by contrast the difficult conditions of rice cultivation and the high death rates of those who worked in the rice fields ensured that the black population would barely be able to sustain itself through natural increase until much later.
between 1700 and 1760 the number of africans in the colonies increased tenfold to about a quarter of a million.
a relatively small number 16 000 in 1763 lived in new england there were slightly more 29 000 in the middle colonies.
the vast majority however continued to live in the south.
by then the flow of free white laborers to that region had all but stopped and africans had become securely established as the basis of the southern workforce.
it was not entirely clear at first that the status of african laborers in america would be fundamentally different from that of white indentured servants.
in the rugged conditions of the seventeenth century south it was often difficult for europeans and africans to maintain strictly separate roles.
in uncertain status some areas south carolina for example where the number of african arrivals swelled more quickly than anywhere else whites and blacks lived and worked together for a time on terms of relative equality.
some blacks were treated much like white hired servants and some were freed after a fixed term of servitude.
a few africans themselves became land owners and some apparently owned slaves of their own.
by the early eighteenth century however a rigid distinction had become established between black and white.
see debating the past above.
masters were contractually obliged to free white servants after a fixed term of servitude.
there was no such necessity to free black workers and the assumption slowly spread that blacks would remain in service permanently.
another incentive for making the status of africans rigid was that the children of slaves provided white landowners with a self perpetuating labor force.
72 73 74 chapter 3 white assumptions about the inferiority of people of color contributed to the growing rigidity of the system.
such assumptions came naturally to the english settlers.
they had already defined themselves as a superior race in their relations with the native indian population and earlier in their relations with the irish.
the idea of subordinating a supposedly inferior race was therefore already established in the english imagination by the time substantial numbers of africans appeared in america.
in the early eighteenth century colonial assemblies began to pass slave codes limiting the rights of blacks in law and ensuring almost absolute authority to white masters.
one factor and slave codes one actor on y determined whether a person was subject to the slave codes color.
in contrast to the colonial societies of spanish america where people of mixed race had a different and higher status than pure africans english america recognized no such distinctions.
any african ancestry was enough to classify a person as black.
changing sources of european immigration by the early eighteenth century the flow of immigrants from england itself began to decline substantiallya result of better economic conditions there and of new government restrictions on emigration in the face of massive depopulation in some regions of the country.
but as english immigration declined french german swiss irish welsh scottish and scandinavian immigration continued and increased.
the earliest although not the most numerous of these non english european immigrants were the french calvinists ar rican slave trade this image is from a plate from british author amelia opie s poem blnru c l opie s poem depicts the life of an african who was captured by slave traders and h f u p b k s ves hld fthe slave ship or how to m t were narked like remn fnr 4 i y e traders and chronicles his journey to the west indies nn i w sugar published in london packed hke cargo for the long ocean voyage.
history archive uig the bridgentan art ubrary n sh p his ed work on the sugar plantations the society and culture in provincial america 75 pennsylvania dutch or huguenots.
a royal proclamation the edict of nantes of 1598 had allowed them to become practically a state within the state in roman catholic france.
in 1685 however the french government revoked the edict.
soon after that huguenots and husuenots besan leaving the country.
about 300 000 left france in the following decades.
a small proportion of them traveled to the english colonies in north america.
many german protestants suffered similarly from the arbitrary religious policies of their rulers and all germans catholics as well as protestants suffered from the devastating wars with king louis xiv of france the sun king.
the rhineland of southwestern germany the area known as the palatinate experienced particular hardships.
because it was close to france its people were particularly exposed to slaughter and ruin at the hands of invaders.
the unusually cold winter of 1708 1709 dealt a final blow to the precarious economy of the region.
more than 12 000 palatinate germans sought refuge in england and approximately 3 000 of them soon found their way to america.
they arrived in new york and tried at first to make homes in the mohawk valley only to be ousted by the powerful landlords of the region.
some of the germans moved farther up the mohawk out of reach of the patroons but most made their way to pennsylvania where they received a warm welcome and where they ultimately became known to english settlers as the pennsylvania dutch a corruption of their own word for german deutsch.
the quaker colony became the most common destination for germans who came to america in growing numbers.
among them were moravians and mennonites with religious views similar in many ways to those of the quakers.
many german protestants went to north carolina as well especially after the founding of new bern in 1710 by a company of 600 german speaking swiss.
the most numerous of the newcomers were the scots irish scottish presbyterians who had settled in northern ireland in the province of ulster in the early seventeenth century.
the ulster colonists had prospered for a time despite the barren soil and the constant never wholly successful struggle to suppress the catholic natives.
but in the first years of the eighteenth century parliament prohibited ulster from exporting to england the woolens and other products that had become the basis of the northern irish economy at the same time the english government virtually outlawed the practice of the presbyterian religion the slave ship spookes the british slave ship brookes provided this plan of its stowage of slaves to conform to 1798 legislation from parliament.
it illustrates vividly the terrible conditions under which slaves were shipped from africa to the americas human beings squeezed into every available space like cargo for the long dangerous passage during which many africans died.
library of congress 76.
chapter 3 population thousands 575 1620 1640 1660 1680 1700 1720 1740 1760 1780 year the african population of the british colonies 1620 1780 from tiny beginnings in the seventeenth century the african population of the british colonies grew rapidly in the eighteenth century.
the growth of slavery was a result of both supply a readily available population of african workers in the caribbean islands and demand the growth of tobacco rice and cotton cultivation in larger areas of the south.
the slave population in the colonies also increased naturally in this period at a far greater rate than in the past largely because living conditions for african workers improved.
why did slaveowners invest in better conditions for their slaves.
in ulster and insisted on conformity with the anglican church.
after 1710 moreover the long term leases of many scots irish expired english landlords doubled and even tripled the rents.
thousands of tenants embarked for america.
often coldly received at the colonial ports many of the scots irish pushed out to the edges of european settlement.
there they occupied land without much regard for who actually claimed to own it whether absentee whites indians or the colonial governments.
they were as ruthless in their displacement and the pennsylvania dutch this folk art painted dish illustrates the traditional dress of the pennsylvania dutch.
the pennsylvania dutch were in fact german immigrants known to their neighbors as dutch because that was how their native word for their nationality deutsch sounded to most english speakers.
the granger collection new york scots irish suppression of the indians as they had been with the native irish catholics.
immigrants from scotland and southern ireland added other elements to the colonial population in the eighteenth century.
scottish highlanders some of them roman catholics who had been defeated in rebellions in 1715 and 1745 immigrated into several colonies north carolina above all.
presbyterian lowlanders faced in scotland with high rents in the country and unemployment in the towns left for america in large numbers shortly before the american revolution joining earlier groups of scots who had arrived in the late seventeenth century.
they became a significant influence in new jersey and pennsylvania and helped establish presbyterianism as an important religion in those colonies.
the catholic irish migrated steadily over a long period and by the time of the revolution they were almost as numerous as the scots although less conspicuous.
many of them had by then abandoned their roman catholic religion and with it much of their ethnic identity.
continuing immigration and natural increase contributed to a rapid population growth in the colonies in the eighteenth century.
in 1700 the non indian population of the colonies totaled less than 250 000 by 1775 it was over 2 million a nearly tenfold increase.
throughout the colonial period the non indian population nearly doubled every twenty five years.
the colonial economies to those who remained in europe and even to some who settled in north america the english colonies often appeared so small and isolated as to seem virtually at the end of the world.
but from the beginning almost all the english colonies were commercial ventures and were tied in crucial ways to other economies.
they developed substantial trade with the native population of north america with the french settlers to the north and to a lesser extent with spanish colonists to the south and west.
and over time they developed an even more substantial trade within the growing atlantic economy of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries of which they became a critical part.
american colonists engaged in a wide range of economic pursuits.
but except for a few areas in the west where the small white society and culture in provincial america 77 populations subsisted largely on the fur and skin trade with the indians farming dominated all areas of european and african settlement throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
some farmers engaged in simple subsistence agriculture but whenever possible american farmers attempted to grow crops for the local intercolonial and export markets.
the southern economy in the chesapeake region tobacco quickly became the basis of the economy.
a strong european demand for the crop enabled tobacco sme planters to row enormously wealthy.
and at times allowed the region as a whole to prosper.
but production frequently exceeded demand and as a result the price of tobacco periodically suffered severe declines.
the first major bust in the tobacco economy occurred in 1640 and the boom and bust pattern continued throughout the colonial period and beyond.
growing more tobacco only made the problem of overproduction worse but chesapeake farmers never understood that.
those planters who could afford to do so expanded their landholdings enlarged their fields and acquired additional laborers.
after 1700 tobacco plantations employing several dozen slaves or more were common.
the staple of the economies of south carolina and georgia was rice.
by building dams and dikes along the many tidal rivers farmers managed to create rice paddies that could be flooded and then drained.
rice cultivation was arduous work performed standing knee deep in the mud of malarial swamps under a blazing sun surrounded by insects.
it was a task so difficult and unhealthful that white laborers generally refused to immigrant groups in colonial america 1760 even though the entire atlantic seaboard of what is now the united states had become a series of british colonies by 1760 the population consisted of people from many nations.
as this map reveals english settlers dominated most of the regions of north america.
but note the large areas of german settlement in the western chesapeake and pennsylvania the swath of dutch settlement in new york and new jersey the scots irish areas in the western regions of the south and the large areas in which africans were becoming the majority of the population even if subjugated by the white minority.
what aspects of the history of these colonies help explain their ethnic composition.
atlantic ocean sout carols wilmington g apeof charles town savannah immigrant groups english scots irish german dutch i african 200 400 km 78 chapter 3 perform it.
as a result planters in south carolina and georgia were even more dependent than those elsewhere on african slaves.
it was not only because africans could be compelled to perform difficult work that whites found them so valuable.
it was also because they were much better at it.
they showed from the beginning a greater resistance to malaria and other local diseases although the impact of disease on african workers was by no means inconsiderable.
and they proved more adept at the basic agricultural tasks required in part because some of them had come from rice producing regions of west africa.
in the early 1740s another staple crop contributed to the south carolina economy indigo.
eliza lucas a young antiguan woman who managed her family s north american plantations experimented with cultivating the west indian plant which was the source of a blue dye in great demand in europe on the mainland.
she discovered that it could grow on the high ground indigo out carolina which was unsuitable for rice planting and that its harvest came while the rice was still growing.
indigo became an important complement to rice and a popular import in england.
because of the souths early dependence on large scale cash crops the southern colonies developed less of a commercial or industrial economy than the colonies of the north.
the trading in tobacco and rice was handled largely by merchants based in london and later in the northern colonies.
few cities of more than modest size developed in the south.
northern economic and technological life more diverse economy in the north in the north agriculture was the single most important part of the economy.
but unlike in the south the northern colonies were less dominated by farming.
the northern economy was more diverse than the economy in the south in part because conditions for farming were less favorable there.
in northern new england in particular colder weather and hard rocky soil made it difficult for colonists to develop the kind of large scale commercial farming system that southerners were creating.
conditions for agriculture were better in southern new england and the middle colonies where the soil was fertile and the weather more temperate.
new york pennsylvania and the connecticut river valley were the chief suppliers of wheat to much of new england and to parts of the south.
even there however a substantial commercial economy emerged alongside the agricultural one.
r r k th sl 1 coliclilorooy i almost every colonist engaged in a certain amount of industry at home.
occasionally these home industries provided families with surplus goods they could trade or sell.
beyond these domestic efforts craftsmen and artisans established themselves in colonial towns as cobblers blacksmiths rifle makers cabinetmakers silversmiths and printers.
in some areas entrepreneurs harnessed water power to run small mills for grinding grain processing cloth or milling lumber.
and in several places large scale shipbuilding operations began to flourish.
the first effort to establish a significant metals industry in the colonies was an ironworks established in saugus massachusetts in the 1640s after iron ore deposits had been saugus discovered in the region.
iron technology ironworks was already advancing rapidly in england and the colonists attempted to transfer those skills to america.
the saugus works used water power to drive a bellows which controlled the heat in a charcoal furnace.
as the ore melted it trickled down into molds or was society and culture in provincial america 79 taken in the form of simple sow bars to a forge to be shaped into such marketable objects as plows hoes axes pots and other tools.
the saugus works was a technological success indeed it could boast technological capabilities equal to those of any ironworks in europe at the time.
but it was a financial failure.
it began operations in 1646 in 1668 its financial problems forced it to close its doors.
metalworks however gradually became an important part of the colonial economy.
the largest industrial enterprise anywhere in english north america was the ironworks of the german ironmaster peter hasenclever in northern new jersey.
founded in 1764 with british capital it employed several hundred laborers many of them imported from ironworks in germany.
there were other smaller ironmaking enterprises in every northern colony with particular concentrations in massachusetts new jersey and pennsylvania and there were ironworks as well in several southern colonies.
even so these and other growing industries did not become the basis for the kind of explosive industrial growth that great britain commerce in new england this late eighteenth century painting of the home wharves countinghouse and fleet of a prosperous new england.
commerce was expanding even in such relatively small places as duxbury massachusetts.
the owner joshua winsor was is erman gives some in i painting evidently an effort to celebrate winsors great material success and record it for posterity was by his active in the mackerel and cod risning y h r r p l cernon idi onni pqu son in law dr rufus hathaway.
i collection american folk art museum new york.
promised gift of ralph esmenan.
pl 2001 53 80 chapter 3 experienced in the late eighteenth century in part because english parliamentary regulations such as the iron act of 1750 restricted metal processing in the colonies.
similar prohibitions limited the manufacture of woolens hats and other goods.
but the biggest obstacles to industrialization in america were an inadequate labor supply a small domestic market and inadequate transportation facilities and energy supplies.
more important than manufacturing were industries that exploited the natural resources of the continent.
by the mid seventeenth century the flourishing fur trade of earlier years was in decline.
taking its place were lumbering mining and fishing particularly in the waters off the new england coast.
these industries provided commodities that could be exported to england in exchange for manufactured goods.
and they helped produce the most distinctive feature of the northern economy a thriving commercial class.
extractive industries the extent and limits of technology despite the technological progress that was occurring in some parts of america in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries much of colonial society was conspicuously lacking in even very basic technologies.
up to half the farmers in the colonies were so primitively equipped that they did not even own a plow.
substantial numbers of households owned no pots or kettles for cooking.
and only about half the households in the colonies owned guns or rifles with rural people almost as unlikely to have firearms as urban people.
the relatively low levels of ownership of these and other elementary tools was not because such things were difficult to make but because most americans remained too poor or too isolated to be able to afford them.
many households had few if any candles because they were unable to afford candle molds or tallow wax or because they had no access to commercially produced candles.
in the early eighteenth century very few farmers owned wagons.
most made do with two wheeled carts which could be hauled by hand or by horse around the farm but which were not very efficient for transporting crops to market.
the most commonly owned tool on american farms was the axe which suggests how much time most farmers had to spend clearing land.
but throughout the colonies the ability of people to acquire manufactured implements lagged far behind the capacity to produce them.
even so few colonists were self sufficient in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
the popular image of early american households is of people who had little myth of self connection t0 the market who grew their sufficiency own food made their own clothes and bought little from anyone else.
in fact relatively few colonial families owned spinning wheels or looms which suggests that most people purchased whatever yarn and cloth they needed or could afford from merchants.
most farmers who grew grain took it to centralized facilities for processing.
shortage of currency the rise of colonial commerce perhaps the most remarkable feature of colonial commerce in the seventeenth century was that it was able to survive.
american merchants faced such bewildering and intimidating obstacles and lacked so many basic institutions of trade they managed to stay afloat only with great difficulty.
there was first no commonly accepted medium of exchange.
the colonies had almost no specie gold or silver coins.
they experimented at times with different forms of paper currency tobacco certificates for example which were secured by tobacco stored in warehouses or land certificates secured by property.
such paper was not however acceptable as payment for any goods from abroad and it was in any case ultimately outlawed by parliament.
for many years colonial merchants had to rely on a haphazard barter system or on crude money substitutes such as beaver skins.
a second obstacle was the near impossibility of imposing order on their trade.
in the fragmented jerry built commercial world of colonial america no merchants could be certain that the goods they sold would be produced in sufficient quantity nor could they be certain of finding adequate markets for them.
few channels of information existed to inform traders of what they could expect in foreign ports vessels sometimes stayed at sea for several years journeying from one market to another trading one commodity for another attempting to find some way to turn a profit.
engaged in this chaotic commerce moreover were an enormous number of small fiercely competitive companies which made the problem of stabilizing the system even more acute.
despite these and other problems commerce in the colonies not only survived but grew.
there was an elaborate coastal trade through which the colonies did business with one another and sold goods to the west indies among them rum agricultural products meat and fish.
the mainland colonies triangular bought sugar molasses and slaves from the trade caribbean markets in return.
there was also an expanding transatlantic trade which linked the north american colonies in an intricate network of commerce with england continental europe and the west coast of africa.
this commerce has often been described somewhat inaccurately as the triangular trade suggesting a neat process merchants carried rum and other goods from new england to africa exchanged their merchandise for slaves whom they then transported to the west indies hence the term middle passage for the dreaded journey it was the second of the three legs of the voyage and then exchanged the slaves for sugar and molasses which they shipped back to new england to be distilled into rum.
in fact the system was almost never so simple.
the triangular trade in rum slaves and sugar was in fact part of a maze of highly diverse trade routes between the northern and southern colonies america and england america and africa the west indies and europe and other combinations.
out of this complex and highly risky trade emerged a group of adventurous entrepreneurs who by the mid eighteenth society and culture in provincial america 81 the triangular trade this map illustrates the complex pattern of trade that fueled the colonial american economy in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
a simple explanation of this trade is that the american colonies exported raw materials agricultural products furs and others to britain and europe and imported manufactured goods in return.
but while that explanation is accurate it is not complete largely because the atlantic trade was not a simple exchange between america and europe but rather a complex network of exchanges involving the caribbean africa and the mediterranean.
note the important exchanges between the north american mainland and the caribbean islands the important trade between the american colonies and africa and the wide range of european and mediterranean markets in which americans were active.
not shown on this map but also very important to colonial commerce was a large coastal trade among the various regions of british north america.
why did the major ports of trade emerge almost entirely in the northern colonies.
century were beginning to constitute a distinct merchant class.
concentrated in the port cities of the north above all boston new york and philadelphia they enjoyed protection p from foreign competition within the merchant english colonies the british navigation class acts had excluded all non british ships from the colonial carrying trade.
they had access to a market in england for such american products as furs timber and ships.
that did not however satisfy all their commercial needs.
many colonial products fish flour wheat and meat all of which england could produce for itself needed markets outside the british empire.
ignoring laws restricting colonial trade to england and its possessions many merchants developed markets in the french spanish and dutch west indies where prices were often higher than in the british colonies.
the profits from this illegal commerce enabled the colonies to import the manufactured goods they needed from europe.
the rise of consumerism among relatively affluent residents of the colonies the growing prosperity and commercialism of british america created both new appetites and new opportunities.
the result was a growing preoccupation with the consumption of material goods and of the association of possessions with social status.
82 chapter 3 tea party in the time of george i this painting by an unknown artist dates from the 1720s and shows a prosperous virginian posing with a fashionable and expensive tea service some of it from china.
his eagerness to display his possessions in this way is a sign of the growing interest in the badges of refinement among colonial americans of means in the eighteenth century.
the colonial williamsburg foundation the growth of eighteenth century consumerism was partly a result of the increasing division of american societies by class.
as the difference between the upper and lower classes became more glaring people of means became more intent on demonstrating their own membership in the upper ranks of society.
growing t0 purchase and display con consumerism sumer goods was an important way of doing so particularly for affluent people in cities and towns.
but the growth of consumerism was also a product of the early stages of the industrial revolution.
although there was relatively little industry in america in the eighteenth century england and europe were making rapid advances and producing more and more affordable goods for affluent americans to buy.
the new manufacturing was dependent of course on customers for its products.
in an increasingly commercial society therefore there were many people committed to promoting the purchase of consumer goods as a positive social good.
consumption also grew because of an increasing tendency among colonists to take on debt to finance purchases and be cause of the willingness of some merchants to offer credit.
to facilitate the new consumer appetites merchants and traders began advertising their goods in journals and newspapers.
agents of urban merchants the first traveling salesmen fanned out through the countryside attempting to interest wealthy landowners and planters in luxury goods.
george and martha washington for example spent considerable time and money ordering elegant furnishings for their home at mount vernon goods that were shipped to them mostly from england and europe.
things that had once been considered expensive luxuries gradually became commonplace necessities among them tea household linens glassware manufactured cutlery crockery and social furniture and many others.
another result of consumerism was the association of material goods of the quality of a persons home and possessions and clothing for ex ample with virtue and refinement the ideal of the cultivated gentleman and the gracious lady became increasingly powerful throughout the colonies in the eighteenth century.
that meant striving to become educated and refined gentlemanly or ladylike in speech and behavior.
americans read books on manners and fashion.
they bought magazines about london society.
they also commissioned portraits of themselves and their families devoted large portions of their homes to entertainment built shelves and cases in which they could display fashionable possessions constructed formal gardens and lavished attention on their wardrobes and hairstyles.
the growing importance of consumption and refinement was visible in public spaces as well.
eighteenth century cities in america as in england and europe began to plan their growth to ensure that there would be elegant and gracious public squares parks and boulevards.
in the past social in teraction in american communities had largely been between neighbors and relatives or at most among members of church congregations.
now that a wider society was emerging within cities it became important to create not just private but also public stages for social display.
patterns of society although there were sharp social distinctions in the colonies the deeply entrenched class system of england failed to re social produce itself in america.
in england land mobility was scarce and the population large.
the relatively small number of people who owned property had power over the great majority who did not the imbalance between land and population became a foundation of the english economy and the cornerstone of its class system.
in early america the opposite was true.
land was abundant and people were scarce.
aristocracies emerged in america to be sure.
but they tended to rely less on landown ership than on control of a substantial workforce and they society and culture in provincial america 83 were generally less secure and less powerful than their english counterparts.
far more than in england there were opportunities in america for social mobility both up and down.
the plantation the plantation defined a distinctive way of life for many white and black southerners that would survive in varying forms until the civil war.
the first plantations emerged in the early new georgia csavannah atlantic ocean percent of population that was black per county colony in 1775 bm 61 to 71 51 to 60 31 to 50 11 to 30 0 1 to 10 100 200 km african population as a proportion of total population c 1775 this map illustrates the parts of the colonies in which slaves made up a large proportion of the population in some areas a majority.
the densest african population was in tidewater virginia but there were black majorities as well in south carolina and parts of north carolina.
the slave population was smallest in the western regions of the southern colonies and in the area north of the chesapeake although there remained a significant african population in parts of new jersey and new york some slave some free.
what explains the dense concentrations of slaves in certain areas of the south.
vagaries of the plantation economy settlements of virginia and maryland once tobacco became the economic basis of the chesapeake.
some plantations were enormous much like some of the great estates of england.
the maryland plantation of charles carroll of carrollton reputedly the wealthiest man in the colonies covered 40 000 acres and contained 285 slaves.
on the whole however seventeenth century colonial plantations were rough and relatively small estates.
in the early days in virginia most plantations were crude clearings where land owners and indentured servants worked side by side in conditions so rugged that death was an everyday occurrence.
even in later years when the death rate declined and the landholdings became more established plantation workforces seldom exceeded thirty people.
the economy of the plantation like all agricultural economies was precarious.
in good years successful growers could earn great profits and expand their operations.
but since they could not control their markets even the largest planters were constantly at risk.
when prices for their crops fell as tobacco prices did for example in the 1660s they faced ruin.
because plantations were sometimes far from cities and towns which were relatively few in the south they tended to become self contained communities.
residents lived in close proximity to one another in a cluster of buildings that included the great house of the planter a house that was usually far from great the service buildings the barns and the cabins of the slaves.
wealthier planters often created something approaching a full town on their plantations with a school for white children only a chapel and a large population.
smaller planters lived more modestly but still in a relatively self sufficient world.
in some parts of the south for example the region around charleston south carolina planters often divided their time between the city and their nearby plantations.
on the larger plantations the presence of a substantial slave workforce altered not only the economic but also the family lives of the planter class.
the wives of plantation owners unlike the wives of small farmers could rely on servants to perform ordinary household chores.
they could thus devote more time to their husbands and children than people in poorer parts of colonial society.
but there were also frequent sexual liaisons between their husbands or sons and black women of the slave community.
southern white women generally learned to pretend not to notice these relationships but they were almost certainly a source of anxiety and resentment.
black women naturally had even greater cause to resent such liaisons.
southern society was highly stratified.
within given areas great landowners controlled not only the lives of those who worked on their own plantations.
wealthy planters also shaped the livelihoods of small farmers who could not effectively compete with the wealthy planters and thus depended on them to market crops and receive credit.
small farmers working modest plots of land with few or no slaves to help them formed the majority of the southern agrarian stratified southern society 84 chapter 3 mulberry plantation 1770 this painting of a rice plantation in south carolina is unusual in placing the slave quarters in the forefront of the picture.
the steep roofs of the slave cabins which were built by the slaves themselves reflected african architectural styles.
the high roofs helped keep the cabins cool by allowing the heat to rise into the rafters.
the masters house and adjacent chapel built in conventional european style are in the background.
view of mulberry house and street 1805 by thomas coram american 1756 1811 oil on paper.
image gibbes museum of art carolina art association 1968 18 01 population but it was the planters who dominated the southern agrarian economy.
most landowners lived in rough cabins or houses with their servants or slaves nearby.
few landowners lived in anything resembling aristocratic splendor.
plantation slavery african slaves of course lived very differently than white planters.
on the smaller farms with only a handful of slaves there was not always a rigid social separation between whites and blacks.
but by the mid eighteenth century over three fourths of all blacks lived on plantations of at least ten slaves nearly half lived in communities of fifty slaves or more.
in these larger establishments africans developed a society and culture of their own influenced by their white masters to be sure but also partly independent of them.
although whites seldom encouraged formal marriages among slaves africans themselves developed an elaborate family structure.
this became possible beginning in the eighteenth century as a result of the increased life expectancy of slaves the gradual equalization of the sex ratio and the growth of the population through natural increase.
slaves attempted to construct nuclear families and they managed at times to build stable households even to work together growing their own food in gardens provided by their masters.
but such efforts were in constant jeopardy.
any family member could be sold at any time to another planter even to one in another colony.
as a result the black family developed in ways different from its white counterpart.
africans placed special emphasis on extended kinship networks even creating surrogate relatives for those who were separated from their own families.
they adapted themselves in short to difficult conditions over which they had limited control.
african workers also developed languages of their own.
in south carolina for example the early slaves communicated with one another in gullah a hybrid of english and slave culture african tongues which enabled them to engage in conversations their white masters could not understand.
there emerged too a distinctive slave religion which blended christianity with african folklore.
nevertheless slave society was heavily tied to white society.
african house servants for example at times lived in what was by the standards of slavery great luxury but they were also isolated from their own community and under constant surveillance from whites.
black women were often subjected to unwanted sexual advances from owners and overseers and hence to bearing mulatto children who were rarely recognized by their white fathers but generally accepted as members of the slave community.
on some society and culture in provincial america 85 plantations african workers received kindness and even affection from their masters and mistresses and displayed genuine devotion in return.
on others they encountered physical brutality and occasionally even sadism against which they were powerless.
there were occasional acts of individual resistance by slaves against harsh masters and at least twice during the colonial period there were actual slave rebellions.
in the most import stono ant such revolt the so called stono rebellion rebellion in south carolina in 1739 about 100 africans rose up seized weapons killed several whites and attempted to escape south to florida.
whites quickly crushed the uprising and executed most participants.
the most frequent form of resistance was simply running away but for most slaves that provided no real solu tion either.
there was nowhere to go.
most slaves male and female worked as field hands with women also shouldering the additional burdens of cooking and child rearing.
on the larger plantations that aspired to genuine self sufficiency some slaves learned trades and crafts blacksmithing carpentry shoemaking spinning weaving sewing midwifery and others.
these skilled craftsmen and craftswomen were at times hired out to other planters.
some set up their own establishments in towns or cities and shared their profits with their owners.
on occasion they were able to buy their freedom.
there was a small free black population living in southern cities by the time of the revolution.
the puritan community a very different form of community emerged in puritan new england but one that was also distinctively american.
the characteristic social unit in new england was not the isolated farm but the town.
each new settlement drew up a covenant among its members binding all residents in a religious and so cial commitment to unity and harmony.
some such settlements consisted of people who had emigrated to america patterns of settlement concord lexington lincoln waltham cambridge commonly held land privately held lots john goodnow s holdings residences meetinghouse 1 4 1 2 km the new england town sudbury massachusetts 17th century just as the plantation was a characteristic social form in the southern colonies the town was the th nraanization of sudbury massachusetts a town west of boston in the early years in the seventeenth century note the location of the most common social unit in new england.
this map shows tne orgariizduui i u j houses which are grouped mostly together around a shared pasture or commons and near the church.
note too the outlymg del s which were divided among res ents of the town even though they were often no connected to theland on which they lived.
the gray areas of the map illustrate the holdings of a single resident of sudbury john goodnow whose house was on the common but whose lands were scattered over a number of areas of sudbury.
based on sumner chilton powell puntan ullage.
the format on of a new england town copynght 0 1963 bg wesleyan un vers ty.
f boston newton what aspects of new england life might help explain the clustering of residences at the center of the town.
88 chapter 3 boston philadelphia the growth of commerce and of great fortune occurred later in new york city than in boston and philadelphia.
new york city wealth distribution in colonial cities 1687 1771 although the gap between rich and poor in colonial america was not as large as it would become in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the rise of commerce in the early eighteenth century did produce increasing inequality.
this chart shows the distribution of wealth in three important commercial cities boston philadelphia and new york.
the upper pie charts show the distribution of wealth in the late seventeenth century and the lower charts show how that distribution had changed by the mid or late eighteenth century.
note the heavy concentration of wealth in the top 10 percent of the population in the seventeenth century and the even heavier concentration of wealth in boston and philadelphia in the eighteenth century.
in new york by contrast wealth distribution became slightly more equal between 1695 and 1730 because of the breaking up of the great dutch estates once the colony came under the control of the british.
in later years new york would show the same pattern of growing inequality that boston and philadelphia experienced.
what aspects of colonial commerce helped concentrate so much wealth in the hands of a relatively small group.
area of colonial life except of course in the relationship between masters and slaves social distinctions were real and visible in urban areas.
cities were also the centers of much of what industry there was in the colonies such as ironworks and distilleries for turning imported molasses into exportable rum.
and they were the locations of the most advanced schools the most sophisti commercial and cate cultural activities and shops cultural where imported goods could be bought.
importance in addition they were communities with peculiarly urban social problems crime vice pollution epidemics traffic.
unlike smaller towns cities were required to establish elaborate governments.
they set up constables offices and fire departments.
they developed systems for supporting the urban poor whose numbers grew steadily and became especially large in times of eco nomic crisis.
cities were also particularly vulnerable to fluctuations in trade.
when a market for a particular product became glutted and prices fell the effects on merchants and other residents could be severe.
in the countryside the impact of economic instability was generally more muted than in cities.
farmers were still somewhat independent from the larger world of the markets.
of particular importance for the political future of the colonies cities became places where new ideas could circulate and be discussed.
because there were printers it was possible to have regular newspapers.
books and other publications from abroad introduced new intellectual influences.
and the taverns and coffeehouses of cities provided forums in which people could gather and debate the issues of the day.
it was not surprising that when the revolutionary crisis began to build in the 1760s and 1770s it was first visible in the cities.
inequality new england for all its belief in community and liberty was far from an egalitarian society.
some must be rich and some poor john winthrop wrote early in the seventeenth century and his prediction perhaps exceeded his expectations.
wealthy families and socially distinguished ones which were usually the same people had privileges and rights that were not available to poor citizens.
elites were called ladies and gentleman while people in the lower levels of society were known as goodman or goodwife elites were given the best seats in their churches and had the most influence over the parish.
men had more power than women.
servants had few rights.
the church itself taught that inequality reflected gods intention.
in cities such economic stratification was significant although unlike in later eras the ranks of the richest were the largest group in the population and in boston in the eighteenth century the majority.
that was partly because wealthy people were more likely than poor people to move to cities and participate in commerce.
in the agricultural countryside many fewer people accumulated significant wealth.
awakenings and enlightenments two powerful forces were competing in american intellectual life in the eighteenth century.
one was the traditional outlook of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries with its emphasis on a personal god intimately involved with the world keeping watch over individual lives.
the other was the new spirit of the enlightenment a movement sweeping both europe and america which stressed the importance of science and human reason.
the old views supported such phenomena as the belief in witchcraft and they placed great value on a stern moral code in which intellect was less important than faith.
the enlightenment by contrast suggested that people had substantial control over their own lives and the course of their societies that the world could be explained and therefore could be structured along rational scientific lines.
much of the intellectual climate of colonial america and long after was shaped by the tension between these two impulses.
the pattern of religions religious toleration flourished in many parts of america to a degree unmatched in any european nation not because americans deliberately sought to pro religious duce k but because conditions virtually toleration required it.
settlers in america brought with them so many different religious practices that it proved difficult to impose a single religious code on any large area.
the church of england was established as the official faith in virginia maryland new york the carolinas and georgia.
but with few exceptions the laws establishing the church of england as the official colonial religion were largely ignored.
even in new england where the puritans had originally believed that they were all part of a single faith there was a growing tendency in the eighteenth century for different congregations to affiliate with different denominations especially congregationalism and presbyterianism.
in parts of new york and new jersey dutch settlers had established their own calvinist denomination dutch reformed which survived after sinners in hell 1744 this mid eighteenth century religious image illustrates both the fears and prejudices of many colonial christians.
the idyllic city of sion in the center of the drawing is threatened on all sides by forces of evil which include images not just of satan and sin but also of some of the perceived enemies of protestants the catholic church symbolized by the image of the pope and islam symbolized by turks.
the granger collection new york the colonies became part of the british empire.
american baptists considered to have been introduced to americans by roger williams developed a great variety of sects.
all baptists shared the belief that rebaptism usually by total immersion was necessary when believers reached maturity.
but while some baptists remained calvinists believers in predestination others came to believe in salvation by free will.
protestants extended toleration to one another more readily than they did to roman catholics.
many protestants in anti catholicism america like many in england feared and hated the pope.
new englanders in particular viewed their catholic neighbors in new france canada not only as commercial and military rivals but also as dangerous agents of rome.
in most of the english colonies the witchcraft trials hp t t t.
witchcraft trials of the 1690s which began in salem massachusetts and spread to 1 o ti other areas of new england have been the stuff of popular legend for centuries.
they have also engaged the interest of generations of historians who have tried to explain why these seventeenth century americans became so committed to the belief that some of their own neighbors were agents of satan.
although there have been many explanations of the witchcraft phenomenon some of the most important in recent decades have focused on the central place of women in the story.
through the first half of the twentieth century most historians dismissed the witchcraft trials as hysteria prompted by the intolerance and rigidity of puritan society.
this interpretation informed perhaps the most prominent popular portrayal of witchcraft in the twentieth century arthur millers play the crucible first produced in 1953 which was clearly an effort to use the salem trials as a comment on the great anticommunist frenzy of his own time.
but at almost the same time the renowned scholar of puritanism perry miller argued in a series of important studies that belief in witchcraft was not a product of hysteria or intolerance but rather a widely shared part of the religious worldview of the seventeenth century.
to the puritans witchcraft seemed not only plausible but scientifically rational as well.
a new wave of interpretation of witchcraft began in the 1970s with the publication of salem possessed 1976 by paul boyer and stephen nissenbaum.
their examination of the town records of salem in the 1690s led them to conclude that the witchcraft controversy there was a product of class tensions between the poor marginal residents of one part of salem and the wealthy privileged residents of another.
these social tensions which could not find easy expression on their own terms led some poor salemites to lash out at their rich neighbors by charging them or their servants with witchcraft.
a few years later john demos in entertaining satan 1983 examined witchcraft accusations in a larger area of new england and similarly portrayed them as products of displaced anger about social and economic grievances that could not be expressed otherwise.
demos provided a far more complex picture of the nature of these grievances than had boyer and nissenbaum but like them saw witchcraft as a symptom of a persistent set of social and psychological tensions.
at about the same time however a number of scholars were beginning to look at witchcraft through the scholarly lens of gender.
carol karlsen s the devil in the shape of a woman 1987 demonstrated however roman catholics were too few to cause serious conflict.
they were most numerous in maryland and even there they numbered no more than 3 000.
perhaps for that reason they suffered their worst persecution in that colony.
after the overthrow of the original proprietors in 1691 catholics in maryland not only lost their political rights but also were forbidden to hold religious services except in private houses.
jews in provincial america totaled no more than about 2 000 at any time.
the largest community lived in new york city.
smaller groups settled in newport and charles town and there were scattered jewish families in all the colonies.
nowhere could they vote or hold office.
only in rhode island could they practice their religion openly.
by the beginning of the eighteenth century some americans were growing troubled by the apparent decline in religious piety in their society.
the movement of the population westward and the wide scattering of settlements had caused many communities to lose touch with organized religion.
the rise of commercial prosperity created a secular outlook in urban areas.
the progress of science and free thought in europe anc the importation of enlightenment ideas to america caused a least some colonists to doubt traditional religious beliefs.
concerns about weakening piety surfaced as early as th 1660s in new england where the puritan oligarchy warned of decline in the power of the church.
sabbatl jeremiads after sabbath ministers preached sermons despair known as jeremiads deploring the signs of waning piety.
by the standards of other societies or other eras the puritan faith remained remarkably strong.
but new englanders measured their faith by their own standards and to them the declension of religious piety seemed a serious problem.
the great awakening by the early eighteenth century concerns about declining piety and growing secularism were emerging in other regions and among members of other faiths.
the result was the first major american revival the great awakening.
the great awakening began in earnest in the 1730s reached its climax in the 1740s and brought a new spirit of religious fervor to the colonies.
the revival had particular appeal to women who constituted the majority of converts and to younger sons of the third or fourth generation of settlers those who stood to inherit the least land and who faced the most uncertain futures.
the rhetoric of the revival emphasized the potential for every person to break away from the constraints of the past and start anew in his or her relationship with god.
such beliefs may have reflected the desires of many people to break away from their families or communities and start a new life.
powerful evangelists from england helped spread the revival.
john and charles wesley the founders of methodism visited georgia and other colonies in the 1730s.
george through intensive scrutiny of records across new england that a disproportionate number of those accused of witchcraft were property owning widows or unmarried women in other words women who did not fit comfortably into the normal pattern of male dominated families.
karlsen concluded that such women were vulnerable to these accusations because they seemed threatening to people including many women who were accustomed to women as subordinate members of the community mary beth norton s in the devil s snare 2002 placed the witchcraft trials in the context of other events of their time particularly in the terrifying upheavals and dislocations that the indian wars of the late seventeenth century created in puritan communities.
in the face of this crisis in which refugees from king william s war were fleeing towns destroyed by the indians and flooding salem and other eastern towns fear and social instability helped create a more than normal readiness to connect aberrant behavior such as the actions of unusually independent or eccentric women to supernatural causes.
the result was a wave of witchcraft accusations that 7he wonder of the jnvifihle world banu au account of the t r y a l s 01.
kfoetal wwtljcs i lately exacted in new england and 4 k vci il remarkable curtofoies therein occurring together with i ihe nwsbtt and rhe thy tv a knot 4 nd ungc wl v lv ua by cutfon mother.
l iiw the jpcmi owaah f haexcf luncv tfe the fwbt oj the i punted firft at nd keprirmsd n uw for ur.
the library of congress lc usz82 51641 ultimately led to the execution of at least twenty people mostly women.
understand analyze and evaluate 1.
how did the salem witchcraft trials reflect attitudes toward women and the status of women in colonial new england.
why were colonial new englanders willing to believe accusations of witchcraft about their fellow colonists.
what contemporary parallels are there to the salem witchcraft trials.
whitefield a powerful open air preacher and for a time an associate of the wesleys made several evangelizing tours through the colonies and drew tremendous crowds.
but the outstanding preacher of the great awakening was the new england congregationalist jonathan edwards a deeply orthodox puritan but a highly original theologian.
from his pulpit in northampton massachusetts edwards attacked the new doctrines of easy salvation for all.
he preached anew the traditional puritan ideas of the absolute sovereignty of god predestination and salvation by gods grace alone.
his vivid descriptions of hell could terrify his listeners.
the great awakening led to the division of congregations between new light revivalists and old light traditionalists.
it also affected areas of society outside the churches.
some of old lights the rev va sts denounced book learning as and new a hindrance to salvation and some commu lights nities repudiated secular education.
but other evangelists saw education as a means of furthering religion and they founded or led schools for the training of new light ministers.
the enlightenment the great awakening caused one great upheaval in the culture of the colonies.
the enlightenment a very different and in many ways competing phenomenon caused another.
the enlightenment was largely the product of some of the great scientific and intellectual discoveries in seventeenth century europe.
as scientists and other thinkers discovered natural laws that they believed regulated the workings of nature they came to celebrate the power of human reason and scientific inquiry.
enlightenment thinkers argued that reason not just faith could create progress and advance knowledge.
they argued that humans had a moral sense on which they could rely to tell the difference between right and wrong that they did not need always to turn to god for guidance in making decisions.
they insisted that men and women could through the power of their own reason move civilization to ever greater heights.
in celebrating reason the enlightenment slowly helped undermine the power of traditional authority something the great awakening did as well.
but unlike the great awakening the enlightenment encouraged men and women to look to themselves not to god for guidance as to how to live their lives and to shape society.
enlightenment traditional.
authority thought with its emphasis on human ratio challenged nality encouraged a new emphasis on edu cation and a heightened interest in politics and government for through governments the believers in reason argued society had its best chance of bettering itself.
most enlightenment figures did not challenge religion and insisted that rational inquiry would support not undermine 91 colonial almanacs were scarce and expensive in colonial america and many families owned only d u w o one the bible.
but starting very early in the life of the english colonies men and women had another important source of information almanacs the most popular nonreligious literature in early america.
almanacs first appeared in america in 1638 or 1639 when printers in cambridge massachusetts began publishing the philomath almanac which combined an elaborate calendar of religious holidays with information about astronomy astrology and other popular interests.
by the 1680s the farmers almanac a heavily illustrated publication that added medical advice practical wisdom navigational information and humor began to rival the philomath.
through a combination of superstition popular folklore and astronomical and astrological devices the farmers almanac also predicted weather patterns throughout the year crop yields and many other things.
almanac predictions were notoriously unreliable but many people relied on them nevertheless.
by 1700 there were dozens perhaps hundreds of almanacs circulating throughout the colonies and even in the sparsely settled lands to the west and north.
the most popular almanacs sold tens of thousands of copies every year.
most families had at least one and many had several.
it is easy to prove one almanac writer claimed in the mid eighteenth century that no book we read except the bible is so much valued and so serviceable to the community.
america was a multilingual society and although most almanacs were in english some appeared in french dutch hebrew norwegian spanish german and various indian languages.
for five years just after the revolution benjamin banneker of maryland was the only african american almanac writer publishing a book that occasionally included harsh commentary on slavery and the slave trade.
the best known almanac in the colonies in the years before the american revolution was poor richards almanack published in philadelphia by benjamin franklin under the pseudonym richard saunders.
i endeavor d to make it both entertaining and useful franklin later wrote in his autobiography.
and observing that it was generally read.
i consider d it as a proper vehicle for conveying instruction among the common people who bought scarcely any other books.
in issue after issue franklin accompanied his calendars astronomical information and other standard almanac fare with proverbial sentences chiefly such as inculcated industry and frugality.
poor richard s many sayings became among the most familiar passages in america.
franklin was among many writers who used the almanac to promote the new scientific discoveries of his time and to try to discredit what he considered the backward superstitions standing in the way of knowledge.
almanacs were the only widely read publications in america that contained popular humor and they are one of the best sources today for understanding what early americans considered funny.
not unlike later generations they delighted in humor that ridiculed the high and mighty aristocrats lawyers clergymen politicians made fun of relationships between men and women and expressed stereotypes about racial and ethnic groups.
in the 1760s and 1770s almanac humor was often used to disguise political ideas in the way it ridiculed british officials and american tories.
during the war itself humorous anecdotes about military officers and political leaders reflected the uneasy views of americans about the long and difficult struggle.
during and after the revolution much almanac humor consisted of admiring anecdotes about the man who was by then perhaps the most famous and beloved man in christianity.
but they challenged the notion of some religious groups that the answer to all questions about human society should or could come directly from god.
in the early seventeenth century enlightenment ideas in america were largely borrowed from abroad from such earlier giants as francis bacon and john locke and from more contemporary enlightenment thinkers in england and scotland.
few americans had yet made important contributions of their own to the new age of science and reason.
later however such americans as benjamin franklin thomas jefferson thomas paine and james madison made their own contributions to the enlightenment tradition.
education even before enlightenment ideas became common in america colonists had placed a high value on education despite the difficulties they confronted in gaining access to it.
some families tried to teach their children to read and write at home although the heavy burden of work in most agricultural households limited the time available for schooling.
in massachusetts a 1647 law required every town to support a pi many communities failed to comply a modest network of edu cational establishments emerged as a result.
elsewhere the quakers and other sects operated church schools.
and in some communities widows or unmarried women conducted dame schools by holding private classes in their homes.
in cities mas ter craftsmen set up evening schools for their apprentices a least a hundred such schools appeared between 1723 and 1770 only a relatively small number of children received educa tion beyond the primary level but white male americans a high white least achieved a hish degree of literacy.
b literacy rates tde time ftde revolution well over hal f all white men could read and write rate substantially higher than in most european countries.
th large number of colonists who could read helped create a mai ket for the first widely circulated publications in america othe than the bible almanacs see patterns of popular culture above.
the literacy rate of women lagged behind that of men until the nineteenth century and while opportunities for education beyond primary school were scarce for males they were almost nonexistent for females.
nevertheless in their early years 92 ii mofh april hath xxx days kind katharine to her husband ktfim theft words mine own greet how dearly i love thee j if true quoth will the world no fueh adordi and that its true i durft his warrant be for neer heard i of woman good or ill.
but always loved heft her own facet wilt f all fools.
z ifet weather t or 3 7 fee 9 o 4 5 cloudy and likely 4 fee rain.
8 g z sand.
p bader 2 0 nters y 7 fee 0 4 days 15 k 20 w 5 jrwd ffrvfckwirr sund.
p eattcr 17 fet 8 21 3 and tain.
4i beware e meat tfwice boil d an 3 bald foe reconcil d.
4 7 days inc 4 h 26 5 i k sund.
pjsaftcr 2g 0eorge x.
io troy burnt 7 4pt.
mark evang js d cloudy with hitfby gwtndt and periapt 10 7p fct 4 7 jit g jrogationbupday 1 p 2915 yli 5 295 m 22k w 10 i s uxsry 2zy a r.
22 t 5 29 24 zzy r 2v 2 threat t 7 little deere.
50 yjnew 1 3 day 29 71 at 4 morn 2.
7 fets 9 29 aft us 7 z rich rogue js 24 1 a fat hog who 23 never doetgeedtii 22 7 dead at a fog.
2t 7 fidl quarter.
20 7 fees 1 44 mo.
19 7 relatimwithaut 18 7 faendfrip friend 17 7 pipwithoutpow 16 i tr power without t 7 fets4 7 mor.
14 7fulls at 1 oat 13 7 night 12 7 will will withe.
11 7 tfflh ejfefl with 1 rif it aftern 7 otrtpreft.
graft without virtue are net laft quarter.
worth a forte.
uf 1 5 mor.
days 14 ho us 7 let.
54 town and country mans almanack as the population of colonial cities and towns grew almanacs originally targeted mainly at farmers began to make explicit appeal to townspeople as well.
universal images group getty images america poor richard himself benjamin franklin.
much less reverential and probably funnier to readers was the often ribald ethnic and racial humor in almanacs.
in beer s almanac of 1801 an irishman boasted that he had owned a large estate in ireland before leaving for america.
why he was asked had he left it to come to the united states.
ah he replied it was indeed under a small encumbrance for another mans land lay right a top of it almanacs remained enormously popular throughout the nineteenth century and some are still published today.
but they had their greatest influence in the early years of european settlement when for thousands of americans they were virtually the only source of printed information available.
a good almanac the printer isaac briggs wrote in 1798 in a preface to one of his own is like iron far more valuable although much less valued than gold if we estimate its value by its absolute usefulness to the common purposes of life.
understand analyze and evaluate poor richards almanack this page from a 1757 edition of poor richard s almanack illustrates the wide range of material that almanacs presented to their readers an uplifting poem a calendar of holidays and weather predictions and such scattered pieces of advice and wisdom as a rich rogue is like a fat hog who never does good till as dead as a log.
fotosearch getty images 1.
why were almanacs so popular in colonial america.
what can almanacs tell us about life in colonial america.
the farmer s almanac is still popular today distributing more than 4 million copies a year.
why do you think it continues to be popular.
colonial girls often received the same home based education as boys and their literacy rate too was substantially higher than that of their european counterparts.
african slaves had virtually no access to education.
occasionally a master or mistress would teach slave children to read and write but they had few real incentives to do so.
indeed as the slave system became firmly entrenched strong social and ultimately legal sanctions developed to discourage any efforts to promote black literacy lest it encourage slaves to question their station.
indians too remained largely outside the white educational system to a large degree by choice most tribes preferred to educate their children in their own way.
but some white missionaries and philanthropists established schools for native americans and helped create a small but significant population of indians literate in spoken and written english.
nowhere was the intermingling of the influences of traditional religiosity and the new spirit of the enlightenment clearer than in the colleges and universities that grew up in colonial america.
of the six colleges in operation by 1763 all but two were founded by religious groups primarily for the training of preachers.
yet in almost all the influences of the new scientific rational approach to knowledge could be felt.
harvard the first american college was established in 1636 by the general court legislature of massachusetts at the behest of puritan theologians who wanted to create a training center for ministers.
the college was named for a charlestown minister john harvard who had died and left his library and half his estate to the college.
decades later in 1693 william and mary college named for the english king and queen was established in williamsburg virginia by anglicans like harvard it was conceived as an academy to train clergymen.
in 1701 conservative congregationalists dissatisfied with what they considered the growing religious liberalism of harvard founded yale named for one of its first benefactors elihu yale in new haven connecticut.
out of the great awakening emerged the college of new jersey founded in 1746 and known later as princeton after the town in which it is located.
one of its first presidents was jonathan edwards.
despite the religious basis of these colleges students at most of them could derive something of a secular education from the curricula which included not only theology but logic ethics 93 94 chapter 3 george whitefield whitefield succeeded john wesley as leader of the calvinist methodists in oxford england.
like wesley he was a major force in promoting religious revivalism in both england and america.
he made his first missionary journey to the new world in 1738 and returned in the mid 1740s for a celebrated journey through the colonies that helped spark the great awakening.
francis g mayer corbis time cuts down all both great and fma izrztfavbeaureouswife made david leek his life.
whales in the sea.
gods voice obey.
xerxes the great did die and fo mull you i toutb forward flips death foonell dips.
zacbeus he did climb the tree.
his lord to fee.
7vw lie cbi d being entred in bit letters and spelling let bun learn tbrje and fucb like sentences by heart whereby be will be both inflrufted in bis duty tnd encouraged in bis learning.
tbe dutiful cbilts protnifes i will fear god and honour hc king.
i will honour my father mother.
i will obey my superiours.
i will submit to my elders.
i will love my friends.
i will hate no m m.
i will forgive my enemies and pray to god for them.
1 will as much as in me lies keep afl god hojy commandments.
a dame school primer more than the residents of any other region of north america and far more than those of most of europe the new england colonists strove to educate their children and achieved perhaps the highest level of literacy in the world.
throughout the region young children attended institutions known as dame schools because the teachers were almost always women and learned from primers like this one.
puritan education emphasized both basic skills the alphabet and reading and moral and religious precepts as this sample page suggests.
american antiquarian society liberal curricula physics geometry astronomy rhetoric latin hebrew and greek as well.
from the beginning harvard attempted not only to provide an educated ministry but also to advance learning and perpetuate it to posterity members of the harvard faculty made strenuous efforts to desseminate new scientific ideas particularly the ideas of copernican astronomy to a larger public often publishing their ideas in popular almanacs.
by doing so they hoped to stamp out popular belief in astrology which they considered pagan superstition.
kings college founded in new york in 1754 and later renamed columbia was even more devoted to the spread of secular knowledge.
although it was founded in part by the anglican trinity church in new york it had no theological faculty and was interdenominational from the start.
the academy and college of philadelphia which became the university of pennsylvania was a completely secular institution founded in 1755 by a group of laymen under the inspiration of benjamin franklin.
it offered courses in utilitarian subjects mechanics chemistry agriculture government commerce and modern languages as well as in the liberal arts.
it also became the site of the first medical school in british america founded in 1765.
the spread of science the clearest indication of the spreading influence of the enlightenment in america was an increasing interest in scientific knowledge.
most of the early colleges established chairs in the natural sciences and introduced some of the advanced scientific theories of europe including copernican astronomy and newtonian physics to their students.
but the most vigorous promotion of science in these years occurred outside the colleges through the private efforts of amateurs and the activities of scientific societies.
leading merchants planters and even theologians became corresponding members of the royal society of london the leading english scientific organization.
benjamin franklin the most celebrated amateur scientist in america won international fame through his experimental proof of the nature of lightning and electricity and his invention of the lightning rod.
his 1752 demonstration using a kite of his theory that lightning and electricity were the same was widely celebrated in the colonies.
the high value that influential americans were beginning to place on scientific knowledge was clearly demonstrated by the most daring and controversial smallpox scientific experiment of the eigh inoculation teenth century inoculation against smallpox.
the puritan theologian cotton mather heard reportedly from his own slave of the practice of deliberately infecting people with mild cases of smallpox in order to immunize them against the deadly disease.
he learned too that experiments in inoculation were being conducted with some success in england.
mather was not society and culture in provincial america 95 experiments an d observations o n electricity made at philadelphia in america fam of tbe royal society w b y benjamin franklin l l d.
member of the royal academy of sciences at sbmlrf the batavian society in hollaed at pbiiadelpbia.
to which are added letters and papers o k philosophical subjects.
the whole correded methodized improved and now collected into one volume end illusreted with co z i latis.
thb fifth edition.
i 0 if d t x print 6 f n wmv ae cr of st wchenh y.
benjamin franklin on electricity the discovery of electricity was one of the great scientific events of the eighteenth century even though large scale practical use of electrical energy emerged much later.
benjamin franklin was one of the first americans and certainly the most famous one to experiment with electricity.
this is the frontispiece for a book originally published in 1750 in philadelphia that describes his experiments and observations.
the pages shown here are from the london edition which appeared in 1774.
getty images certainly a wholly committed scientist.
he continued to believe that disease was a punishment for sin.
yet despite strong opposition from many of his neighbors he urged inoculation on his fellow bostonians during an epidemic in the 1720s.
the results confirmed the effectiveness of the technique.
other theologians including jonathan edwards took up the cause along with many physicians.
by the mid eighteenth century inoculation had become a common medical procedure in america.
concepts of law and politics in seventeenth and eighteenth century law and politics as in other parts of their lives americans of european descent believed that they were re creating in the new world the practices and institutions of the old.
but as in other areas they managed to create something very different.
changes in the law in america resulted in part from the scarcity of english trained lawyers who were almost unknown in the colonies until after 1700.
not until well into the eighteenth century did authorities punishment in new england new england communities prescribed a wide range of punishments for misconduct and crime in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
among the more common punishments were public humiliations placing offenders in stocks forcing them to wear badges of shame or as in this woodcut publicly ducking them in a stream or pond to create both discomfort and embarrassment.
fotosearch getty images colonial legal system 96.
chapter 3 in england try to impose the common law and the statutes of the realm upon the provinces.
by then it was already too late.
although the american legal system adopted most of the essential elements of the english system including such ancient rights as trial by jury significant differences had already become well established.
pleading and court procedures were simpler in america than in england and punishments were different.
instead of the gallows or prison colonists more commonly resorted to the whipping post the branding iron the stocks and for gossipy women the ducking stool.
in a labor scarce society it was not in the interests of communities to execute or incarcerate potential workers.
crimes were redefined.
in england a printed attack on a public official whether true or false was considered libelous.
in the 1734 1735 trial of the new york publisher john peter zenger who was powerfully defended by the philadelphia lawyer andrew hamilton the courts ruled that criticisms of the government were not libelous if factually true a verdict that removed some restrictions on the freedom of the press there was a subtle but decisive transformation in legal philosophy.
some colonists came to think of law as a reflection of the divine will others saw it as a result of the natural order.
in neither case did they consider it an expression of the power of an earthly sovereign.
colonial even more significant for the future of governments the relationship between the colonies and england were important differences between the american and british political systems.
because the royal government was so far away americans created a group of institutions of their own that gave them in reality if not looking back what began as a few small isolated precarious settlements in the wilderness had evolved by the mid eighteenth century into a large and complex society.
the english colonies in america grew steadily between the 1650s and the 1750s in population in the size of their economies and in the sophistication and diversity of their cultures.
in many ways the colonies had become more like england by the mid eighteenth century than they had been during their frail early years.
in other ways life in america and life in britain had begun to diverge.
many distinct societies developed in the colonies but the greatest distinction was between the colonies of the north and those of the south.
in the north society was dominated regional by small family farms and by towns and differences cities of growing size.
a thriving commer cial class was developing and with it an increasingly elaborate urban culture.
in the south there were many family farms as well.
but there were also large plantations cultivating tobacco rice indigo and cotton for export.
in theory a large measure of self government.
in most colonies local communities grew accustomed to running their own affairs with minimal interference from higher authorities.
communities also expected to maintain strict control over their delegates to the colonial assemblies and those assemblies came to exercise many of the powers that parliament exercised in england even though in theory parliament remained the ultimate authority in america.
provincial governors appointed by the crown had broad powers on paper but in fact their influence was sharply limited.
they lacked control over appointments and contracts such influence resided largely in england or with local colonial leaders.
they could never be certain of their tenure in office because governorships were patronage appointments a governor could be removed any time his patron in england lost favor.
and in many cases governors were not even familiar with the colonies they were meant to govern.
some governors were native born americans but most were englishmen who came to the colonies for the first time to assume their offices.
the result of all this was that the focus of politics in the colonies became a local one.
the provincial governments became accustomed to acting more or less independently of parliament and a set of assumptions and expectations about the rights of the colonists began to take hold in america that policymakers in england did not share.
these differences caused few problems before the 1760s because the british did little to exert the authority they believed they possessed.
but when beginning in 1763 the english government began attempting to tighten its control over the american colonies a great imperial crisis developed.
by the late seventeenth century these plantations were relying heavily on african workers who had been brought to the colonies forcibly as slaves.
there were few significant towns and cities in the south and little commerce other than the marketing of crops.
the colonies did however also have much in common.
most white americans accepted common assumptions about racial inequality.
that enabled them to accept and at times celebrate the enslavement of african men and women and to justify a campaign of displacement and often violence against native americans that would continue for two centuries.
most white americans and in different ways most nonwhite americans as well were deeply religious.
the great awakening therefore had a powerful impact throughout the colonies north and south.
and most white colonists shared a belief in certain basic principles of law and politics which they considered embedded in the english constitution and which in the years after the 1750s would lead to a great imperial crisis.
society and culture in provincial america 97 key terms people places events significant events cotton mather 94 covenant 85 george whitefield 94 great awakening 90 gullah 84 huguenots 75 indentured servitude 66 indigo 78 jeremiad 90 john and charles wesley 90 john peter zenger 96 jonathan edwards 91 middle passage 71 primogeniture 86 saugus ironworks 79 scots irish 76 slave codes 74 stono rebellion 85 triangular trade 80 the enlightenment 89 1636 harvard college founded in massachusetts 1662 halfway covenant established in new england 1647 massachusetts law requires a public school in every town recall and reflect 1.
how did patterns of family life and attitudes toward women differ in the northern and southern colonies.
how did the lives of african slaves change over the course of the first century of slavery.
which groups emigrated to north america in the seventeenth century and why did they come.
what was the intellectual culture of colonial america as expressed in literature philosophy science education and law.
how and why did life in the english colonies diverge from life in england.
1685 edict of nantes revoked in france huguenots begin migrating to north america 1692 witchcraft trials begin in salem 1697 slave importations increase 1720 cotton mather initiates smallpox inoculations in massachusetts 1739 george whitefield arrives in north america stono slave rebellion in south carolina 1746 college of new jersey founded at princeton 1755 academy and college of philadelphia later university of pennsylvania founded 1670s slave traders begin importing slaves directly from africa to north america 1691 official toleration of catholics ends in maryland 1693 college of william and mary founded in virginia 1701 yale college founded in connecticut 1734 great awakening begins in massachusetts peter zenger tried in new york 1740s indigo production begins in south carolina 1754 kings college later columbia university founded in new york the empire in transition looking ahead 1.
how did the seven years war change the balance of power in north america and throughout the world.
what policies did parliament implement with regard to the colonies in the 1760s and 1770s and why did britain adopt these policies.
how did the colonists respond to parliament s actions.
toppling george iii in the immediate aftermath of the declaration of independence patriots in new york pulled down a statue of king george iii from its pedestal in the center of the city.
among those pulling down the statue were a number of african americans both free blacks and slaves.
this print is a french illustration of the event with captions in both french and german.
the library of congress ppmsca 17521 in setting the stage as late as the 1750s few americans objected to their membership in the british empire the imperial system provided them with many benefits opportunities for trade and commerce military protection political stability.
and for the most part the english government left the colonies alone.
beginning in 1763 however the british government embarked on a series of new policies toward its colonies policies dictated by changing international realities and new political circumstances within england itself.
in the beginning most americans reacted to the changes with relative restraint.
gradually however as crisis followed crisis a large group of americans found themselves fundamentally disillusioned with the imperial relationship.
by the mid 1770s the relationship between the american colonies and their british rulers had become so strained so poisoned so characterized by suspicion and resentment the once seemingly unbreakable bonds of empire were ready to snap.
and in the spring of 1775 the first shots were fired in a war that would ultimately win america its independence.
loosening ties after the glorious revolution of 1688 in england and the collapse of the dominion of new england in america the english government which became the british government after 1707 when a union of england and scotland created great britain made no serious or sustained effort to tighten its control over the colonies for over seventy years.
during those years an increasing number of colonies were brought under the direct control of the king.
new jersey in 1702 north and south carolina in 1729 georgia in 1754 all became royal colonies bringing the total to eight in all of them the king had the power to appoint the governors and other colonial officials.
during those years parliament also passed new laws supplementing the original navigation acts and strengthening the mercantilist program laws restricting colonial manufactures prohibiting paper currency and regulating trade.
on the whole however the british government remained uncertain and divided about the extent to which it ought to interfere in colonial affairs.
the colonies were left within broad limits to go their separate ways.
a tradition of neglect in the fifty years after the glorious revolution the british parliament established a growing supremacy over the king.
during the reigns of george i 1714 1727 and george ii 1727 1760 both growing of whom were german born and unaccustomed to english ways the prime power of minister and his cabinet ministers began to become the nations real execu parliament tives.
they held their positions not by the kings favor but by their ability to control a majority in parliament.
these parliamentary leaders were less inclined than the seventeenth century monarchs had been to try to tighten imperial organization.
they depended heavily on the support of the great merchants and landholders most of whom feared that any such experiments would require large expenditures increase taxes and diminish the profits they were earning from the colonial trade.
the first of the modern prime ministers robert walpole deliberately refrained from strict enforcement of the navigation acts believing that relaxed trading restrictions would stimulate commerce.
meanwhile the day to day administration of colonial affairs remained decentralized and inefficient.
there was no colonial office in london.
the nearest equivalent was the board of trade and plantations established in 1696 a mere advisory body that had little role in any actual decisions.
real authority rested in the privy council the central administrative agency for the government as a whole the admiralty and the treasury.
but those agencies were responsible for administering laws at home as well as overseas none could concentrate on colonial affairs.
to complicate matters decentralized colonial administration 99 58 chapter 3 beginning in the 1670s a decrease in the birthrate in england and an improvement in economic conditions there reduced the pressures on laboring men and women to emigrate and the flow of indentured servants into america declined.
those who did travel to growing reliance on slavery america as indentures now generally avoided the southern colonies where prospects for advancement were slim.
in the chesapeake therefore landowners began to rely much more heavily on african slavery as their principal source of labor.
birth and death immigration remained for a time the greatest source of population growth in the colonies.
but the most important long range factor in the increase of the colonial population was its ability to reproduce itself.
improvement in the reproduction rate began in new england and the mid atlantic colonies in the second half of the seventeenth century.
after the 1650s natural increase became the most important source of population growth in those factors in population growth areas.
the new england population more than quadrupled through reproduction alone in the second half of the seventeenth century.
this rise was a result not only of families having large numbers of children.
it was also because life expectancy in new england was unusually high.
conditions improved much more slowly in the south.
the high death rates in the chesapeake region did not begin to decline to levels found elsewhere until the mideighteenth century.
throughout the seventeenth century the average life expectancy for european men in the region was just over forty years and for women slightly less.
one in four white children died in infancy and half died before the age of twenty.
children who survived infancy often lost one or both of their parents before reaching maturity.
widows widowers and orphans thus formed a substantial proportion of the white chesapeake population.
only after settlers developed immunity to local diseases particularly malaria did life expectancy increase significantly.
population growth was substantial in the region but it was largely a result of immigration.
the natural increases in the population in the seventeenth century reflected a steady improvement in the balance between men and women in the colonies.
in the early years toward a balanced sex ratio of settlement more than three quarters of the white population of the chesapeake consisted of men.
and even in new england which from the beginning had attracted more families and thus more women than the southern colonies 60 percent of the inhabitants were male in 1650.
gradually however more women began to arrive in the colonies and increasing birthrates contributed to shifting the sex ratio the balance between men and women as well.
throughout the colonial period the population almost doubled every twenty five years.
by 1775 the non indian population of the colonies was over 2 million.
medicine in the colonies there were very high death rates of women who bore children in the colonial era.
physicians had little or no understanding of infection and sterilization.
as a result many women and babies died from infections contracted during childbirth or surgery.
unaware of bacteria many communities were plagued with infectious diseases transmitted by garbage or unclean water.
because of the limited extent of medical knowledge and the lack of regulations for any practitioners at the time it was relatively easy for people to practice medicine even society and culture in provincial america 59 without any professional training.
the biggest beneficiaries of this were women who established themselves in considerable numbers as midwives.
midwives midwifery assisted women in childbirth but they also dispensed other medical advice.
they were popular because they were usually friends and neighbors of the people they treated unlike physicians who were few and therefore not often well known to their patients.
male doctors felt threatened by the midwives and struggled continually to drive them from the field although they did not make substantial progress in doing so until the nineteenth century.
midwives and doctors alike practiced medicine on the basis of the prevailing assumptions of their time most of them derived from the theory of humoralism humoralism popularized by the famous second century roman physician galen.
galen argued that the human body was governed by four humors that were lodged in four bodily fluids yellow bile or choler black bile melancholy blood and phlegm.
in a healthy body the four humors existed in balance.
illness represented an imbalance and suggested the need for removing from the body the excesses of whatever fluid was causing the imbalance.
that was the rationale that lay behind the principal medical techniques of the seventeenth century purging expulsion and bleeding.
bleeding was practiced mostly by male physicians.
midwives favored pukes and laxatives.
the great majority of early americans however had little contact with physicians or even midwives and sought instead to deal with illness on their own.
the assumption that treating illness was the exclusive province of trained professionals so much a part of the twentieth century and beyond lay far in the distance in the colonial era.
that seventeenth century medicine rested so much on ideas produced 1 400 years before is evidence of how little support there was for the scientific method in england and america at the time.
bleeding for example had been in use for hundreds of years during which time there had been no evidence at all that it helped people recover from illness indeed there was considerable evidence that bleeding could do great harm.
but what would seem in later eras to be the simple process of testing scientific assumptions was not yet a common part of western thought.
that was one reason that the birth of the enlightenment in the late seventeenth century with its faith in human reason and its belief in the capacity of individuals and societies to create better lives was important not just to politics but also to science.
women and families in the colonies because there were many more men than women in seventeenth century america few women remained unmarried for long.
the average european woman in america married for the first time at twenty or twenty one years of age.
because of the large early marriages numbers of indentured servants who were forbidden to marry until their terms of service expired premarital sexual relationships were not uncommon.
children born out of wedlock to indentured women were often taken from their mothers at a young age and were themselves bound as indentured servants.
women in the chesapeake could anticipate a life consumed with childbearing.
the average wife experienced pregnancies every two years.
those who lived long enough bore an average of eight children apiece up to five of whom typically died in infancy or early childhood.
since childbirth was one of the most frequent causes of female death many women did not survive to see their children grow to maturity.
those who did however were often widowed since they were usually much younger than their husbands.
60 chapter 3 life in the american colonies this colored engraving shows the domestic life of americans during the eighteenth century.
depicted are family members at work in their cozy surroundings.
the industriousness they show was a virtue of the era.
bettmann corbis in new england where many more immigrants arrived with family members and where death rates declined more quickly family structure was much more stable than in the chesapeake.
the sex ratio was more balanced than in the chesapeake so most men could expect to marry.
as in the chesapeake women married young began producing children early and continued to do so well into their thirties.
in contrast to their southern counterparts however northern children were more likely to survive and their families were more likely to remain intact.
fewer new england women became widows and those who did generally lost their husbands later in life.
the longer life span in new england meant that parents continued to control their children longer than did parents in the south.
few sons and daughters could choose a spouse entirely independently of their parents wishes.
men tended to rely on their fathers for land to cultivate.
women needed dowries from their parents if they were to attract desirable husbands.
stricter parental supervision of children meant too that fewer women became pregnant before marriage than was the case in the south.
puritanism placed a high value on the family and the position of wife and mother was highly valued in puritan culture.
at the same time however puritanism reinforced the idea of nearly absolute male authority.
a wife was expected to devote herself almost entirely to serving the needs of her husband and the family economy.
new england and chesapeake families compared the beginnings of slavery in english america the demand for african servants to supplement the scarce southern labor force existed almost from the first moments of settlement.
for a time however black workers were hard to find.
not until the mid seventeenth century when a substantial commerce in slaves society and culture in provincial america 61 grew up between the caribbean islands and the southern colonies did black workers become generally available in north america.
just how slavery actually took root and spread has been a source of endless debate among historians.
see debating the past the origins of slavery the demand for slaves in north america helped expand the transatlantic slave trade.
and as slave trading grew more extensive and more sophisticated it also the slave trade grew more horrible.
before it ended in the nineteenth century it was responsible for the forced immigration of as many as 11 million africans to north and south america and the caribbean.
in the flourishing slave marts on the african coast native chieftains brought captured members of rival tribes to the ports.
the terrified victims were then packed into the dark filthy holds of ships for the horrors of the middle passage the long journey to the americas during which the prisoners were usually kept chained in the bowels of the slave ships and supplied with only minimal food and water.
many slave traders tried to cram as many africans as possible into their ships to ensure that enough would survive to yield a profit at journeys end.
those who died en route and many did were simply thrown overboard.
upon arrival in the new world slaves were auctioned off to white landowners and transported frightened and bewildered to their new homes.
north america was a less important direct destination for african slaves than were such other parts of the new world as the caribbean islands and brazil fewer than 5 percent of the africans imported to the americas arrived first in the english colonies.
through most of the seventeenth century those blacks who were transported to what became the united states came not directly from africa but from the west indies.
not until the 1670s did traders start importing blacks directly from africa to north america.
even then the flow remained small for a time mainly because a single group the royal african company of england monopolized the trade and kept prices high and supplies low.
a turning point in the history of the black population in north america was 1697 the year rival traders broke the royal african companys monopoly.
with the trade now open to competition prices fell and the number of africans greatly increased.
in 1700 about 25 000 african slaves lived in english north america.
because african americans were so heavily concentrated in a few southern colonies they were already beginning to outnumber whites in some areas.
there were perhaps twice as many black men as black women in most areas but in some places the african american population grew by natural increase nevertheless.
by 1760 the number of africans in the english mainland colonies had increased to surging slave population approximately a quarter of a million the vast majority of whom lived in the south.
by then blacks had almost wholly replaced white indentured servants as the basis of the southern workforce.
for a time the legal and social status of the african laborers remained somewhat fluid.
in some areas white and black laborers worked together on terms of relative equality.
some blacks were treated much like white hired servants and some were freed after a fixed term of servitude.
by the late seventeenth century however a rigid distinction emerged between blacks and whites.
gradually the assumption emergence of a race based system spread that blacks would remain in service permanently and that black children would inherit their parents bondage.
white beliefs about the inferiority of africans reinforced the growing rigidity of the system but so did the economic advantages of the system to white slaveowners.
debating the past the origins of slavery the debate among historians over how and why white americans created a system of slave labor in the seventeenth century and how and why only african americans should be slaves has been an unusually lively one.
at its center is a debate over whether slavery was a result of white racism or whether racism was a result of slavery.
in 1950 oscar and mary handlin published an influential article comparing slavery to other systems of unfreedom in the colonies.
what separated slavery from other conditions of servitude they argued was that it was restricted to people of african descent that it was permanent and that it passed from one generation to the next.
the unique characteristics of slavery the handlins argued were part of an effort by colonial legislatures to increase the available labor force.
white laborers needed an incentive to come to america black laborers forcibly imported from africa did not.
the distinction between the conditions of white workers and the conditions of black workers was therefore based on legal and economic motives not on racism.
winthrop jordan was one of a number of historians who later challenged the handlins thesis and argued that white racism more than economic interests produced african slavery.
in white over black 1968 and other works jordan argued that europeans had long viewed people of color as inferior beings.
those attitudes migrated with white europeans to the new world and white racism shaped the treatment of africans in america from the beginning.
even without the economic incentives the handlins described in other words whites would have been likely to oppress blacks in the new world.
peter woods black majority 1974 a study of seventeenth century south carolina 62 was one of a number of works that moved the debate back toward social and economic conditions.
wood demonstrated that blacks and whites often worked together on relatively equal terms in the early years of settlement.
but as rice cultivation expanded it became more difficult to find white laborers willing to do the arduous work.
the increase in the forcible importation of african slaves was a response to this growing demand for labor.
it was also a response to fears among whites that without slavery it would be difficult to control a labor force brought to america against its will.
edmund morgans american slavery american freedom 1975 argued similarly that the southern labor system was at first relatively flexible and later grew more rigid.
in colonial virginia he claimed white settlers did not at first intend to create a system of permanent bondage.
but as the tobacco economy grew and created a high demand for cheap labor white landowners began to feel uneasy about their reliance on a large group of dependent white workers.
such workers were difficult to recruit and control.
slavery therefore was less a result of racism than of the desire for whites to find a reliable and stable labor force.
robin blackburns the making of new world slavery 1996 argues particularly strenuously that while race was a factor in making the enslavement of africans easier for whites to justify to themselves the real reasons for the emergence of slavery were hardheaded economic decisions by ambitious entrepreneurs who realized very early that a slave labor system in the labor intensive agricultural world of the american south and the caribbean was more profitable than a free labor system.
slavery served the interests of a powerful combination of groups planters merchants industrialists and consumers.
the most important reason for the creation and continuation of the system therefore was not racism but the pursuit of profit.
slavery was not blackburn concludes an antiquated remnant of an older world.
it was a recognizably modern labor system that served the needs of an emerging market economy.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
what do historians say is the relation ship between racism and slavery.
what are the economic arguments put forward by historians to explain the system of slave labor that developed in america.
do these arguments account fully for the development of slavery.
the system of permanent servitude american slavery became legal in the early eighteenth century when colonial assemblies began to pass slave codes granting white masters almost absolute authority over their slaves.
only one factor determined whether a person was subject to the slave codes color.
in the colonial societies of spanish america people of mixed race were granted a different and higher status than pure africans.
english america recognized no such distinctions.
this image is from a plate from british author amelia opies poem black slaves in the hold of the slave ship or how to make sugar published in london in 1826.
opies poem depicts the life of an african who was captured by slave traders and chronicles his journey to the west indies on a slave ship and his enforced work on the sugar plantations there.
slaves were fastened and packed like cargo for the long ocean voyage.
universal history archive ug bridgeman images african slave trade 63.
er maine augusta connecticut r st philadelphia su id m r ies new jersey delaware r ac maryland.
virginia a m es r j o newport rhode island new haven connecticut ec olo n r dela are w ehann squ a providence hartford ies hudson r lon d co uron lan ke h massachusetts baltimore o hi boston new york r potom portsmouth eng la pennsylvania portland new hampshire tario mohawk r e on lak new york ie er ke a l mass.
w lake champlain dl nc re ne l aw 64 chapter 3 new bern ni lo o r.
er charles town th english scotch irish u savannah o georgia n r.
ar ah am alt c sa ee nt sa wilmington es.
south carolina va nn ah at l a n t i c ocean ar r fe r ee ed pe pe ca norfolk ro anoke r north carolina s german dutch african 200 mi 400 km non native groups in colonial america 1760 even though the entire atlantic seaboard of what is now the united states had become a series of british colonies by 1760 the non native population consisted of people from many places.
as this map reveals english settlers dominated most of the regions of north america.
but note the large areas of german settlement in the western chesapeake and pennsylvania the swath of dutch settlement in new york and new jersey the scotch irish regions in the western regions of the south and the large areas in which enslaved africans were becoming the majority of the population.
what aspects of the history of these colonies help explain their ethnic composition.
society and culture in provincial america 65 changing sources of european immigration the most distinctive and enduring feature of the american population was that it brought together peoples of many different races ethnic groups and nationalities.
north america was home to a highly diverse population.
the british colonies were the home to native americans english immigrants forcibly imported africans and a wide range of other european groups.
among the earliest european immigrants were about 300 000 french calvinists known as huguenots.
the edict of nantes of 1598 had assured them freedom of religion in france.
but in 1685 the edict was revoked driving many huguenot refugees huguenots to north america.
germany had similar laws banning protestantism driving many germans to america where they settled in pennsylvania.
they came to be known as the pennsylvania dutch a corruption of the german term for their nationality deutsch.
frequent wars in europe drove many other immigrants to the american colonies.
the most numerous of the newcomers were the so called scotch irish scotch presbyterians who had settled in northern ireland in the province of ulster in the early s eventeenth scotch irish century.
most of the scotch irish in america pushed out to the western edges of european settlement and occupied land without much regard for who actually claimed to own it.
there were also immigrants from scotland itself and from southern ireland.
the irish migrated steadily over a long period.
some abandoned their roman catholic religion and much of their ethnic identity after they arrived in america.
the colonial economies farming hunting and fishing dominated almost all areas of european and african settlement in north america throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
even so the economies of the different regions varied markedly.
the southern economy a strong european demand for tobacco enabled some planters in the chesapeake maryland and virginia to become enormously wealthy and at times allowed the region as a whole to prosper.
but throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth boom and bust tobacco economy centuries production of tobacco frequently exceeded demand and as a result the price of the crop sometimes suffered severe declines.
the result was a boom and bust cycle in the chesapeake economy with the first major bust occurring in 1640.
south carolina and georgia relied on rice production since the low lying coastline with its many tidal rivers made it possible to create rice paddies that could be flooded and drained.
rice cultivation was so difficult and unhealthy that white laborers generally refused to perform it.
hence planters in south carolina and georgia were much more dependent on slaves than were their northern counterparts.
african workers were adept at rice cultivation in part because some of them had come from rice producing regions of west africa and in part because they were generally more accustomed to the hot humid climate than were europeans.
they also had a greater natural immunity to malaria.
but the work was arduous and debilitating for them nevertheless.
because of their dependence on large scale cash crops the southern colonies developed less of a commercial or industrial economy than the colonies of the north.
the trading in tobacco and rice was handled largely by merchants based in london and later in the northern colonies.
66 chapter 3 this label presents an image of tobacco designed to appeal to european consumers.
three gentlemen planters enjoy the product while a trio of faceless africans tend the crop.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
londons virginia tobacco label northern economic and technological life in the north as in the south agriculture continued to dominate but it was agriculture of a more diverse kind.
in northern new england colder weather and hard rocky soil made it difficult for colonists to develop the kind of large scale commercial farming system that southerners were creating.
conditions for agriculture were better in southern new england and the middle colonies where the soil was fertile and the weather more temperate.
new york pennsylvania and the connecticut river valley were the chief suppliers of wheat to much of new england and to parts of the south.
even there however a substantial commercial economy emerged alongside the agricultural one.
almost every colonist engaged in a certain amount of industry at home.
occasionally these home industries provided families with surplus goods they could trade or sell.
colonial artisans and entrepreneurs beyond these domestic efforts craftsmen and artisans established themselves in colonial towns as cobblers blacksmiths riflemakers cabinetmakers silversmiths and printers.
in some areas entrepreneurs harnessed water power to run small mills for grinding grain processing cloth or milling lumber.
and in several coastal areas large scale shipbuilding operations began to flourish.
the first effort to establish a significant metals industry in the colonies was an ironsaugus ironworks works established in saugus massachusetts in the 1640s.
the saugus ironworks used water power to drive a bellows which controlled the heat in a charcoal society and culture in provincial america 67 furnace.
the carbon from the burning charcoal helped remove the oxygen from the ore and thus reduced its melting temperature.
as the ore melted it trickled down into molds or was taken in the form of simple sow bars to a nearby forge to be shaped into iron objects such as pots and anvils.
there was also a mill suitable for turning the sow bars into narrow rods that blacksmiths could cut into nails.
the saugus ironworks was a technological success but a financial failure.
it began operations in 1646 in 1668 its financial problems forced it to close its doors.
metalworks however gradually became an important part of the colonial economy.
the largest industrial enterprise anywhere in english north america was the ironworks of the german ironmaster peter hasenclever in northern new jersey.
founded in 1764 with british capital it employed several hundred laborers.
there were other smaller ironmaking enterprises in every northern colony and there were ironworks as well in several of the southern colonies.
even so these and other growing industries did not immediately become the basis for the kind of explosive industrial growth that great britain experienced in the late eighteenth century in part because english parliamentary regulations such as the iron act of 1750 restricted metal processing in the colonies.
similar prohibitions limited the manufacture of woolens hats and other goods.
but the biggest obstacles to industrialization in america were an inadequate labor supply a small domestic market and inadequate transportation facilities and energy supplies.
more important than manufacturing were industries that exploited the natural resources of the continent.
by the mid seventeenth century the flourishing fur trade of earlier years was in decline.
taking its place were lumbering mining and fishing.
these industries provided commodities that could be exported to england in exchange for manufactured goods.
and they helped produce the most distinctive feature of the northern economy a thriving commercial class.
the extent and limits of technology despite the technological progress that was occurring in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries much of colonial society was conspicuously lacking in even very basic technological capacities.
up to half the farmers in the colonies did not even own a plow.
substantial numbers of households lacked pots and kettles for persistent colonial poverty cooking.
and only about half the households in the colonies owned guns or rifles.
the relatively low levels of ownership of these and other elementary tools was not because such things were difficult to make but because most americans remained too poor or too isolated to be able to obtain them.
many households had few if any candles because they were unable to afford candle molds or tallow wax or because they had no access to commercially produced candles.
in the early eighteenth century very few farmers owned wagons.
most made do with two wheeled carts which were inefficient for transporting crops to market.
the most commonly owned tool on american farms was the axe.
few colonists were self sufficient in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
a popular image of early american households is of people who grew their own food made their own clothes and bought little from anyone else.
in fact relatively few colonial families owned spinning wheels or looms which suggests that most myth of colonial self sufficiency people purchased whatever yarn and cloth they needed.
most farmers who grew grain took it to centralized facilities for processing.
in general people who lived in isolated or poor areas owned fewer tools and had less access to advanced technologies than did those in more populous or affluent areas.
68 chapter 3 the rise of colonial commerce perhaps the most remarkable feature of colonial commerce was that it was able to survive at all.
american merchants faced such bewildering obstacles and lacked so many of the basic institutions of trade that they managed to stay afloat only with great difficulty and through considerable ingenuity.
the colonies had almost no gold or silver and their paper currency was not acceptable as payment for goods from abroad.
for many years colonial merchants had to rely on barter or on money substitutes such as beaver skins.
a second obstacle was lack of information about the supply and demand of goods and services.
traders had no way of knowing what they would find in foreign ports vessels sometimes stayed at sea for years journeying from one port to another trading one commodity for another attempting to find some way to turn a profit.
there was also an enormous number of small fiercely competitive companies which made the problem of organizing the system of commerce even more acute.
obstacles to trade 1000 mi 2000 km ens hors es lin north america baltimore norfolk es we in di r s f sse la mo es spain portugal e uit op eur p ean uc rod sla v ru es m ts africa red caribbean sea win u act manuf st ock est er liv mb fish ur lu sugar flo ves sla v sla spanish florida slaves sugar e ric savannah grain fish lumber rum manufactured goods at l a n t i c ocean it ds oo red g factu manu bacco to fru boston newport new york philadelphia europe l stores rs nava fish fu goods ctured manufa s hide ods igo ind tured go e c i r ufac n a m wine ce ran new f english colonies wilmington charles town england goo ds slav es g old ivor slave coa y gold sts south america the triangular trade this map illustrates the complex pattern of trade that fueled the colonial american economy in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
a simple explanation of this trade is that the american colonies exported raw materials agricultural products furs and others to britain and europe and imported manufactured goods in return.
while that explanation is accurate it is not complete largely because the atlantic trade was not a simple exchange between america and europe but a complex network of exchanges involving the caribbean africa and the mediterranean.
note the important exchanges between the north american mainland and the caribbean islands the important trade between the american colonies and africa and the wide range of european and mediterranean markets in which americans were active.
not shown on this map but also very important to colonial commerce was a large coastal trade among the various regions of british north america.
why did the major ports of trade emerge almost entirely in the northern colonies.
society and culture in provincial america 69 nevertheless commerce in the colonies survived and grew.
there was elaborate trade among the colonies themselves and with the west indies.
the mainland colonies offered their caribbean trading partners rum agricultural products meat and fish.
the islands offered sugar molasses and at times slaves in return.
there was also trade with england continental europe and the west coast of africa.
this commerce has often been described somewhat inaccurately as the triangular trade suggesting a neat process by which merchants carried rum and other goods from new england to africa exchanged their merchandise for slaves whom they then transported to the west indies hence the term middle passage for the dreaded journey it was the second of the three legs of the voyage and then exchanged the slaves for sugar and molasses which they shipped back to new england to be distilled into rum.
in reality the so called triangular trade in rum slaves and sugar was a complicated maze of highly diverse trade routes.
out of this risky trade emerged a group of adventurous entrepreneurs who by the mid eighteenth century were beginning to constitute a distinct merchant class.
the british navigation acts protected them from foreign competition in the colonies.
they had an emerging merchant class ready access to the market in england for such colonial products as furs timber and american built ships.
but they also developed markets illegally outside the british empire in the french spanish and dutch west indies where they could often get higher prices for their goods than in the british colonies.
the rise of consumerism as affluent residents of the colonies grew in number the growing prosperity and commercialism of british america created both new appetites and new opportunities to satisfy them.
the result was a growing preoccupation with the consumption of material goods.
the growth of eighteenth century consumerism increased the class divisions in the american colonies.
as the difference between the upper and lower classes became more glaring people of means became more intent on demonstrating reasons for growing consumerism their own membership in the upper ranks of society.
the ability to purchase and display consumer goods was an important way of doing so particularly for wealthy people in cities and towns who did not have large estates to boast their success.
but the growth of consumerism was also a product of the early stages of the industrial revolution.
although there was relatively little industry in america in the eighteenth century england and europe were making rapid advances and producing more and more affordable goods for affluent americans to buy.
to facilitate the new consumer appetites merchants and traders began advertising their goods in journals and newspapers.
agents of urban merchants the ancestors of the traveling salesman fanned out through the countryside attempting to interest wealthy landowners and planters in the luxury goods now available to them.
george and martha washington for example spent considerable time and money ordering elegant furnishings for their home at mount vernon goods that were shipped to them mostly from england and europe.
one feature of a consumer society is that things that once were considered luxuries quickly come to be seen as necessities once they are readily available.
in the colonies items that became commonplace after having once been expensive luxuries included tea household linens glassware manufactured cutlery crockery furniture and many other things.
another result of consumerism is the association of material goods of the quality of a persons home and possessions and clothing for example with virtue and refinement the ideal of the cultivated gentleman and the gracious lady became 70 chapter 3 increasingly powerful throughout the colonies in the eighteenth century.
in part that meant striving to become educated and refined in speech and behavior.
americans read books new social ideals of refinement on manners and fashion.
they bought magazines about london society.
and they strove to develop themselves as witty and educated conversationalists.
they also commissioned portraits of themselves and their families devoted large portions of their homes to entertainment built shelves and cases in which they could display fashionable possessions constructed formal gardens and lavished attention on their wardrobes and hairstyles.
patterns of society although there were sharp social distinctions in the colonies the well defined and deeply entrenched class system of england failed to reproduce itself in america.
aristocracies emerged to be sure but they tended to rely less on landownership than on control of a substantial workforce and they were generally less secure and less powerful than their english counterparts.
more than in england white people in america faced opportunities social mobility for social mobility both up and down.
there were also new forms of community in america and they varied greatly from one region to another.
masters and slaves on the plantation the plantation system of the american south produced one form of community.
the first plantations emerged in the tobacco growing areas of virginia and maryland.
some of the early planters became established aristocrats with vast estates.
on the whole however realities of plantation life seventeenth century colonial plantations were rough and relatively small.
in the early days in virginia they were little more than crude clearings where landowners and indentured servants worked side by side in conditions so harsh that death was an everyday occurrence.
most landowners lived in rough cabins or houses with their servants or slaves nearby.
the economy of the plantation was precarious.
planters could not control their markets so even the largest plantations were constantly at risk.
when prices fell planters faced the prospect of ruin.
the plantation economy created many new wealthy landowners but it also destroyed many.
the enslaved african americans of course lived very differently.
on the smaller farms with only a handful of slaves it was not always possible for a rigid separation to develop between whites and blacks.
but by the early eighteenth century over three fourths of all slave communities slaves lived on plantations of at least ten slaves and nearly one half lived in communities of fifty slaves or more.
in those settings they were able to develop a society and culture of their own.
although whites seldom encouraged formal marriages among slaves many blacks themselves developed strong and elaborate family structures.
there was also a distinctive slave religion which blended christianity with african folklore and sacred practices that became a central element in the emergence of an independent black culture.
nevertheless black society was subject to constant intrusions from and interaction with white society.
black house servants for example were isolated from their own community.
black women were often subject to unwanted sexual advances from owners and overseers and hence to bearing mulatto children who were rarely recognized by their white fathers.
on some plantations black workers were treated with kindness and society and culture in provincial america 71 ie new york e er lak pe n n s y lva n i a new york city philadelphia new jersey baltimore m a r yl an delaware d virginia williamsburg norfolk n o r t h ca r o l i n a new bern wilmington south ca r o l i n a atla nti c ocea n charles town georgia percent of population that was black per county colony in 1775 savannah 61 to 71 51 to 60 31 to 50 100 mi 11 to 30 0 1 to 10 200 km african population as a proportion of total population ca.
1775 this map illustrates the parts of the colonies in which slaves made up a large proportion of the population in some areas a majority.
the slave population was smallest in the western regions of the southern colonies and in the area north of the chesapeake although there remained a significant african population in parts of new jersey and new york some slave some free.
what explains the dense concentration of slaves in certain areas.
responded to their owners with genuine devotion.
on others they encountered physical brutality and occasionally even sadism against which they were virtually powerless.
slaves often resisted their masters in large ways and small.
the most serious example in the colonial period was the stono rebellion in south carolina in 1739 stono rebellion during which about 100 slaves rose up seized weapons killed several whites and attempted 72 chapter 3 to escape south to florida.
the uprising was quickly crushed and most participants were executed.
a more frequent form of resistance was simply running away but that provided no real solution either.
for most there was nowhere to go.
resistance more often took the form of subtle and often undetected defiance or evasion of their masters wishes.
most slaves male and female worked as field hands.
but on the larger plantations that aspired to genuine self sufficiency some slaves learned trades and crafts blacksmithing carpentry shoemaking spinning weaving sewing midwifery and others.
these skilled craftspeople were at times hired out to other planters.
some set up their own establishments in towns or cities and shared their profits with their owners.
a few were able to buy their freedom.
the puritan community the characteristic social unit in new england was not the isolated farm or the large plantation but the town.
in the early years of colonization each new settlement drew up a covenant binding all residents tightly together both religiously and socially.
colonists laid out a village with houses and a meetinghouse arranged around a shared pasture or common thus families generally lived with their neighbors close by.
they divided up the outlying fields and woodlands among the residents the size and location of a familys field depended on the familys numbers wealth and social station.
r ral field sudbury common swamp waltham weston general field gene cranberry swamp lexington malden lincoln sud b concord ury cambridge boston newton commonly held land privately held lots pound east stre john goodnows holdings et north field residences meetinghouse c ow sand hill co mm on 1 4 mi 1 4 1 2 km mill south field n commons the new england town sudbury massachusetts seventeenth century just as the plantation was a characteristic social form in the southern colonies the town was the most common social unit in new england.
this map shows the organization of sudbury massachusetts a town just west of boston in its early years in the seventeenth century.
note the location of the houses which are grouped mostly together around a shared pasture or common and near the church.
note too the outlying fields which were divided among residents of the town even though they were often not connected to the land on which the owners lived.
the map illustrates the holdings of a single resident of sudbury john goodnow whose house was on the common but whose lands were scattered over a number of areas of sudbury.
what aspects of new england life might help explain the clustering of residences at the center of the town.
source of data from sumner chilton powell puritan village the formation of a new england town.
society and culture in provincial america 73 once a town was established residents held a yearly town meeting to decide important questions and to choose a group of selectmen who ran the towns puritan democracy affairs.
participation in the meeting was generally restricted to adult males who were members of the church.
only those who could give evidence of being among the elect assured of salvation the visible saints were admitted to full church membership although other residents of the town were required to attend church services.
new englanders did not adopt the english system of primogeniture the passing of all property to the firstborn son.
instead a father divided up his land among all his sons.
his control of this inheritance gave him great power over the family.
often a son would reach his late twenties before his father would allow him to move into his own household and work his own land.
even then sons would usually continue to live in close proximity to their fathers.
the early puritan community was a tightly knit organism.
but as the years passed and the communities grew strains and tensions began to affect this communal structure.
this was partly due to the increasing commercialization of new england society.
it was also partly due to population growth.
in the first generations fathers generally controlled enough land to satisfy the needs of all their sons.
after several generations however there was often too little to go around particularly in communities surrounded by other towns with no room to expand outward.
the result was that in many communities groups of younger residents broke off and moved elsewhere to form towns of their own.
the tensions building in puritan communities could produce bizarre and disastrous events.
one example was the widespread hysteria in the 1680s and 1690s over accusations of witchcraft the human exercise of satanic powers in new england.
the most famous outbreak was in salem massachusetts where adolescent girls leveled salem witchcraft trials charges of witchcraft against several west indian servants steeped in voodoo belief and practice.
it would be difficult to overstate how the trials captured public attention.
see debating the past the witchcraft trials hysteria spread throughout the town and hundreds of people most of them women were accused of witchcraft.
nineteen residents of salem were put to death before the trials finally ended in 1692 the girls who had been the original accusers later recanted and admitted that their story had been fabricated.
the salem experience was not unique.
accusations of witchcraft spread through many new england towns in the early 1690s and centered mostly on women.
research into the background of accused witches reveals that most were middle aged women often widowed with few or no children.
many accused witches were of low social position were often involved in domestic conflicts had frequently been accused of other crimes and were considered abrasive by their neighbors.
others were women who through inheritance or hard work had come into possession of substantial property of their own and thus challenged the gender norms of the community.
the witchcraft controversies were a reflection of the highly religious character of new england societies.
new englanders believed in the power of satan.
belief in witchcraft was not a marginal superstition rejected by the mainstream.
it was a common feature of puritan religious conviction.
cities in the 1770s the two largest colonial ports philadelphia and new york had populations of 28 000 and 25 000 respectively which made them larger than most english urban centers of their time.
boston 16 000 charles town later charleston south carolina debating the past the witchcraft trials the witchcraft trials of the 1690s which began in salem massachusetts and spread to other areas of new england have been the stuff of popular legend for centuries.
they have also engaged the interest of generations of historians who have tried to explain why these seventeenth century americans became so committed to the belief that some of their own neighbors were agents of satan.
although there have been many explanations of the witchcraft phenomenon some of the most important in recent decades have focused on the central place of women in the story.
through the first half of the twentieth century most historians dismissed the witchcraft trials as hysteria prompted by the intolerance and rigidity of puritan society.
this interpretation informed the most prominent popular portrayal of witchcraft in the twentieth century arthur millers play the crucible first produced in 1953 which was clearly an effort to use the salem trials as a comment on the great anticommunist frenzy of his own era.
but at almost the same time perry miller the renowned scholar of puritanism argued in a series of important studies that belief in witchcraft was not a product of hysteria or intolerance but a widely shared part of the religious worldview of the seventeenth century.
to the puritans witchcraft seemed not only plausible but scientifically rational.
a new wave of interpretation of witchcraft began in the 1970s with the publication of salem possessed 1976 by paul boyer and stephen nissenbaum.
their examination of the town records of salem in the 1690s led them to conclude that the witchcraft controversy was a product of 74 class tensions between the poorer more marginal residents of one part of salem and the wealthier more privileged residents of another.
these social tensions which could not find easy expression on their own terms led some poorer salemites to lash out at their richer neighbors by charging them or their servants with witchcraft.
a few years later john demos in entertaining satan 1983 examined witchcraft accusations in a larger area of new england and similarly portrayed them as products of displaced anger about social and economic grievances that could not be expressed otherwise.
demos provided a far more complex picture of the nature of these grievances than had boyer and nissenbaum but like them he saw witchcraft as a symptom of a persistent set of social and psychological tensions.
at about the same time however a number of scholars were beginning to look at witchcraft through the scholarly lens of gender.
carol karlsens the devil in the shape of a woman 1987 demonstrated through intensive scrutiny of records across new england that a disproportionate number of those accused of witchcraft were propertyowning widows or unmarried women in other words women who did not fit comfortably into the normal pattern of maledominated families.
karlsen concluded that such women were vulnerable to these accusations because they seemed threatening to people including many women who were accustomed to women as subordinate members of the community.
more recently mary beth nortons in the devils snare 2002 placed the witchcraft trials in the context of other events of their time and in particular the terrifying upheavals and dislocations that the indian wars of the late seventeenth century created in puritan communities.
in the face of this crisis in which refugees from king williams war were fleeing towns destroyed by the indians and flooding salem and other eastern towns fear and social instability grew.
the witchcraft trials helped create a greater than normal readiness to connect aberrant behavior such as the actions of unusually independent or eccentric women to supernatural causes.
the result was a wave of witchcraft accusations that ultimately led to the execution of at least twenty people.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
how did the salem witchcraft trials r eflect attitudes toward women and the status of women in colonial new england.
why were colonial new englanders willing to believe accusations of witchcraft about their fellow colonists.
12 000 and newport rhode island 11 000 were also substantial communities by the standards of the day.
colonial cities served as trading centers for the farmers of their regions and as marts for international commerce.
cities were the centers of what industry existed in the colonies.
they were the locations of the most advanced schools and sophisticated cultural activities and of shops where imported goods could be bought.
in addition they were communities with urban social problems crime vice pollution traffic.
unlike smaller towns cities needed to set up constables offices and fire departments and develop systems for supporting the urban poor whose numbers became especially large in times of economic crisis.
finally cities were places where new ideas could circulate and be discussed.
there were newspapers books and other publications from abroad and hence new intellectual influences.
the taverns and coffeehouses of cities provided forums taverns and coffeehouses in which people could gather and debate the issues of the day.
that is one reason why the revolutionary crisis when it began to build in the 1760s and 1770s originated in the cities.
inequality new england for all its belief in community and liberty was far from an egalitarian society.
some must be rich and some poor john winthrop wrote in the early seventeenth century and his prediction perhaps exceeded his expectations.
wealthy families and socially distinguished ones who were usually the same people had privileges and rights that were not available to poorer citizens.
elites were called ladies and gentlemen while people in the lower levels of society were known as goodman or goodwife the elite were given the best seats in their churches and had the greatest influence over the parish.
men had more power than women.
servants had few rights.
the church itself taught that inequality reflected gods intention.
in cities such economic stratification was significant although unlike in later eras the rich were the largest sector of the population and in boston in the eighteenth century the majority.
that was so partly because wealthy people were most likely to move to cities and participate in commerce.
in the agricultural countryside differences in wealth were less extreme.
75 76 chapter 3 awakenings and enlightenments intellectual life in colonial america revolved around the conflict between the traditional emphasis on a personal god deeply involved in individual lives and the new spirit of the enlightenment which stressed the importance of science and human reason.
the old views placed a high value on a stern moral code in which intellect was less important than faith.
the enlightenment suggested that people had substantial control over their own lives and societies.
the pattern of religions religious toleration flourished in america to a degree unmatched in any european nation.
settlers in america brought with them so many different religious practices that it proved impossible to impose a single religious code on any large area.
the church of england was established as the official faith in virginia maryland new york the carolinas and georgia.
except in virginia and maryland however the laws establishing the church of england as the official colonial religion were largely ignored.
even in new england where the puritans had originally believed that they were all part of a single faith there was a growing tendency in the eighteenth century for different congregations to affiliate with different denominations.
in parts of new york and new jersey dutch settlers had established their own calvinist denomination dutch reformed.
numerous sects american baptists developed a great variety of sects and shared the belief that rebaptism usually by total immersion was necessary when believers reached maturity.
but while some baptists remained calvinists believers in predestination others came to believe in salvation by free will.
protestants extended toleration to one another more readily than they did to roman catholics.
new englanders in particular viewed their catholic neighbors in new france canada not only as commercial and military rivals but also as dangerous agents of rome.
rights of catholics in most of the english colonies however roman catholics were too few to cause serious conflict.
they were most numerous in maryland where they numbered 3 000.
perhaps for that reason they suffered the most persecution in that colony.
after the overthrow of the original proprietors in 1691 catholics in maryland not only lost their political rights but also were forbidden to hold religious services except in private houses.
jews in provincial america totaled no more than about 2 000 at any time.
the largest community lived in new york city.
smaller groups settled in newport and rights of jews charles town and there were scattered jewish families in all the colonies.
nowhere could they vote or hold office.
only in rhode island could they practice their religion openly.
by the beginning of the eighteenth century some americans were growing troubled by the apparent decline in religious piety in their society.
the movement of the population westward and the wide scattering of settlements had caused many communities to lose touch with organized religion.
the rise of commercial prosperity created a more secular outlook in urban areas.
the progress of science and free thought caused at least some colonists to doubt traditional religious beliefs.
concerns about weakening piety surfaced as early as the 1660s in new england where the puritan oligarchy warned of a decline in the power of the church.
ministers preached sermons of despair known as jeremiads deploring the signs of waning society and culture in provincial america 77 piety.
by the standards of other societies or other eras the puritan faith remained remarkably strong.
but to new englanders the declension of religious piety seemed a serious problem.
the great awakening by the early eighteenth century similar concerns about declining piety were emerging in other regions and among members of other faiths.
the result was the first great american revival the great awakening.
the great awakening began in earnest in the 1730s and reached its climax in the 1740s.
the revival had particular appeal to women the majority of converts and to younger sons of the third or fourth generation of settlers those who stood to inherit the least land and who faced the most uncertain futures.
the rhetoric of the revival emphasized the potential for every person to break away from the constraints of the past and start anew in his or her relationship with god.
such beliefs reflected in part the desires of many people to break away from their families or communities and start a new life.
powerful evangelists from england helped spread the revival.
john and charles wesley the founders of methodism visited georgia and other colonies in the 1730s.
george whitefield a powerful open air preacher from england made several evangelizing tours through the colonies and drew tremendous crowds.
but the wesleys whitefield and edwards outstanding preacher of the great awakening was the new england congregationalist jonathan edwards.
from his pulpit in northampton massachusetts edwards attacked the new doctrines of easy salvation for all.
he preached anew the traditional puritan ideas of the absolute sovereignty of god predestination and salvation by gods grace alone.
his vivid descriptions of hell could terrify his listeners.
the great awakening led to the division of existing congregations between new light revivalists and old light traditionalists and to the new lights and old lights founding of new ones.
it also affected areas of society outside the churches.
some of the revivalists denounced book learning as a hindrance to salvation.
but other evangelists saw education as a means of furthering religion and they founded or led schools for the training of new light ministers.
the enlightenment the great awakening caused one great cultural upheaval in the colonies.
the enlightenment caused another very different one.
the enlightenment was the product of scientific and intellectual discoveries in europe in the seventeenth century discoveries that revealed the natural laws that regulated the workings of nature.
the new scientific natural law knowledge encouraged many thinkers to begin celebrating the power of human reason and to argue that rational thought not just religious faith could create progress and advance knowledge in the world.
in celebrating reason the enlightenment encouraged men and women to look to themselves and their own intellect not just to god for guidance as to how to live their lives and shape their societies.
it helped produce a growing interest in education and a heightened concern with politics and government.
in the early seventeenth century enlightenment ideas in america were largely borrowed from europe from such thinkers as francis bacon and john locke of england 78 chapter 3 baruch spinoza of amsterdam and ren descartes of france.
later however such americans as benjamin franklin thomas paine thomas jefferson and james madison made their own important contributions to enlightenment thought.
literacy and technology white male americans achieved a high degree of literacy in the eighteenth century.
by the time of the revolution well over one half of all white men could read and write.
the literacy rate for women lagged behind the rate for men until the nineteenth century.
while opportunities for education beyond the primary level were scarce for men they were almost nonexistent for women.
the large number of colonists who could read created a market for the first widely circulated publications in america other than the bible almanacs.
by 1700 there were almanacs dozens perhaps hundreds of almanacs circulating throughout the colonies and even in the sparsely settled lands to the west.
most families had at least one.
almanacs provided medical advice navigational and agricultural information practical wisdom humor and predictions about the future most famously predictions about weather patterns for the coming year which many farmers used as the basis for decisions about crops even though the predictions were notoriously unreliable.
the most famous almanac in eighteenth century america was poor richards almanac published by benjamin franklin in philadelphia.
among their many purposes almanacs sought to help farmers predict weather and plan for the demands of changing seasons.
this illustration part of a calendar of farming images shows a man and a woman tending fields in july.
american antiquarian society guide to the seasons society and culture in provincial america 79 the wide availability of reading material in colonial america by the eighteenth century was a result of the spread of printing technology.
the first printing press began operating in the colonies in 1639 and by 1695 there were more towns in america with printers than there were in england.
at first many of these presses did not get very much use.
over time however the rising literacy of the society created a demand for books pamphlets and almanacs that the presses rushed to fill.
the first newspaper in the colonies publick occurrences was published first newspaper in boston in 1690 using a relatively advanced printing facility.
it was the first step toward what would eventually become a large newspaper industry.
one reason the stamp act of 1765 which imposed a tax on printed materials created such a furor was that printing technology had by then become central to colonial life.
education even before enlightenment ideas penetrated america colonists placed a high value on formal education.
some families tried to teach their children to read and write at home although the heavy burden of work in most agricultural households limited the time available for schooling.
in massachusetts a 1647 law required that every town support a school and a modest network of public schools emerged as a result.
the public schools quakers and other sects operated church schools and in some communities widows or unmarried women conducted dame schools in their homes.
in cities some master craftsmen set up evening schools for their apprentices.
african americans had virtually no access to education.
occasionally a master or mistress would teach slave children to read and write but as the slave system became more firmly entrenched strong social and ultimately legal sanctions developed to discourage such efforts.
indians too remained largely outside the white educational system to a large degree by choice.
some white missionaries and philanthropists established schools for native americans and helped create a small population of indians literate in spoken and written english.
harvard the first american college was established in 1636 by puritan theologians who wanted to create a training center for ministers.
the college was named for a charlestown massachusetts minister john harvard who had left it his library and onehalf of his estate.
in 1693 william and mary college named for the english king and queen was established in williamsburg virginia by anglicans.
and in 1701 first colleges conservative congregationalists dissatisfied with the growing religious liberalism of harvard founded yale named for one of its first benefactors elihu yale in new haven connecticut.
out of the great awakening emerged the college of new jersey founded in 1746 and known later as princeton after the town in which it was located one of its first presidents was jonathan edwards.
despite the religious basis of these colleges most of them offered curricula that included not only theology but also logic ethics physics geometry astronomy rhetoric latin hebrew and greek.
kings college founded in new york city in 1754 and later renamed columbia was specifically devoted to the spread of secular knowledge.
the academy and college of philadelphia founded in 1755 and later renamed the university of pennsylvania was also a secular institution established by a group of laymen under the inspiration of benjamin franklin.
after 1700 most colonial leaders received their entire education in america rather than attending university in england as had once been the case.
but higher education remained available only to a few relatively affluent white men.
80 chapter 3 the spread of science the clearest indication of the spreading influence of the enlightenment in america was an increasing interest in scientific knowledge.
most of the early colleges established chairs in the natural sciences and introduced some of the advanced scientific theories of europe including copernican astronomy and newtonian physics to their students.
but the most vigorous promotion of science in these years occurred through the private efforts of amateurs scientific societies and the activities of scientific societies.
leading merchants planters and even theologians became corresponding members of the royal society of london the leading english scientific organization.
benjamin franklin won international fame through his experiments with electricity.
particularly notable was his 1747 theory and his 1752 demonstration using a kite that lightning and electricity were the same.
previously most scientists had believed that there were several distinct types of electricity.
his research on the way in which electricity could be grounded led to the development of the lightning rod which greatly reduced fires and other damage to buildings during thunderstorms.
the high value that influential americans were beginning to place on scientific knowledge was clearly demonstrated by the most daring and controversial scientific experiment of the eighteenth century inoculation against smallpox.
the puritan theologian cotton cotton mather and vaccines mather had learned of experiments in england by which people had been deliberately infected with mild cases of smallpox to immunize them against the deadly disease.
despite strong opposition he urged inoculation on his fellow bostonians during an epidemic in the 1720s.
the results confirmed the effectiveness of the technique.
other theologians took up the cause along with many physicians.
by the mid eighteenth century inoculation had become a common medical procedure in america.
concepts of law and politics in law and politics as in other parts of their lives americans in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries believed that they were re creating in the new world the practices and institutions of the old world.
but as in other areas they created something very different.
although the american legal system adopted most of the essential elements of the english system including such ancient rights as trial by jury significant differences developed in court procedures punishments and the definition of crimes.
in england for example a printed attack on a public official whether true or false was considered john peter zenger libelous.
at the 1734 1735 trial of the new york publisher john peter zenger the courts ruled that criticisms of the government were not libelous if factually true a verdict that removed some colonial restrictions on the freedom of the press.
more significant for the future relationship between the colonies and england were differences emerging between the american and british political systems.
because the royal government was so far away americans created a group of institutions of their own that gave them a large measure of self government.
in most colonies local communities grew accustomed to running their own affairs with minimal interference from higher authorities.
the colonial assemblies came to exercise many of the powers that parliament exercised in england.
provincial governors appointed by the king after the 1690s had broad powers on paper but their actual influence was limited.
the result of all this was that the provincial governments became accustomed to acting more or less independently of parliament and a set of assumptions and expectations about the rights of the colonists took hold in america that was not shared by policymakers in england.
society and culture in provincial america 81 american communities prescribed a wide range of punishments for misconduct and crime.
among the more common punishments were public humiliations placing offenders in stocks forcing them to wear badges of shame or as in this woodcut binding them into a ducking stool and immersing them in water.
fotosearch getty images colonial punishment these differences caused few problems before the 1760s because the british did little to exert the authority they believed they possessed.
but when beginning in 1763 the english government began attempting to tighten its control over the american colonies a great imperial crisis resulted.
conclusion between the 1650s and the 1750s the english colonies in america grew steadily in population in the size of their economies and in the sophistication and diversity of their cultures.
although most white americans in the 1750s still believed that they were fully a part of the british empire they were in fact living in a world that had become very different from that of england.
many distinct societies developed in the colonies but the greatest distinction was between the colonies of the north and those of the south.
in the north society was dominated by relatively small family farms and by towns and cities of growing size.
a thriving commercial class was developing and with it an increasingly elaborate urban culture.
in the south there were many family farms as well.
but there were also large plantations cultivating tobacco rice indigo a plant used to make a dark blue dye and cotton for export.
by the late seventeenth century these plantations were relying heavily on african workers who had been brought to the colonies forcibly as slaves.
there were few significant towns and cities in the south and little commerce other than the marketing of crops.
82 chapter 3 the colonies did however have much in common.
most white americans accepted common assumptions about racial inequality.
that enabled them to tolerate the enslavement of african men and women and to justify a campaign of displacement and often violence against native americans.
most white americans and in different ways most nonwhite americans as well were deeply religious.
the great awakening therefore had a powerful impact throughout the colonies.
and most white colonists shared a belief in certain basic principles of law and politics which they considered embedded in the english constitution.
their interpretation of that constitution however was becoming increasingly different from that of the parliament in england and was laying the groundwork for future conflict.
key terms people places events cotton mather 80 covenant 72 enlightenment 76 evangelist 77 george whitefield 77 great awakening 77 huguenots 65 indentured servant 55 jeremiad 76 john and charles wesley 77 john peter zenger 80 jonathan edwards 77 middle passage 61 primogeniture 73 salem witchcraft trials 73 saugus ironworks 66 scotch irish 65 slave codes 63 stono rebellion 71 triangular trade 69 recall and reflect 1.
how did patterns of family life and attitudes toward women differ in the northern and southern colonies.
how did the lives of african slaves change over the course of the first century of slavery.
3 who emigrated to north america in the seventeenth century and why did they come.
what was the intellectual culture of colonial america as expressed in literature philosophy science education and law.
how and why did life in the english colonies diverge from life in england.
the empire in transition loosening ties the struggle for the continent the new imperialism stirrings of revolt cooperation and war looking ahead 1.
how did the seven years war change the balance of power in north america and throughout the world.
what policies did parliament implement with regard to the colonies in the 1760s and 1770s and why did britain adopt these policies.
how did the colonists respond to parliaments actions.
as late as the 1750s few americans objected to their membership in the british empire.
the imperial system provided many benefits to the americans and for the most part the english government left the colonies alone.
by the mid 1770s however the relationship between the american colonies and their british rulers had become so strained that the empire was on the verge of unraveling.
and in the spring of 1775 the first shots were fired in a war that would ultimately win america its independence.
how had it happened.
and why so quickly.
loosening ties in one sense it had not happened quickly at all.
ever since the first days of english settlement the ideas and institutions of the colonies had been diverging from those in britain.
in another sense however the revolutionary crisis emerged in response to relatively sudden changes in the administration of the empire.
in 1763 the english government began to enforce a series of colonial policies that brought the differences between the two societies into sharp focus.
83 time line a decentralized empire beginning of french and indian war seven years war begins george iii becomes king peace of paris proclamation of 1763 sugar act stamp act stamp act repealed declaratory act townshend duties boston massacre most townshend duties repealed regulator movement in north carolina committees of correspondence in boston gaspe incident tea act boston tea party coercive acts first continental congress in philadelphia battles of lexington and concord american revolution begins 84 in the fifty years after the glorious revolution the english parliament established a growing supremacy over the king.
under kings george i 1714 1727 and george ii 1727 1760 the prime minister and his cabinet became the nations real executives.
because they depended politically on the great merchants and landholders of england they were less inclined than the seventeenth century monarchs had been to try to tighten control over the empire which many merchants feared would disrupt the profitable commerce with the colonies.
as a result administration of the colonies remained loose decentralized and inefficient.
the character of royal officials in america contributed further to the looseness of the imperial system.
few governors were able men.
many perhaps most had used bribery to obtain their offices and continued to accept bribes once in office.
some appointees remained in england and hired substitutes to take their places in america.
the colonial assemblies taking advantage of the weak imperial administration had asserted their own authority to levy taxes make appropriations approve appointments and pass laws.
the assemblies came to look upon themselves as little parliaments each practically as sovereign within its colony as parliament itself was in england.
the colonies divided even so the colonists continued to think of themselves as loyal english subjects.
many felt stronger ties to england than they did to the other american colonies.
although the colonies had slowly learned to cooperate with one another on such practical matters as intercolonial trade road construction and a colonial postal service they remained reluctant to cooperate in larger ways even when in 1754 they faced a common threat from their old rivals the french and the empire in transition 85 frances indian allies.
delegates from pennsylvania maryland new york and new england met in albany in that year to negotiate a treaty with the iroquois.
they albany plan tentatively approved a proposal by benjamin franklin to set up a general government to manage relations with the indians.
war with the french and indians was already beginning when the albany plan was presented to the colonial assemblies.
none approved it.
the struggle for the continent the war that raged in north america through the late 1750s and early 1760s was part of a larger struggle between england and france.
the british victory in that struggle known in europe as the seven years war confirmed englands commercial supremacy and cemented its control of the settled regions of north america.
in america the conflict which colonists called the french and indian war was also the final stage in a long struggle among the three principal powers in northeastern north america the english the french and the iroquois.
new france and the iroquois nation by the end of the seventeenth century the french empire in america was vast the whole length of the mississippi river and its delta named louisiana after their king and the continental interior as far west as the rocky mountains and as far frances colonial empire south as the rio grande.
france claimed in effect the entire interior of the continent.
to secure their hold on these enormous claims they founded a string of widely separated communities fortresses missions and trading posts.
would be feudal lords established large estates seigneuries along the banks of the st lawrence river.
on a high bluff above the river stood the fortified city of quebec.
montreal to the south and sault sainte marie and detroit to the west marked the northern boundaries of french settlement.
on the lower mississippi there were plantations much like those in the southern colonies of english america worked by african slaves and owned by creoles people of european ancestry born in the americas.
new orleans founded in 1718 to service the french plantation economy was soon as big as some of the larger cities of the atlantic seaboard biloxi and mobile to the east completed the string of french settlement.
both the french and the english were aware that the battle for control of north america would be determined in part by who could best win the allegiance of native tribes.
the english with their more advanced commercial economy could usually offer the indians better and more plentiful goods.
but the french offered tolerance.
unlike the english the french settlers in the interior generally adjusted their own behavior to indian patterns.
french fur traders frequently married indian women and adopted tribal ways jesuit missionaries interacted comfortably with the natives and converted them to catholicism by the thousands without challenging most of their social customs.
by the mid eighteenth century therefore the french had better and closer relations with most of the indians of the interior than did the english.
the most powerful native group however had remained aloof from both sides.
the iroquois confederacy five indian nations mohawk seneca the iroquois confederacy cayuga onondaga and oneida that had formed a defensive alliance in the fifteenth century had been the most powerful native presence in the ohio valley since the 1640s.
