chapter 7 practicing democracy 179 significant dates new house and senate elected george washington elected and inaugurated as first u s president french revolution begins federal government assumes state revolutionary war debts washington d c selected permanent u s capital the government actually moved there in 1800 judith sargent murray s on the equality of the sexes published bill of rights ratified first bank of the united states chartered ohio indian tribes defeat u s army in northwest territory hamilton s report on manufactures washington reelected president citizen genet arrives as ambassador to the united states 1793 1794 whiskey rebellion 1794 western indian confederacy is defeated at battle of fallen timbers jay s treaty negotiated between the united states and britain ratified by the senate in 1795 and effective in 1796 1795 treaty of greenville ends indian wars on ohio frontier pinckney s treaty with spain 1796 john adams elected president 1797 beginning of the quasi war with france xyz affair congress passes alien and sedition acts kentucky and virginia resolutions declare alien and sedition acts unconstitutional 1799 george washington dies 1800 adams concludes peace with france and signs judiciary act the policies that were set and institutions that were created during the first years of the new government lasted for decades but the philosophical differences about the role of government in the nations life that emerged have persisted to the present.
convening a congress inaugurating a president adopting a bill of rights 7 1 jefferson defeats adams for president analyze the first federal elections and the adoption of the bill of rights.
in one of its last acts under the articles of confederation the outgoing congress set the dates for elections for the house of representatives the senate and presidential electors to occur in early 1789.
the constitution left it to each state legislature to decide how to manage these elections.
no one had conducted elections like these before and it took time to work out the process.
elections for members of the house were held in january and february of 1789.
as permitted in the constitution different states had different rules for who could vote.
some house races were hotly contested including the one in virginias fifth district that pitted two future u s presidents james madison and james monroe against each other.
madison won and played a crucial role in the first congress.
state legislatures then elected the members of the u s senate as they would do until 1913.
presidential electors were chosen by different methods depending on the state and they cast their ballots for the first president.
congress and president washington setting to work by early spring the new congress began to assemble in the nations temporary capital new york city the location that many of its residents hoped would become permanent.
congress was supposed to convene on march 4 but it was not until april that either house of congress could muster a quorum a majority of the total members which was required to do business.
much business awaited.
the constitution required each house to set up its own rules of operation.
the senate had to confirm the election of the president.
the constitution also gave the new government the power to set and collect taxes.
the need for a tax law was urgent each day that congress delayed thousands of dollars went uncollected.
on april 14 charles thomson the secretary of congress arrived at mount vernon to officially inform george washington of what he already knew he had been unanimously elected president of the united states by the 69 presidential electors who also elected john adams as vice president though by a smaller vote.
washington quickly traveled to new york where he and adams were formally inaugurated on april 30 1789.
he then set to work creating the executive branch of the federal government.
the 58 year old george washington had no precedents to guide him.
an independent republic with an elected citizen at its head was an unprecedented development for the world of 1789.
some led by alexander hamilton who loved british models recommended that washington establish a court similar to that of king george iii.
others including vice president john adams recommended a more egalitarian approach.
washington steered a middle course insisting on formal state dinners and fairly formal relationships with those who came to call on him but avoiding a throne or robes of office.
he was called simply mr.
president instead of your highness although he was the only president never to live in the white house he did help to design it although african slaves did most of the work building it.
while in office he maintained a formal presidential residence in new york city and in philadelphia when the capital moved there in 1790.
the bill of rights on may 4 1789 only a month after the house of representatives had begun its work james madison told the house that he would soon fulfill his promise and propose amendments to the constitution.
on june 8 he offered amendments that included line by line changes in the constitution.
proposing amendments was easy.
getting them passed was not.
some of madisons strongest partners in getting the constitution adopted were neutral or hostile to amending it.
president washington at madisons request made a brief reference to amendments in his inaugural address.
later washington said of the proposed amendments some of them in my opinion are importantly necessary others though of themselves in my conception not very essential are necessary to quiet the fears of some respectable characters and well meaning men it was hardly a ringing endorsement.
on the other hand some federalists in congress thought it was far too early to amend the constitution especially when other issues like balancing the budget were pressing.
during the ratification process however madison had promised to add a bill of rights to the constitution guaranteeing citizens important rights under a federal government.
without a promise for those added rights key states would not have ratified the constitution.
while he was determined to fulfill his promise madison also knew that antifederalists sought more far reaching changes and he wanted to act faster than those opponents.
representative iheodorick bland a close ally of patrick henry proposed a second convention to consider the defects of this constitution if congress did not act to quiet this movement the whole constitutional structure could unravel.
madison quickly abandoned his original proposal for new clauses to be included throughout the body of the constitution and decided instead to propose amendments to be added at the end of the document.
the house initially passed 17 amendments but the senate changed them and on september 25 congress sent 12 amendments to the states for ratification.
it was fast work for a body that had not existed 6 months earlier.
an amendment setting the size of the house was not ratified neither was an amendment limiting congressional pay it was ratified finally in 1992.
the other 10 amendments became the bill of rights added to the constitution in 1791 after three fourths of the state legislatures approved them.
the bill of rights the first 10 amendments to the constitution passed by congress in 1789 and ratified by the states in 1791 first of these amendments said congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof or abridging the freedom of speech or the press or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
other of the amendments included the right of the people to keep and bear arms freedom from being required to house soldiers in private homes a major grievance against the british before the revolution the right to be secure in their persons houses papers and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures the right to trial by jury the right to a speedy trial and limits on excessive bail.
finally the tenth amendment perhaps most important to many antifederalists especially those who worried about federal intervention in the institution of slavery limited the powers of the national government the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution nor prohibited by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people.
the methodist church on john street in new york city is the oldest methodist church in the united states.
since methodist and baptist churches never received public support in any of the former colonies they were among the strongest supporters of the prohibition on any congressional action to create a state church for the united states that was included in the bill of rights.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 181 180 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 73 the constitution had replaced a weak national government with a strong one but the amendments meant that the new government would operate within clear limits.
7 1 quick review why was the bill of rights added to the constitution.
7 2 73 creating an economy alexander hamilton and the u s economic system analyze the enduring argument begun by hamilton s economic vision for the united states and the alternative vision of jefferson and madison.
7 2 president washington faced difficult problems many of them economic.
the inability of the federal government under the articles of confederation to collect taxes meant that federal debts were not being paid and that the financial status of the united states was in serious trouble.
the government could not afford an army sufficient to protect the frontier.
tensions with britain were made worse because britain had not withdrawn its troops from western forts as promised in the treaty of paris and because london merchants who were owed large sums from americans were angry.
although the continental congress had adopted the dollar as the national currency in 1785 there was no official currency congress state governments and private banks had printed a variety of paper notes all of which could be easily counterfeited and the ease with which they were put into circulation led to inflation.
in the new united states as during much of the colonial era people bought and sold with an amazing variety of paper notes and coins from around the world especially spanish gold and silver.
solving the financial crisis and regulating the currency was essential for national prosperity.
in the summer of 1789 congress adopted a five percent customs tax on all imports into the united states creating a solid financial footing for the new government.
it also set up a system of federal courts and approved the establishment of four senior positions within the executive branch secretaries of state war and the treasury and an attorney general.
these four officials became the first presidential cabinet.
washington quickly appointed thomas jefferson then u s.
ambassador to paris as his secretary of state general henry knox his deputy in command throughout the revolution as secretary of war and his friend the former governor of virginia edmund randolph as attorney general.
but given the nations financial problems the most important and powerful position would be secretary of the treasury and to that office washington appointed new yorker alexander hamilton.
a brilliant and ruthless political infighter hamilton could handle the economic crisis better than anyone else even if washington also knew from bitter experience that he could never completely trust hamilton who had served as washingtons chief aide during the revolution and had sometimes gone behind his commanders back or quarreled directly with him.
the secretary of the treasury s key role on his first full day on the job secretary hamilton negotiated a 50 000 loan from the bank of new york to keep the new government solvent.
he also set about creating a customs service to collect the five percent import tax that congress had already passed and he organized what would become the u s coast guard to be sure that imports were not smuggled into the country without being taxed.
hamilton had once said i hate procrastination in business and he was not about to make a slow start on the new job.
ten days after his appointment the house of representatives asked him for a report on the public credit of the united states the most pressing national issue m virtually everyones view and gave him until january to prepare it.
182 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america j 754 1800 debt and taxes hamiltons report relative to a provision for the support of public credit was the foundation of the economic development of the new nation.
hamilton had read widely in philosophy and economics as if preparing for the moment when he would be asked to design a new economic system.
as he looked at the crushing debt that the nation faced from the revolution 54 million in federal debt and 25 million more in state debts he knew that radical action was required.
few people including foreign and domestic investors and foreign governments trusted the new countrys ability to pay its bills.
as a result neither the state and federal governments nor private businesses could borrow money.
the government could not finance desperately needed activities including the creation of an army.
private businesses could not restart commerce which had been mostly frozen since the revolution.
revolutionary war veterans who had been paid in government promissory notes had sold them for as little as 15 cents on the dollar rather than trust a government that seemed untrustworthy to pay what it had promised.
in this crisis hamilton saw only one solution.
the federal government he believed needed to assume all of the revolutionary war debt state and federal and promise to pay it all off dollar for dollar while establishing a tax policy that would show wary observers that the government would meet its obligations.
credit is the entire thing hamilton argued.
not everyone in congress agreed.
to hamiltons surprise his close ally in the fight over adopting the constitution james madison led the opposition to debt assumption in the house and more quietly secretary of state jefferson led similar opposition within the administration.
states like virginia and north carolina that had paid off most of their own war debts were unhappy with the idea that they would pay taxes to cover the debts of what they considered less responsible states like massachusetts and south carolina.
veterans who had sold their government promissory notes at highly depreciated rates during the 1780s to eat and live were appalled that the civilian speculators to whom they had sold them would get rich on the 100 percent payment of the debt.
and for those who shared jeffersons view of a democratic nation of small farmers hamiltons plan created a national government that was too big would raise too much in taxes sustain a standing army and shift power from farmers to urban and commercial interests.
they would have none of it.
in the spring of 1790 the house led by madison rejected hamiltons proposals each of four times he submitted it.
ever the wily politician hamilton sought a compromise and secretary of state jefferson made it happen.
many years later jefferson told the story of how he hosted a dinner at his home in new york at which he madison and hamilton struck a deal by which each one got something that he considered important.
hamilton wanted new york city his home and the nations commercial center to be the permanent u s capital.
but others especially jefferson and madison wanted to locate the capital further south.
they disliked the difficult travel to new york and they also disliked urban life.
they feared that a northern capital would fuel northern antislavery tendencies in congress.
not incidentally madison like george washington owned land on the potomac river that would become more valuable if the capital were nearby.
if hamilton would agree to support jefferson and madison on the location of the capital then the two virginians would support hamiltons economic plan.
in july congress made the compromise official.
philadelphia not new york was designated as the new temporary capital and the law also stipulated that a 10 square mile site on the potomac river between maryland and virginia should become the nations permanent capital.
they gave president washington a free hand to select the specific site and plan the new center of government.
congress also passed hamiltons financial plan including the assumption of state debts by the federal government.
henceforth the new nation would have a government on a solid financial footing with a guaranteed credit rating just as hamilton wanted.
this painting of alexander hamilton ca.
1804 was done by the artist john trumbull after hamilton had left office.
hamilton s fiscal program was controversial from the beginning but it launched the nation s economy in a commercial direction and also created political division that continued for decades in the united states.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 183 7 1 72 73 7a the compromise solved the immediate issues but the split on economic policy would lead to the creation of two hostile political parties which came to be known as the federalists and the democratic republicans known at first as antifederalists that would dominate the nations politics for the next decade.
in the first years of the new government those who supported the constitution called themselves federalists wanting a strong federal government and those opposed to the adoption of the constitution and then hamiltons interpretation of it were happy to be known simply as antifederalists.
but as the battle over hamiltons plans intensified those in the government and the newspapers who supported madisons and jeffersons opposition began to call themselves democratic republicans claiming that they not those following hamilton were the true defenders of the republic.
most everyone including hamilton jefferson madison and especially washington abhorred the idea of opposing political parties but such parties were beginning to form before washington finished his first term in office though no one yet called them that.
to a degree the political divisions reflected a sectional split.
supporting hamilton were bankers in new york and philadelphia as well as merchants especially those engaged in seagoing trade based in boston or other ports.
those tending to support the democratic republican cause included southern plantation owners who always worried that the new government would move against slavery and who saw little value in banks and commercial development farmers ranging from supporters of daniel shays in massachusetts to farmers in the backwoods of kentucky and small town merchants who were less dependent on international credit.
supporters of each side also had their own newspaper.
john fenno had launched the gazette of the united states in 1789 to support the federalist cause.
two years later madison and jefferson convinced philip freneau to launch the staunchly antifederalist national gazette.
to support that paper jefferson to his later embarrassment also put freneau on the federal payroll as an official of the state department.
the lines between two groups were growing stronger.
the first bank of the united states once he had resolved the debt issue hamiltons next move widened the divide between those who like him wanted an activist government and a robust commercial economy and those who preferred jeffersons vision of an agrarian nation made up of small independent farmers with a very modest national government.
in december 1790 bank of the united states hamilton submitted another report to congress that called for creating a bank of the first federal bank chartered in 1781 the united states modeled on the bank of england.
hamiltons fondness for british issued currency for the country and stabilized models wag on rason americans never trusted him but hamilton did not want the economy.
to be part of britain.
he wanted to use britains economic model to build a nation that would become as powerful as britain.
achieving that vision meant creating a federal bank that would manage the economy and fund a strong government as britains bank did for that country.
as with the debt not everyone agreed.
the bank of england was a joint public private venture.
most of its shareholders were private investors but it played a key role in guaranteeing and repaying britains public debt and its paper bank notes were accepted as official currency in britain.
hamilton did not trust congress or the states to issue paper currency.
he feared all too realistically given what had happened during the revolution that congress and the states would solve financial problems by printing more currency and thus quickly debase its value and re create the inflation that the nation faced in the 1790s.
but hamilton was confident that no investors would risk their funds by allowing more currency to circulate than they could afford to redeem.
he was anxious to have those americans who had funds to invest become strongly attached to the new government.
currency from a semiprivate bank could be trusted because the bank would have to redeem its paper currency in gold or silver.
hamilton believed the united states could have a stable currency that everyone trusted if the bank of the united states were chartered.
part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 the 1799 building that was designed for the first bank of the united states in philadelphia reflected the solid structure and grand hopes that hamilton had for his bank.
a central bank could also make loans thus expanding the amount of credit available.
with resources backed by both private investors and government guarantees the bank could ease the credit squeeze and stimulate commerce and trade.
businesses could get loans.
investment in new enterprises could begin.
much of the banks financing would also be promissory notes from the government itself notes that hamilton had just guaranteed would maintain their full value.
for southern plantation owners like jefferson and madison the bank plan was much worse than the plan to assume all debt for the revolutionary war.
the bank plan would centralize power in the big northern cities philadelphia new york and boston where the nations largest banks were.
jefferson did not like cities.
he preferred small rural communities which he believed were far more democratic places.
he said i think our governments will remain virtuous for many centuries as long as they are chiefly agricultural and he continued when people get piled upon one another in large cities as in europe they will become corrupt as in europe in addition jefferson like most democratic republicans of his day did not like banks.
the battle over the bank of the united states was a key battle in a war between those who wanted an urban commercial nation and those who wanted a nation based on independent farmers.
it would not be the last such battle.
jefferson feared that banks would keep the poor in poverty and enrich those who were already wealthy through ill gotten gains based on speculation rather than hard work.
for most farmers who were always in debt given their need to buy seed and fertilizer before they could plant and harvest a crop banks were the distant institutions that hounded them to repay loans.
for jefferson and madison and even for john adams the thought that the government they had worked so hard to create was now about to create a bank was galling.
although hamilton and madison had both helped write and defend the constitution they now parted company forever over their interpretation of it.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 185 1a despite the opposition of some of the nations most eloquent leaders the bank bill sailed through congress.
almost all northern representatives voted for it and almost all southern ones against it.
the sectional lines and the lines between the federalist and democratic republican factions they were not yet political parties were clearly emerging.
once the bill passed both houses of congress washington had to decide whether to sign it.
for madison who had been operating as washingtons key spokesperson in congress the bank was an unconstitutional extension of federal power and he argued privately and persuasively that washington should veto the bill.
washington then turned to his cabinet for advice.
attorney general randolph and secretary of state jefferson both urged a veto.
the tenth amendment was clear they said that anything not mentioned in the constitution was left to the states and the constitution certainly did not authorize a federal bank.
for secretary of the treasury hamilton however the bank was essential and the constitution he said gave congress the authority to do everything necessary and proper for the smooth functioning of the nation.
he warned washington that if the national government did not invoke the necessary and proper clause then americans would become a people governed without government washington signed the bill in february 1791 and the united states now had a bank and deeper political divisions than previously imagined.
after the bank bill hamilton proposed a federal mint to create uniform coins for use throughout the country.
for almost 20 years after the revolution people had used foreign coins.
hamilton wanted u s coins based on the u s dollar not the british pound.
it was not a controversial proposal and the federal mint was soon established.
with the mint in place hamilton resigned as secretary of the treasury in 1795 and washington appointed oliver wolcott in his place.
though he remained a close presidential advisor until the end of washingtons term hamilton preferred to make money as a private citizen.
hamilton s commercial nation vs jefferson s agrarian vision hamiltons last major report to congress was his report on manufactures.
unlike the earlier reports this one was not a plea for immediate legislation but rather a blueprint for the future of the nation as hamilton saw it.
where jefferson wanted an agrarian nation that exported raw materials hamilton wanted a more complete economy within the united states.
he too saw farming as the backbone of the economy but he also wanted to support factories that would create finished goods from the products of the fields forests and mines for both domestic consumption and export.
in addition he wanted the nation to make everything its military might need from uniforms to gunpowder and warships.
hamilton was a harsh critic of slavery but although he did not mention slavery in his report on manufactures the document was suffused with what 70 years later a new republican party would call free labor hamiltons vision promoted open immigration.
immigrants from europe would work in the emerging factories hamilton said and a plentiful supply of new workers would keep wages low and factories profitable for their owners.
he had no fear of child labor either noting in general women and children are rendered more useful and the latter more early useful by manufacturing establishments than they would otherwise be hamilton wanted a federal government that would shape the nations economy rather than leave economic development to individuals.
he believed that higher tariffs should protect new industries and that government incentives should help launch those ventures when private investment was not sufficient.
he saw strong patent protection as essential to invention.
moreover he wanted to build a network of roads and canals to help commerce flow.
part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 these ideas frightened jefferson and madison.
at one point jefferson told washington that he thought his treasury secretary was expanding the general welfare clause of the constitution to give congress the authority to regulate every aspect of the nation s economy.
jefferson would continue to worry especially as washington sided with his treasury secretary more often than not.
although hamilton was a brilliant if sometimes unscrupulous leader not all of his ideas were his alone.
he was regularly looking to europe especially britain for ideas and there were many economic ideas ready for export.
hamilton greatly admired the british industrialists who were creating mechanized production on a scale never seen before.
he was also influenced by the scottish philosopher adam smith whose book wealth of nations was published in 1776.
in the economic world that smith described wealth was generated not by the simple ownership of things land or gold or products but rather by the free trade of goods and services and by competition to expand trade.
as people competed to make a profit on their transactions they increased the circulation of money lowered the cost of goods and created general prosperity the wealth of nations and of individuals.
competition smith said was the key to wealth.
thus he wrote it is not from the benevolence of the butcher the brewer or the baker that we expect our dinner but from their regard to their self interest as that self interest is satisfied through competition there is more meat beer and bread at lower cost available for everyone while the butcher brewer and baker live well.
for smith who called britain a nation of shopkeepers it was the shopkeepers and manufacturers and traders not the hoarders of gold and silver who made wealth.
73 7 2 73 thinking historically hamilton vs jefferson in his 1791 report on manufactures alexander hamilton defended the expediency of encouraging manufacturers in the united states.
contrast ng farming with manufacturing he noted labour employed in agriculture is in a great measure periodical and occasional depending on seasons liable to various and long intermissions while that occupied in many manufactures is constant and regular extending through the year embracing in some instances night as well as day.
hamilton knew that not everyone agreed with him.
some believed that it was wrong to use the government to accelerate the growth of manufactures.
critics he knew liked a world in which the less independent condition of an artisan can be exchanged for the more independent condition of a farmer.
hamilton s critics led by thomas jefferson and james madison feared an activist government and thought his plans were an antidemocratic effort to strengthen the power of the financial elite and their political allies.
where hamilton wanted the federal government to foster manufacturing and commerce jefferson and his supporters wanted a passive federal government that stayed out of people s way.
while still secretary of state jefferson wrote hamilton s financial system had two objects 1 st as a puzzle to exclude popular understanding and inquiry 2nd as a machine for the corruption of the legislature.
jefferson believed that independent farmers were far more likely to maintain a strong democratic government than paid employees who in giving up their economic freedom would soon also give up their political freedom.
he saw hamilton s plan as a way to confuse the true agents of democracy.
this debate from the 1790s is still alive today.
thinking critically 1.
contextualization what regions of the country in the 1790s best reflected jefferson s view of america.
what regions reflected hamilton s view.
historical interpretation what groups in american society stood to gain the most if hamilton s vision was enacted.
which groups would gain from jefferson s vision.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 187 12 smiths book was a direct attack on the earlier ideas of mercantilism that saw wealth as a matter of getting and hoarding wealth.
in the new world of a capitalist system or a market economy where commerce and trade were most significant great britain with its growing factories and its royal navy controlling the oceans was destined to great wealth.
as smith was trying to describe the economic system in great britain hamilton was trying with surprising success in spite of the opposition to duplicate the system in the united states.
13 12 quick review how did hamilton s ideas for the young united states differ from those of jefferson.
how might different groups of americans line up as supporters of one or the other.
7 4 7 3 setting the pace the washington administration explain the precedents set by george washington s presidential administration.
while president washington tended to leave economic policy to his secretary of the treasury he was far from a passive bystander during his 8 years in office.
although economic issues were the top priority washington also faced many others.
having spent most of his adult life in public service washington knew how fragile the new republic was.
the votes to adopt the new constitution had been close in several states and powerful leaders including patrick henry in virginia and john hancock in massachusetts would have been happy to return to a system in which the states were supreme and the national government only a weak federation.
many rural americans including the poor white farmers who made up most of the citizens distrusted all governments and felt they got little benefit from them while the tax on imports raised the cost of necessities.
an obscure massachusetts farmer william manning who had fought at the battle of concord now wrote a pamphlet the key of liberty in which he argued that friends to liberty and free government needed to be watchful of the few who were dominating the new administration and needed to be prevented from destroying free government and tyrannizing over the people.
while farmers like manning complained britain was alert maneuvering in military and diplomatic actions along the borders of the fledgling republic prepared to reopen hostilities and indeed retake the newly independent nation.
washington was especially worried that the new nation would lose the land west of the 13 original states.
although britain had ceded all its claims to land east of the mississippi river to the united states indians who lived in that huge territory had not agreed and when washington took office the tribes were considerably stronger than the u s army.
in addition the british had not removed all of their forces from forts in that area even though they had agreed to at the end of the revolution.
the british saw the indians as a useful instrument to help them reignite a war that would end american independence and return the country to the empire.
many western whites were so fed up with the lack of protection by the federal government that there was talk of forming a separate western nation.
between 1785 and 1788 john sevier led settlers in the western counties of north carolina now the j state of tennessee to form a state they called franklin or sometimes the republic of franklin.
they were desperate for support in their battles with local cherokee and chickasaw.
when their petition to become a state failed they virtually governed themselves as an independent nation.
sensing an opportunity spanish authorities offered financial support to the settlers if they would affiliate with spain rather than the united states but north carolina authorities successfully reasserted authority in the region.
when he became president in 1789 washington wanted to be sure there were no similar interests in independence or foreign alliances in the western lands claimed by the united states.
188 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 as one of his first moves after taking office washington set out on a series of grand tours of the united states.
he meant to see and be seen with the citizens of the country.
people loved seeing in person this war hero now president and the tours were an important effort to solidify the country behind the president and the constitution.
a lifelong soldier washington also played a major role in the wars between the united states government and the native american tribes that dominated the ohio region when he came to office.
in spite of a series of defeats for the u s army washington kept pressing his case and eventually defeated the tribes that had long inhabited the ohio river valley.
when hamiltons efforts to raise taxes created an armed uprising of farmers along the pennsylvania frontier the so called whiskey rebellion washington himself took charge of the army that put down the rebellion but also treated the rebels far more leniently than some like alexander hamilton wanted.
finally in his second term in office washington turned most of his attention to foreign policy specifically the growing tension between revolutionary france and the united states which continued even after he left office.
the president tours the nation to use his personal prestige to consolidate public support for the new government washington went on tours of the nation not an easy task at a time when roads were poor and horses and carriages were the only means of transport once one left the waterways.
american voices moses seixas and george washington 1790 letters fn 1790 as part of one of his national tours washington visited newport rhode island and its touro synagogue the oldest synagogue in the united states.
moses seixas speaking for the congregation wrote to washington thanking him for the visit.
washington responded with a statement of his commitment to religious freedom.
in a nation that was still sorting out the meaning of democracy and at a time before the first amendment was added to the constitution washington s letter was an important statement of american freedom.
letter from moses seixas permit the children of the stock of abraham to approach you with the most cordial affection and esteem for your person and merits and to join with our fellow citizens in welcoming you to newport deprived as we heretofore have been of the invaluable rights of free citizens we now with a deep sense of gratitude to the almighty disposer of all events behold a government erected by the majesty of the people a government which to bigotry gives no sanction to persecution no assistance but generously affording to al liberty of conscience and immunities of citizenship deeming every one of whatever nation tongue or language equal parts of the great governmental machine letter from g washington to the hebrew congregation in newport rhode island while i receive with much satisfaction your address replete with expressions of affection and esteem i rejoice in the opportunity of assuring you that i shall always retain a grateful remembrance of the cordial welcome i experienced in my visit to newport the citizens of the united states of america have a right to applaud themselves for having given to mankind examples of an enlarged and liberal policy a policy worthy of imitation.
all possess alike liberty of conscience and immunities of citizenship.
it is now no more that toleration is spoken of as if it was by the indulgence of one class of people that another enjoyed the exercise of their inherent natural rights.
for happily the government of the united states which gives to bigotry no sanction to persecution no assistance requires only that they who live under its protection should demean themselves as good citizens in giving it on all occasions their effectual support.
source george washington papers 1741 1799 library of congress letterbook 39.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what claims do seixas and washington make about religious toleration in the united states of the 1790s.
historical interpretation washington wrote his letter before the first amendment was added to the constitution.
what does he mean by more than toleration and natural rights to free religious expression.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 189 7 1.
7 2 13 the battles between the u s military and a confederation of tribes that were fought between 1785 and 1795 were sometimes referred to as the northwest indian war or little turtle s war in recognition of the central role of the miami leader little turtle in the early defeats of the u s forces.
nevertheless between 1789 and 1791 he rode by carriage and horseback from new york through much of new england and across the south.
the trip allowed him to address important issues such as religious freedom hear from citizens and personalize a distant national government.
welcoming the nations greatest hero and leader was the social event of the season for these small town residents and for many it consolidated the sense of belonging to one nation.
privately washington sometimes complained about the accommodations but he was convinced that his speeches and meetings had done much to build good will and support for the nation and his administration.
indian wars building the u s army washington was deeply concerned about how to handle the frontier indian tribes.
he blamed much of the problem on the turbulence and disorderly conduct of settlers who would not wait for permission or protection to enter the new territories but then who complained bitterly when indians attacked them.
still he needed to act with caution because he wanted these new settlers to be loyal citizens despite his frustration with them.
on a personal level he himself like many members of congress had speculated in western lands and stood to make money if the land could actually be opened to white settlement.
but given the poverty of the federal government including only 600 soldiers in the army when washington became president the president hardly commanded a force that could make much of a difference in the vast western territory.
ihe chief representative of the u s government on the western frontier arthur st clair was both the appointed governor of what were then the northwest territories of the united states lands indians claimed and a major general in the army.
congress had ordered him to end all indian titles to the lands between the ohio and mississippi rivers.
but st clair lacked the resources to do his job.
his strategy as he wrote to washington was to divide and conquer to seek many treaties with individual tribes rather than one overall treaty with all the tribes.
but this strategy did not go well.
in 1789 just before washingtons inauguration st clair negotiated several treaties with one group of indian leaders at fort harmar but most other leaders and most tribes rejected these treaties making them virtually useless.
in 1790 washington asked congress to expand the army so it could force the tribes of the ohio region to sue for peace before a blow is struck at them congress agreed to expand the army to 1 000 men and added 1 500 state militia from kentucky virginia and pennsylvania.
this increased force however was still not strong enough to win the victories the president thought essential.
in september 1790 1 450 troops under general josiah harmar marched into the territory of the miami and shawnee to destroy villages and crops as a show of force that might stop the attacks on frontier settlements.
in october harmars army was attacked by shawnees miamis and pottawattamies and 500 of the americans were killed before the rest retreated.
after this defeat attacks on white settlements continued and attempts at negotiating peace failed.
although some indians led by a seneca named cornplanter sought to make a separate peace for their tribes most others rejected the governments proposed treaties.
in 1791 president washington ordered a new attack.
general st clair himself led 2 000 troops in a direct assault on the miamis on the wabash river in what is now indiana.
on november 4 1791 1 500 indians from several tribes led by mishikinakwa or little turtle of the miami and blue jacket of the shawnee killed over 500 troops and most of the expeditions female camp followers.
washington was shocked that st clair had allowed his army to be cut to pieces hacked butchered tomahawked and relieved st clair of his command.
as 1792 began most of the area the united states called its northwest territory was in indian hands.
190 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 throughout 1792 the washington administration and many of the indians tried to negotiate.
in june 1792 joseph brant the mohawk leader who had earlier traveled to london to meet with king george iii went to philadelphia and met with president washington becoming one of the few people to meet with both national leaders.
the meeting with washington was cordial but did not lead to any final agreements and brant continued to strengthen his ties with britain.
brant and most of the iroquois shawnee and miami leaders were determined to allow no white settlement west of the ohio river and demanded that the united states abandon its forts in that territory.
but white settlers continued to move across the ohio river.
they and their government wanted more land.
some of the negotiations were good faith efforts.
some were a sham.
all failed.
while some in congress and the press argued for peace and an end to the waste of money and lives in western military campaigns washington called for a full scale war on the indians.
secretary of war knox began to create a truly professional army of 5 000 men.
in late 1793 he launched a third military campaign in the northwest territory.
in place of the disgraced st clair washington appointed anthony wayne known as mad anthony wayne as major general of the u s army.
wayne trained his army and during the winter of 1793 1794 they built a new base fort recovery on the site of st clairs defeat.
in august 1794 waynes army defeated a large indian force led by the shawnee blue jacket at the battle of fallen timbers near present day toledo ohio.
after fierce fighting among twisted tree limbs and trunks the indians broke ranks and retreated.
british forces at the nearby fort miami did not support their indian allies and wayne decided not to attack the british fort see map 7 1.
a year later the treaty of greenville ended major hostilities between indians and whites in the future states of ohio and indiana.
the treaty established indian reserves treaty of greenville a treaty agreed to in 1795 in which native americans in the northwest territory were forced to cede most of the present states of ohio indiana illinois michigan and wisconsin to the united states.
nt british north america 7 1 7 2 73 x4 x.
o zliio new hampshire massachuset7 vermont fort efz oswegatchie 5 w 3 we9 mewyork aultste marie fort michiliimackinac 1 illinois fwme8 g0 hamar s 1 rt detrp sauk5and fort foxes dearbpirn 7572 pqwtayvatomis kickapoos territory ohio illinois touts shawnees kentucky quapaws tenness cr1ppewas pennsylvania wyandots st clair s delawares 1791.
sil rhode island connecticut new jersey sowiis is delaware amk maryland vt spanish territory vi ijiha north caroj na 3 33sfs is zz 3 3 mississippi 1 chickasaws territoryf horseshoe bend j 1814 creeks georgia choctaws s sfani south carolina atlantic ocean spanish florida seminoles y gulf of mexico j ceded before 1784 battle ceded 1784 1809 british fort unceded indian lands 1809 american fort map 7 1 indian removals and resistance 1790 1814.
between the end of the revolution in 1783 and the treaty of greenville in 1795 there was almost constant warfare between native american tribes and the u s army in the northwest territory and further battles well into the 1800s elsewhere in what was then the west of the country.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 191 after a series of native american victories the u s army s victory at the battle of fallen timbers in 1794 brought organized resistance to an end.
a year later in 1795 defeated tribal leaders agreed to the treaty of greenville ceding most of the land of the northwest to white settlement.
this picture shows little turtle talking with general anthony wayne.
while ceding most of the remaining lands to white settlers.
for the tribes of the northwest the battle of fallen timbers and the treaty of greenville were the end of their control of the territory.
the defeated indian leader little turtle was blunt telling general anthony wayne you have pointed out to us the boundary line between the indians and the united states but i now take the liberty to inform you that the line cuts off from the indians a large portion of the country which has been enjoyed by my forefathers from time immemorial without molestation or dispute but after fallen timbers there was little that the tribal leaders could do.
many indians moved to british canada or further west into the louisiana territory still formally controlled by spain.
although groups of indians and settlers continued minor skirmishes for another 20 years 1795 was the end of the indian wars in the ohio region.
efforts to survey settlements and create local governments came quickly.
washingtons goals for the northwest territory and for dealing with the indians were mostly accomplished.
white settlers got the lands they wanted the british lost their most powerful ally in the region and the power and prestige of the u s army were enhanced.
settlement continued long after washington left office and ohio was admitted as a state in 1803.
indiana followed in 1816 illinois in 1818 but michigan and wisconsin much later in 1837 and 1848 respectively.
whiskey tax whiskey rebellion when a compromise by hamilton fefferson and madison led congress to pass hamiltons economic plan in 1782 it solved one set of problems but created new ones.
paying off the debt required more income for the federal government than the customs tax alone could raise.
after considering several options hamilton hit on the idea of taxing whiskey.
if there were to be new taxes a tax on whiskey seemed less undesirable than most options.
even hamiltons long time opponent james madison supported it as a way to increase sobriety and thereby prevent disease and untimely deaths like the sin taxes of later generations the tax on whiskey seemed an easy call.
however what seemed easy in new york and philadelphia was seen by farmers in western pennsylvania as a direct attack on their livelihood.
western pennsylvania and neighboring parts of appalachia had been settled long before the revolution primarily by scots irish presbyterians who were willing to 192 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 fight indians for land and who wanted to maintain their culture including their love for whiskey.
turning corn their staple crop into whiskey was also the best way to get the crop to market.
a farmer could distill corn into whiskey at home and then transport a keg or several kegs on a horse or mule over the mountains and sell the liquid corn at 16 a keg in east coast markets making a considerable profit.
it was much easier and more profitable than trying to transport raw corn over the mountains and between 1783 and 1795 when spain closed the port of new orleans to american goods transporting any products down the ohio and mississippi rivers was not an option.
hamiltons tax however ate up the profit.
since the tax was applied uniformly to all producers small producers of whiskey ended up paying a higher percentage of their income than did those producing larger amounts.
moreover the tax singled out these whiskey making farmers and not others such as land speculators of which washington was one.
western farmers complained that the tax discriminated against them and it did.
they were already angry.
most frontier farmers had opposed adopting the constitution when it was being debated in 1787 and 1788.
now only a few years later the first administration elected under that document wanted to destroy their best hope of economic prosperity.
they rebelled.
the whiskey rebellion began with modest protests.
the pennsylvania north carolina maryland virginia and georgia legislatures passed resolutions opposing the tax.
when these actions were not heeded by the administration protests escalated quickly.
tax collectors were shot at tarred and feathered or beaten and threatened with scalping.
in a mass meeting in pittsburgh rebels agreed to fight for the repeal of the tax and to treat tax collectors with the contempt they deserve in 1793 and 1794 no federal taxes were collected in kentucky or pennsylvanias western counties.
a convention of more than 200 farmers at parkinsons ferry debated armed resistance to the national government.
in 1794 a federal marshal david lennox and john neville a friend of washingtons from the revolution were attacked by armed men when they tried to collect the tax.
nevilles house was burned and he and his family barely escaped.
on august 1 6 000 rebels met outside of pittsburgh and modeling their behavior on revolutionaries in france created a committee of public safety erected a guillotine and made plans to attack the government garrison at pittsburgh to gain weapons.
hamilton advised washington to exert the full force of the law against offenders but washington worried about losing the westerners allegiance to the united states.
throughout 1792 and 1793 he sought to negotiate with the whiskey makers.
washingtons overtures were seen as weakness by some of the whiskey rebels.
farmers who paid the tax were attacked and their stills destroyed.
whiskey rebellion armed uprising in 1794 by farmers in western pennsylvania who attempted to prevent the collection of the excise tax on whiskey.
western farmers who opposed the whiskey tax turned to increasingly violent means of resistance including tarring and feathering u s tax agents as others had done to british tax agents before the revolution.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 193 7 3 by the summer of 1794 as the riots spread and after the attack on neville washington had had enough.
he saw the attacks on federal officials and the refusal to pay the taxes as part of a plot to overthrow the constitution.
he decided to act.
given the size of the insurgency washington called for 12 000 troops to be drawn from the militias of new jersey maryland and virginia.
the president himself took command of the force and with hamilton at his side marched across pennsylvania.
while hamilton promised that every rebel they caught would be skewered shot or hanged on the first tree washington remained grave distant and austere in the end the sheer size of washingtons army frightened the rebels and ended the rebellion.
most of the rebel farmers either accepted washingtons offer of amnesty if they would swear loyalty to the united states or melted away into the woods and hollows.
the army arrested 150 rebel leaders but only two were convicted of treason and washington pardoned both of them.
but the back of the rebellion had been broken.
federal authority loved by some hated by others was supreme.
the french revolution comes to america news and ideas moved slowly in the 1700s.
people had to wait weeks to hear about.
developments in another state and months to hear about foreign events.
yet to a surprising degree americans in the 1790s were well informed about and influenced by developments in europe most of all by the french revolution about which most americans had strong opinions.
if much of washingtons first term was taken up with economic matters and indian wars his second term 1793 1797 was dominated by the french revolution table 7 1.
indeed if revolution had not erupted in france washington might have served only one term and retired as he wanted to do.
table 7 1 interplay of the french revolution and the united states 1789 1801 developments in the united states developments in france april 1789 george washington is inaugurated as the first u s president washington appoints alexander hamilton generally pro british secretary of the treasury and thomas jefferson generally pro french secretary of state.
september 1789 congress approves the bill of rights including freedom of religion and the press and guaranteed due process.
ratified december 1791 july 1789 a paris mob storms the bastille prison and sets prisoners free keys to the bastille are eventually given to george washington.
november 1792 george washington is elected to a second term as president after agreeing to be a candidate primarily because of concerns with the french revolution.
april 1793 citizen genet arrives as french ambassador.
1793 1794 democratic republican societies spring up around united states in support of french revolution and jefferson madison policies at home during the whiskey rebellion farmers create a committee of public safety modeled on france and set up a guillotine.
1797 john quincy adams reports a french plot to create a breakaway republic in southwest united states president adams fears a french jeffersonian plot to create a directory in the united states.
1798 1800 xyz affair united states fights undeclared naval war with france.
1801 thomas jefferson is elected president reducing tensions with france.
1803 jefferson purchases louisiana territory from france.
august 1789 the french national assembly issues the declaration of the rights of man and citizen men are born and remain free and equal and affirms freedom of thought religion petition and due process.
september 1791 a new french constitution creates a constitutional monarchy.
april 1792 the national assembly declares war on austria beginning 23 years of war in europe french monarchy is overthrown.
january 1793 louis xvi is executed in paris.
june 1793 june 1794 reign of terror under a committee of public safety over 40 000 people are executed the terror ends with the execution of maximilian robespierre.
1795 1799 france is governed by a five member directory.
1799 napoleon bonaparte stages a coup d etat and rules france until 1814.
194 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 by 1792 washington believed that he had stabilized the country and would have been happy to retire.
however both hamilton and jefferson by then bitter enemies told washington that the country still needed him in part because each saw washington as a buffer against the others policies.
most of their followers agreed.
the most powerful argument for a second term however was washingtons realization that revolutionary france would soon be at war with austria and britain and that war would make american diplomacy much more difficult.
he could not walk away from what he saw as a coming foreign policy crisis even as he insisted at my age the love of retirement grows every day more more powerful his personal popularity exceeded any disagreement with his policies and he was reelected unanimously.
when word of the european war reached philadelphia in the spring of 1792 the washington administration issued a formal proclamation of neutrality.
where washington had seemed to favor hamilton in economic matters he favored jefferson and jeffersons successor edmund randolph on foreign policy.
when frances revolutionary government asked for america to pay off debt from the revolutionary war earlier than negotiated washington agreed.
when the french announced plans to send a new ambassador just after the execution of king louis xvi in january 1793 washington agreed to receive him.
washington was determined to maintain neutrality.
he would not let hamiltons pro british views draw him into a war much as he disliked some of the news from france.
however the new french ambassador edmond charles genet citizen genet as he was called using the title that every person in france adopted if they wanted to keep their head was as undiplomatic as a diplomat could be.
he landed in charleston south carolina and immediately began commissioning american vessels to attack british shipping in direct violation of washingtons neutrality policies.
he also purchased munitions for france and enlisted volunteers to attack spanish florida.
then he went to philadelphia to meet the president.
washington had long mastered the art of showing icy displeasure.
having heard about genets actions in charleston he met genet with great formality standing under a picture of louis xvi americas ally during its revolution whom genets government had just executed.
in the nations capital of philadelphia genet continued to raise arms for privateers to attack the british and recruit soldiers from kentucky to attack florida.
washington then demanded that the french government recall genet which it did early in 1794.
fearing execution if he returned to france genet then asked for asylum and settled in new york as a private citizen.
but in genets brief tenure as ambassador the citizen genet affair as it came to be called did lasting harm inspiring hostility toward france among president washington vice president john adams and other officials while arousing more enthusiasm for the french revolution among some americans.
while washington found it easy to dismiss citizen genet he could not as easily dismiss americans support for the french revolution.
in the first years of the revolution in france most americans strongly supported developments in the countrys oldest ally.
when french citizens stormed the bastille prison in july 1789 lafayette who had fought with washington during the revolution sent the keys to the former prison to the president.
conservative federalists joined with staunch antifederalists in celebrating the emergence of a new constitutional state in europe.
some federalists soon began to have doubts about the french revolution however.
for those who worried that deference and hierarchy were disappearing all too fast in the united states news of riots and killings in france were terrifying.
for the emerging republican movement however the news from france was most encouraging.
thomas jefferson never stopped believing that the revolution was a grand moment in history even if he was uncomfortable with what he viewed as its excesses.
once britain joined the war against revolutionary france many americans sided with france despite official neutrality.
7 3 citizen genet affair the efforts of edmond charles genet french ambassador to the u s 1793 1794 to stir up military support for france and the french revolution among americans leading to long term anti french sentiment.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 195 democratic republican societies supporting the french revolution sprang up across the united states.
the first society was established in philadelphia but before long there were dozens from maine to south carolina and from coastal cities to backcountry hamlets.
these grassroots societies were more radical than anything even jefferson was comfortable with.
some of those who joined the democratic republican societies were farmers who were angry with the federal government and ready for some revolutionary activity of their own.
but the largest societies were in east coast cities where anti british sentiment still ran deep.
there small time merchants and manufacturers mechanics and other citizens were angry at the arrogance of an older federalist aristocracy and anxious to make their own place in the new nation.
members of these societies had great hopes for the ideals if not all the tactics and the bloodshed of the french revolution and wanted to defend it.
not accidentally most of the members of these societies also disliked hamiltons economic policies as well as the expanding power of the federal government and supported the jeffersonian opposition in elections even if the democratic republican leaders in congress kept their distance from them.
regardless of differences the president was generally considered above politics so dissenters usually avoided direct criticisms of washington himself.
even so the democratic republican societies became bastions of hostility to many of his policies and closest allies.
if the birth of the two party system can be traced to the split between hamilton and jefferson over economic issues then the deep divides over the revolution in france solidified the organization of the federalists and the democratic republican societies and inspired the creation of the democratic republican party in the united states see table 7 2.
the federalists were pro british and wanted a strong federal government and army as well as economic policies that supported commercial development.
the democratic republicans were pro french and wanted a small federal government more independence for the states and individuals less commercial development and more focus on independent farmers.
ironically given all the republican talk of liberty and equality the groups associated with jefferson were also much more sympathetic to slavery.
many among the democratic republicans saw states rights as a vehicle for protecting slavery.
by contrast the federalists tended to see slavery as morally wrong and harmful to the nations commercial development.
washington who hated the very idea of permanent factions or parties tried hard to stay above the fray and unite the factions.
for a time he succeeded which explains part of the reason he was unanimously reelected in 1792 but by the end of table 7 2 characteristics of the emerging political parties or factions topic federalists antifederalists or democratic republicans leaders foreign policy influence of federal government economic policy regional base on slavery alien and sedition acts see the birth of political parties later in this chapter alexander hamilton and john adams personal enemies generally pro british want to model united states on british institutions strong federal government with strong army commercial nation favor building roads and canals and support the bank of the united states strongest in new england mildly against slavery sponsor and enforce alien and sedition acts thomas jefferson and james madison personal friends strongly pro french generally supportive of the french revolution i weak federal government strong states rights agrarian nation oppose federal spending i for roads and canals and oppose bank of the.
united states j strongest in the southern states j favor protecting states rights as a vehicle to protect slavery sponsor kentucky and virginia resolutions declaring alien and sedition acts nullified j 96 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 his second term in office in 1797 more people were coming to see him as another federalist leader.
if he had run for a third term something he had no intention of doing the election would certainly not have been unanimous though it is difficult to imagine a person of his enormous popularity being defeated.
u s anger at britain was not fueled only by memories of 1776.
in the 1790s british soldiers still held fort detroit and fort niagara near present day buffalo in violation of the treaty of paris.
in the summer of 1793 fearing that american neutrality was a cover for selling american grain to all sides in the european war the british government issued orders in council orders from the king through his privy council the equivalent of executive orders in the united states that banned all american commercial links with france or the french caribbean islands.
by 1794 the royal navy had taken 400 merchant sailors prisoner.
farmers could not sell their wheat and dockworkers had no jobs.
there were growing calls for war with britain which might help france rid the frontier of the british and end the restrictions on shipping.
washington however was determined to avoid war.
he sent chief justice john jay who had been foreign secretary under the articles of confederation to london to resolve the problems.
for a short moment jays appointment as u s representative to london quieted the calls for war.
but the treaty jay negotiated with britain late in 1794 accomplished little of what washington wanted.
britain did agree to pay compensation for its attacks on shipping since 1793 but not to end the ban on neutral shipping to france or to pay compensation for earlier american losses.
while britain also promised again to remove its troops from the mississippi valley it had been ignoring its own promises to do so for a decade and there was little reason to assume that it would now change policy.
the most jay could say of the treaty he had negotiated was it breaks the ice washington was bitterly disappointed that jay had not accomplished more but sent jays treaty to the senate for ratification anyway.
the senate vote in 1795 showed the growing divisions in the country.
all 20 senators identified with the federalists in the senate voted for the treaty and all 10 associated with the democratic republicans voted against it.
the public attacks against washington which had been muted up to this point in part because of his personal popularity and in part because many believed the president should be above attack now became much louder.
in the final year of the washington administration one significant diplomatic victory helped to balance out the previous controversies.
while jay had been in london washington had sent thomas pinckney to madrid.
where jay had failed pinckneys treaty succeeded beyond expectations.
worrying that britain and the united states might settle their differences at spains expense the spanish agreed to a treaty that pushed the northern border of florida farther south and westward to the mississippi and far more important opened the mississippi river and the port of new orleans to u s commerce.
access to new orleans was very important.
during the colonial era spain had allowed travel on the mississippi river but fearing the rising power of the new united states had closed the port to all american citizens after the revolution.
with pinckneys treaty western farmers could again ship goods down the mississippi through new orleans to world markets instead of having to struggle across the appalachians.
in addition for all the uproar over jays treaty the british actually honored it removing their soldiers from niagara and detroit.
washington believed he could now retire in confidence that the nation was secure.
7 3 jay s treaty a treaty with britain negotiated in 1794 in which the united states made major concessions to avert a war over the british seizure of american ships.
pinckney s treaty a treaty with spain that set the border between the united states and spanish florida.
quick review how did the washington administration try to strengthen the nations security between 1789 and 1796.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 197 7 4 the birth of political parties adams and jefferson explain the growing split between the federalist and democratic republican parties including how the french revolution and the personal differences among hamilton adams and jefferson affected american politics.
the framers of the constitution feared the idea of political parties and the idea of people voting for specific candidates in a national election for president.
because of these fears they designed the election of the president to be a complex process in which each state would have the number of presidential electors equal to its representation in congress.
these electors would form the electoral college.
state legislatures could select these electors any way they wished.
the plan did not entail candidates being nominated for the presidency.
each elector would get two votes technically one for president and one for vice president but electors would not differentiate the offices on their ballots.
instead each elector would vote for whomever he wished as long as his two candidates were from different states.
whoever got the most votes from all the electors would be president.
the runner up would be vice president.
if no one got a majority of the electoral votes then the election would be resolved in the house of representatives where each state delegation would have one vote in selecting among the top three vote getters in the electoral college.
no one knew how this complex system would work but the avoidance of nominations or indeed the identification of actual candidates before the selection of presidential electors was an attempt to prevent the influence of specific factions.
since there had been a national consensus that george washington should be the first president and since he was reelected unanimously only washingtons retirement tested the system.
the first two tests in 1796 and 1800 did not go well.
john adams s difficult presidency the election in 1796 that made john adams president was an odd one.
by 1796 adams though never a close friend or political ally of hamilton had come to represent the federalists those who supported the washington administrations foreign policy and most of hamiltons economic policies.
most federalists also supported thomas pinckney of south carolina for vice president and a few including hamilton tried to maneuver pinckney into the presidency.
thomas jefferson was the logical candidate of the democratic republicans that large group though not yet an organized political party who sympathized with the french revolution and thought hamilton had shifted too much power to the federal government and to the urban economic elites of new york and philadelphia.
although aaron burr of new york was not an official running mate many democratic republicans supported him as their vice presidential candidate.
advocates of these views had formed democratic republican societies in all parts of the country organized their own newspapers sympathized with the whiskey rebels and adopted the french tricolor of red white and blue as their political colors.
they were ready to become a political force in presidential politics.
adams and jefferson remained at home throughout 1796 actually wanting to be president after washington was considered unseemly but many others campaigned for them.
a democratic republican paper in philadelphia called adams his rotundity he was heavy and said that he was the champion of kings ranks and titles federalist papers said that jefferson was an atheist a friend of the radical french revolutionaries and a danger to democracy.
there were also battles within the factions.
after adams learned of hamilton s efforts to make pinckney president instead of him he called hamilton as great a hypocrite as any in the u s george washington also entered the campaign though without formally endorsing a candidate.
in september 1796 washington gave what he called his farewell address 6 months before he left office.
later generations saw the speech as the grand nonpartisan benediction of the nation s founder.
contemporaries understood 198 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 it differently.
in the address washington said he wanted to warn his country against the baneful effects of the spirit of party generally a political party would distract the public councils and enfeeble the public administration.
it agitates the community with ill founded jealousies and false alarms he also warned that foreign influence is one of the most baneful foes of republican government in 1796 most people took the speech to mean vote for adams not jefferson in washington s mind the democratic republican societies embodied the spirit of party generally and he had seen how they could foment riot and insurrection when he had led the army against the whiskey rebels.
he also feared that jeffersons pro french views represented the insidious wiles of foreign influence although he would never say so directly washington wanted his vice president to be his successor.
he got his wish.
of the 139 electoral votes cast in the 1796 election adams received 71 all from new england new york and new jersey while jefferson received 68 all from pennsylvania and the southern states.
so adams and jefferson these two long time political rivals became president and vice president respectively.
the anger of the 1796 campaign cooled quickly.
the pro jefferson newspaper the aurora declared that adams was a man possessing great integrity one of jeffersons strongest supporters in congress william branch giles of virginia said the old man will make a good president too jefferson and adams exchanged cordial letters and adams invited the vice president to sit in the cabinet which washington had never done for him but jefferson declined.
the two dined with washington just after adamss inauguration and in his inaugural address adams insisted that it was his inflexible determination to maintain peace with all nations including france words that surely reassured jefferson and his followers.
but the split between the federalists and the democratic republicans went too deep for soothing words to heal.
differences came to a head in congress in january 1798 when matthew lyon a democratic republican from vermont ridiculed the ceremonial greeting for president adams and insulted federalist roger griswold of connecticut.
griswold then insulted lyon who spat in griswolds face.
griswold attacked lyon with his cane and lyon grabbed a pair of fireplace tongs to fight back on the floor of the house of representatives.
the two were pulled apart but the incident symbolized the hatred between the two parties and the depths to which public discourse had sunk.
nothing however represented the split between the two factions as much as their attitudes toward the french revolution.
barely a week after his inauguration adams received troubling news that the french directory the five member council then ruling revolutionary france had refused to receive adamss choice as u s ambassador to france.
adams had actually chosen charles cotesworth pinckney brother of the federalist candidate for vice president to improve the u s french relationship but the french did not see it that way.
the directory also launched an undeclared war on u s shipping.
in the following months the french captured 300 american merchant ships.
from his son john quincy adams who was serving as u s.
ambassador to prussia adams also heard of a french plan to stir up revolt and secession in the western u s territories.
the federalist press called for war against france while the democratic republicans claimed it was a false crisis made up by the pro british federalists.
adams who was more nonpartisan than his federalist backers had hoped sought a middle ground.
he sent elbridge gerry of massachusetts and john marshall of virginia to join pinckney in paris and try to reopen negotiations.
but he also asked congress to establish a navy and provide funds to prepare for war if it came.
the response to the new presidents actions broke along partisan lines with federalists supporting adams and democratic republicans opposing him.
but adams won authorization for a new department of the navy and funds to build and support three medium sized warships called frigates.
7 4 in this popular drawing that was widely circulated roger griswold a connecticut federalist attacked matthew lyon a vermont republican who fought back with fire tongs.
few images so starkly described the state of partisan politics in the new nation.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 199 xyz affair diplomatic incident in 1798 in which americans were outraged by the demand of the french for a bribe as a condition for negotiating with american diplomats.
quasi war an undeclared war 1797 to 1800 between the united states and france.
alien and sedition acts a series of three acts passed by congress in 1798 that made it harder for new immigrants to vote and made it a crime to criticize the president or congress.
this cartoon reflects the anti french sentiment of many americans showing france as having five heads for the five member directory that ruled at one point the bloody guillotine in the background and the demand for a bribe from the upright american delegates.
note also the africans representative of french owned haiti.
however adamss peace overtures to the french did not go well.
when his new delegation arrived in paris the french foreign minister charles maurice de talleyrand arranged for agents whom adams identified only as x y and z to inform the americans that negotiations could proceed only if talleyrand was paid a bribe of 250 000 and the french government received a loan of 10 to 12 million as well as an apology for what the french considered adamss belligerent tone.
pinckneys famous response was no no not a sixpence in fact the commissioners were prepared to pay a bribe not an unusual part of diplomacy at the time but the amount demanded was far too high.
when word of the so called xyz affair reached congress and the american public in march 1798 adamss popularity soared and many called for a war against france to avenge u s honor.
federalists in congress voted to increase the size of the u s army and shift its focus from the western frontier to a presumed threat of french invasion on the atlantic coast.
given british naval supremacy a french invasion was improbable.
even if the british did not like the united states they certainly did not want their archenemy france to control any territory in north america.
adams unlike most federalists feared a large standing u s army especially after hamilton won appointment as a major general within it.
adams preferred to strengthen the navy to protect u s interests.
in 1798 and 1799 though there was no formal declaration of war the united states engaged in what became known as the quasi war with france or as adams preferred to call it the half war treaties with france dating back to the american revolution were repealed and the united states began a trade embargo against france.
the united states also supported the independence of haiti something it had not done during the washington administration.
congress created the marine corps along with the navy and armed merchant ships so they could attack french ships near the u s coast or in the caribbean.
even if france had the most powerful army in europe talleyrand did not really want war with the united states and he began to make peace overtures.
u s neutrality if not friendship would be important talleyrand thought if france were to launch a planned invasion of england.
the war hysteria also led congress to pass the alien and sedition acts actually three separate acts that irreparably hurt adamss reputation even though he did not directly request any of them.
federalists had become increasingly fearful of pro french agitation.
massachusetts congressman harrison gray otis asked do we not know that the french nation have organized bands of aliens as well as their own citizens in other countries many federalists wondered could it not happen here.
i 200 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 to make sure that french efforts aided by jeffersonian democratic republicans could not undermine the government and its federalist leaders congress passed the naturalization act and the alien friends act in june 1798 which were referred to as the alien acts.
these laws lengthened the time to qualify for citizenship from 5 to 14 years to ensure that recent pro french immigrants could not vote and allowed the government to deport anyone deemed dangerous to the united states.
while no one was actually deported under the acts many french citizens left the united states on their own rather than wait and see what might happen.
a month later on july 14 1798 congress passed the sedition act by a slim majority and adams signed the law.
the sedition act targeted primarily newspaper editors like benjamin franklin bache editor of the democratic republican aurora making any false scandalous and malicious speech against the government particularly congress or the president a crime.
unlike the alien acts the sedition act was vigorously enforced.
democratic republican congressman matthew lyon who earlier had the wrestling match with griswold was convicted under the law for continuing to criticize the adams administration and spent 4 months in a vermont jail.
his constituents made it clear what they thought of the act when they overwhelmingly reelected lyon to congress once he was released from jail.
all told 17 people were tried under the act including a drunk in new jersey who had cast aspersions on the presidents posterior and was fined the then enormous sum of 150.
but newspapers were not silenced and the attack on free speech undermined support for the federalists.
the democratic republicans attacked the alien and sedition acts.
vice president jefferson initially counseled patience with what he saw as the reign of the witches in the adams administration but soon came to view the alien and sedition laws as a fundamental threat to democracy.
in the fall of 1798 he drafted resolutions and his friends and supporters in the kentucky legislature adopted his words that asserted a states right to declare federal law void and of no force within the states jurisdiction.
virginias legislature adopted similar resolutions drafted by james madison.
both legislatures invited other states to join them but none did.
nevertheless the kentucky and virginia resolutions drew a sharp line between the two political factions.
on the democratic republican side madison like jefferson saw the resolutions as an appropriate protest within the framework of the constitution he had helped write and both men saw them as the basic right of state legislatures to nullify federal law.
but the federalists saw both resolutions as a fundamental attack on the basic authority of the federal government and indeed on the constitution itself.
while adams never repudiated the alien and sedition acts he did end the war fever.
through emissaries adams received a signal that france did not want war and after british admiral horatio nelson destroyed the french fleet in the battle of the nile in october 1798 any remote possibility of a french invasion of the united states disappeared.
adams had become convinced that hamilton was trying to stir up a war for his own political ambitions.
the president called him a man devoid of every moral principle in february 1799 adams told the senate that he himself was committed to embrace every plausible appearance of probability of preserving or restoring tranquility and he also asked them to approve a new ambassador to france to replace pinckney.
many federalists were enraged that adams would try yet again for peace and he had to endure a shouting match with hamilton now a private citizen but an influential one.
he also had to fire his own secretary of state timothy pickering who was ready for war and replace him with a close political ally john marshall who would later become chief justice of the supreme court.
but the senate approved william vans murray as the new ambassador and the new mission worked.
it took all of 1799 and 1800 to negotiate during which time the government of france changed from the directory to the dictatorship of napoleon bonaparte but peace came.
the convention of mortefontaine ended the quasi war and protected u s shipping.
adams disbanded part of the army in may 1800 over the opposition 7 4 kentucky and virginia resolutions resolutions written by thomas jefferson and james madison that criticized the alien and sedition acts and asserted the rights of states to declare federal law null and void within a state.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 201 uu american voices the kentucky resolutions of 1798 congress passed the alien and sedition acts in 1798 a ww firestorm of protest broke out.
leaders of the democratic republican party saw the new laws as a direct attack on freedom of speech a bedrock of democracy.
they also opposed the legislation because they feared it would foster war with france and expand the army navy and federal power in general.
in response they sought to undermine the laws.
jefferson secretly drafted the resolutions below which were adopted by the kentucky legislature in november 7 798 while madison drafted similar resolutions for virginia.
these kentucky and virginia resolutions not only attacked the alien and sedition acts but also declared that since the federal government was a compact of the states any state could declare any federal law unconstitutional within the bounds of that state.
this claim would have far reaching implications in the decades leading up to the civil war.
although most historians see the alien and sedition acts as a dangerous attack on free speech they also see the resolutions as an equally dangerous effort to undermine national unity.
resolved that the several states composing the united states of america are not united on the principle of unlimited submission to their general government but that by compact under the style and title of a constitution for the united states and of amendments thereto they constituted a general government for special purposes delegated to that government certain definite powers reserving each state to itself the residuary mass of right to their own self government and that whensoever the general government assumes undelegated powers its acts are unauthoritive void and of no force that to this compact each state acceded as a state and is an integral party that this government created by this compact was not made the exclusive or final judge of the extent of the powers delegated to itself since that would have made its discretion and not the constitution the measure of its powers but that as in all other cases of compact among powers having no common judge each party has an equal right to judge for itself as well of infractions as of the mode and measure of redress.
resolved therefore also the same act of congress passed on the 14th day of july 1798 and entitled an act in addition to the act entitled an act for the punishment of certain crimes against the united states the sedition act and all other their acts which assume to create define or punish crimes other than those so enumerated in the constitution are altogether void and of no force and that the power to create define and punish such other crimes is reserved and of right appertains solely and exclusively to the respective states each within its own territory.
source library of congress thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what argument did jefferson make in favor of a state s right to nullify federal legislation.
historical interpretation in what ways did jefferson s position constitute a threat to national unity.
of his own party.
he also pardoned john fries who had led a nonviolent rebellion against federal war taxes in pennsylvania in 1799 and had been sentenced to death for treason.
these actions cost adams dearly particularly among his own federalists.
but he considered the choice for peace against war his crowning achievement and ordered that his gravestone read here lies john adams who took upon himself the responsibility for peace with france in the year 1800 the election of 1800 the political differences between the two leading candidates for president in 1800 president john adams and vice president thomas jefferson could not have been clearer.
but the methods for actually selecting the next president and vice president in 1800 could not have been more convoluted.
none of the problems with the electoral college that were seen in 1796 had been resolved.
at that time political parties had been informal alliances of like minded individuals.
by 1800 however the federalists and democratic republicans were much better organized.
they had come to represent 202 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 two distinct philosophies and sets of personal allegiances.
nevertheless americans still distrusted formal political parties.
within the parties advocates of different positions schemed to defeat not only the other party but also rivals within their own party.
in december 1799 just as the maneuvering for the 1800 election was starting news came that george washington had died at his home in mount vernon virginia.
people of all political factions mourned the loss of a unifying leader but also knew that the next election would be more divisive than ever.
despite the fact that most of the constitutions authors did not want nominations of presidential candidates to occur before the selection of presidential electors in 1800 each partys congressional delegations nominated the candidates in semisecret caucuses.
when the democratic republican caucus met on may 11 1800 it was clear that jefferson would be their nominee for president.
several candidates were considered for vice president but the democratic republicans wanted someone who would help them win new york which they saw as the key to the white house.
the man to deliver new yorks votes was aaron burr.
few politicians including jefferson trusted or respected burr but jefferson did not intend to lose the presidency twice.
in an ill fated decision the caucus and party leaders pledged that every elector would vote for both jefferson and burr.
everyone simply assumed that somehow jefferson would receive the most votes and become president with burr the runner up becoming vice president but that assumption proved to be a serious mistake.
federalist maneuvering was equally complicated.
there was general agreement that failure to support adams would fatally split the party.
but the caucus also chose charles cotesworth pinckney of south carolina the brother of their 1796 vice presidential nominee to be vice president in part because he was known to be loyal to hamilton and in part because his refusal to give a bribe to france in the xyz affair had made him a hero.
behind the scenes hamilton hoped as he had in 1796 that he could somehow engineer pinckneys election as president.
once again adams found out about hamiltons plans and was furious.
because the constitution gave each state the right to choose its presidential electors any way it wished the actual voting for those electors was spread out over most of the year.
in an early but crucial test burr was able to ensure new yorks electoral votes for the jefferson burr ticket.
pennsylvanias democratic republican governor also promised to deliver its electoral votes for the jefferson burr ticket or if that failed to simply prevent a vote to choose electors from taking place in that state so adams could not receive any votes there.
as other states continued to select their presidential electors in the summer and fall of 1800 the contest remained fierce.
a federalist newspaper said a vote for the democratic republicans was a vote for the tempestuous sea of anarchy and misrule for arming the poor against the rich for fraternizing with the foes of god and man while a democratic republican paper asked people to choose between peace or war happiness or misery opulence or ruin the sedition act made direct attacks on president adams dangerous but the press was far from neutral and anger at that act added fuel to the democratic republican fire.
slaves could not vote and slavery had not been a major issue in the previous presidential campaigns but it was in 1800.
gabriel prosser and jack bowler were slaves on a virginia plantation not far from the state capital in richmond.
throughout the summer they were planning a slave uprising.
prosser promised death to all whites except quakers methodists and french people that is whites known to support abolition.
over 1 000 slaves were involved forging swords from sickles making their own bullets and designing a flag that read death or liberty the uprising was set for saturday august 30 when they planned to meet at the prosser plantation kill the white owners and march on richmond.
however a terrible storm on august 30 scattered the slave army and governor james monroe discovered the plan and called out the state militia.
the leaders of the uprising were quickly tried and executed but the prospect of a slave uprising terrified the southern states.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 203 campaign banners were popular in the 1800 campaign including this streamer that says t jefferson president of the united states of america john adams no more.
the issue of slavery also complicated the presidential campaign.
both political parties were divided internally over it.
adams hated slavery but pinckney his running mate was one of the largest slave owners in south carolina.
both jefferson and burr owned slaves jefferson many of them.
but jefferson had also written in opposition to slavery.
he needed northern democratic republican votes in pennsylvania and new york where abolitionism was gaining ground.
governor monroe and jefferson feared that too many slave executions would spark an abolitionist upheaval and cost them votes.
on the other hand leniency could cost them votes in the fearful southern states where adams and pinckney suddenly looked like the forces of stability.
some slaves saw the ironies of the situation.
most of those arrested including prosser simply remained silent knowing that nothing they said would save them.
one however calmly told the judges i have nothing more to offer than what general washington would have had to offer had he been taken by the british officers and put to trial by them.
i have ventured my life in endeavouring to obtain the liberty of my countrymen and am a willing sacrifice to their cause and i beg as a favour that i may be immediately led to execution.
i know that you have predetermined to shed my blood why then all this mockery of a trial.
the tension between american freedom and american slavery which was at the heart of the republic surfaced in the 1800 contest.
jeffersons religious beliefs also became a major election topic.
yales president timothy dwight gave a speech asking whether the country was going to elect men who set truth at nought who doubt the being and providence of god everyone knew who dwight was talking about given jeffersons liberal religious views.
many clergy and laypeople claimed that jefferson had renounced the basic beliefs of christianity.
in fact jefferson was a deist who believed that god tended to leave the universe on its own.
adams himself who tended to agree with jefferson in religious matters though he was more discreet and more often seen in established churches privately expressed indignation at the charge of irreligion but did not say anything publically during the heat of the campaign.
204 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 ihe hamilton adams feud could not be kept so quiet.
in the summer of 1800 hamilton wrote a letter from alexander hamilton concerning the public conduct and character of john adams esq president of the united states.
hamilton seems to have meant the 54 page document for the private use of a few electors whom he was attempting to switch from adams to pinckney but a delighted democratic republican press found the document and it became public.
in words that could ironically have been prosecuted under the sedition act hamilton attacked adams for his great intrinsic defects of character including his disgusting egotism eccentric tendencies bitter animosity and ungovernable temper ihe split among the federalists was complete.
noah webster a tough federalist from connecticut and author of the first american dictionary wrote to hamilton that if jefferson was elected as a result of this federalist split the fault will lie at your door and your conduct on this occasion will be discerned little short of insanity.
in 1800 the candidates campaigned openly unlike 1796.
the ever diffident adams surprisingly seemed to enjoy campaigning giving speeches in key states.
jefferson considered similar campaign stops but was dissuaded by virginias governor monroe.
instead he engaged in a nonstop correspondence with supporters and in less public forms of campaigning offering financial and editorial advice to friendly newspaper editors.
given the advantages that the democratic republicans held ranging from the unpopularity of the alien and sedition acts to the split among the federalists the election was surprisingly close.
adams swept new england and most of the northern states while jefferson held strong in new york and pennsylvania and most of the southern states.
ihe three fifths clause which counted slaves in the population though they were not allowed to vote gave the southern states an advantage in the electoral college that ultimately tipped the election for jefferson.
ihe last state to vote was south carolina and when the jefferson burr ticket carried every electoral vote in that state the new washington d c democratic republican paper the national intelligencer ran a headline on december 12 splendid intelligence mr jefferson may be considered as our future president but it was not to be so simple see map 7 2.
because the democratic republicans had been so well organized jefferson and burr each received 73 electoral votes putting them well ahead of adams and pinckney.
but because jefferson and burr had each received 73 votes the house of representatives would now have to decide between two candidates who had tied in the election.
in addition though the democratic republicans had also won a majority in the new congress the old congress with a federalist majority would decide the election.
many democratic republicans including jefferson thought that burr had engineered this outcome to make himself president.
many federalists suddenly gave burr a second look.
as far as anyone knows burr did not negotiate with the federalists.
but he also did not give way to jefferson.
ihe country was stuck.
when congress heard the tally of electoral votes the outcome was 73 for jefferson 73 for burr 65 for adams 64 for pinckney and one for john jay.
ihe house then began to vote between the top two.
but it remained deadlocked.
finally hamilton who had fought for so long with thomas jefferson on almost every major government policy convinced his fellow federalists that burr whom he knew all too well from new york politics was a dangerous man of too much ambition and too little morality.
on february 17 thomas jefferson was elected president by a vote a a j k 3 gulf of moxie electoral vote ibillipi 53 65 47 sdr 5 f5 dr 8 f4 atlantic ocean 4 3 x pacific ocean m nonvoting territories thomas jefferson jeffersonian republican john adams federalist map 7 2 the 1800 presidential election.
the 1800 electoral contest between incumbent john adams and thomas jefferson reflected regional differences adams carried all of new england and jefferson most of the south but middle states especially new york decided the outcome.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 205 of 10 state delegations to four with two not voting.
burr became vice president.
it had been a long year and a long election cycle and it would never be repeated in quite the same form.
7 4 quick review why did factions and political parties arise in the 1790s.
conclusion george washington was elected unanimously as the first president of the united states in 1789.
this unity largely the result of his popularity as the general who had defeated the british would be short lived as factions began to form around personalities and around very different ideas of what the government of the new nation should look like.
alexander hamilton washingtons secretary of treasury was an especially forceful advocate of a strong and activist central government.
those who agreed with this position came to be known as the federalists.
hamilton had been charged with making the government financially solvent.
he quickly convinced congress to pass import taxes to pay off the revolutionary war debts to build up the national government and especially to fund the u s army.
in addition hamilton persuaded congress to launch the bank of the united states as well as establish a currency system and a mint.
he believed that making possible financial credit for both government and business would ensure the strength of the new republic.
in opposition to hamilton thomas jefferson washingtons first secretary of state envisioned an idealized agrarian republic with a weak central government.
he believed that the strongest powers should remain with the states and in the hands of the people.
jefferson distrusted banks a standing army and centralized authority.
as promised to many who ratified the constitution james madison authored amendments to the constitution that became the bill of rights.
these amendments spelled out limits on the federal government.
they guaranteed that the nation could not establish a state religion limit free speech or a free press or prohibit people from keeping firearms.
they also promised protection from illegal search and seizure.
perhaps most important to those who initially opposed the constitution the bill of rights limited the power of the federal government itself to only those things that were specifically mentioned in the constitution and reserved all else to the states and the people.
washingtons tenure as president during two terms in office was filled with conflict.
he took the role of mediator and negotiator as often as possible including efforts to balance hamilton and jefferson but mediating was a messy business.
in the northwest territory he tried to control disorderly settlers whose support he also needed.
after illegally moving into territory in the ohio river valley and kentucky those settlers expected support from state and national governments when indians defended their lands.
as president washington sought a more powerful army to manage the conflict.
in spite of initial native american victories before washington left office all of the tribes of the region then known as the northwest had been defeated and millions of acres opened for white settlements.
in response to a new federal tax on whiskey a rebellion the whiskey rebellion broke out among settlers in western pennsylvania who had no intention of paying the tax.
with a massive show of force the washington administration brought the rebellion to an end but once the rule of federal law had been secured washington pardoned individual rebels.
the french revolution began just as washington was taking office but it was during his second term 1793 1797 that it dominated the administrations interest.
washington was determined to maintain neutrality as revolutionary france went to war with great britain and as large numbers of americans came to support each side in the war.
206 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 after serving as president for two terms washington retired.
in a close race his vice president john adams defeated former secretary of state thomas jefferson and under the rules then in force adams became president and jefferson vice president.
four years later the two again ran against each other but this time after a hard fought and exceedingly complicated election process thomas jefferson became the third president of the united states.
by the time jefferson was inaugurated the factions that washington abhorred had begun to harden into two political parties.
the federalists who supported a strong central government a national bank and the development of commercial enterprise were represented in the presidential contests by john adams but alexander hamilton who privately feuded constantly with adams drove the partys ideas.
on the other side the antifederalists or democratic republicans led by jefferson were the party of those supporting states rights a weak federal government and agrarian often slaveholding interests.
once jefferson defeated adams the federalists would never elect another president but the philosophical divide between the two parties would dominate american politics for decades.
chapter review how well did the early american government under the constitution uphold its spirit and ideals.
how did issues not addressed within the document lead to controversy later on.
chapter 7 practicing democracy 207 chapter 7 chapter review 7 1 7 2 convening a congress inaugurating a president adopting a bill of rights analyze the first federal elections and theadoption of the bill of rights.
review questions 1.
contextualization what were the most important priorities for the new congress.
chronological reasoning what concerns raised by the antifederalists during the debate over ratification were addressed by the first 10 amendments to the constitution.
creating an economy alexander hamilton and the u s economic system analyze the enduring argument begun by hamilton s economic vision for the united states and the alternative vision of jefferson and madison.
review questions 3.
constructing an argument why was the resolution of the federal governments fiscal problems so critical to the success of the new nation.
historical interpretation what larger political and regional divisions were reflected in the debates over debt assumption and the first bank of the united states.
comparison compare and contrast hamiltons and jeffersons visions of the future development of the united states.
why did jefferson believe that small independent farmers were the foundation of american society and government.
why did hamilton disagree.
setting the pace the washington administration 73 explain the precedents set by george washington s presidential administration.
review questions 6.
historical interpretation why did events in the western regions of the country occupy so much of washingtons time and attention.
why did he think events in the region were so important to the countrys future.
crafting arguments in your opinion why did diplomatic efforts fail to resolve the conflict in the northwest territory between indian peoples and white settlers.
what evidence can you provide to support your argument.
contextualization why did so many americans identify with the revolutionary cause in france.
how did public reaction to the french revolution contribute to the increasingly partisan nature of american politics in the 1790s.
7 4 the birth of political parties adams and jefferson explain the growing split between the federalist and democratic republican parties including how the french revolution and the personal differences among hamilton adams and jefferson affected american politics.
review questions 9.
crafting arguments should the election of 1796 be considered a contest between two political parties.
why or why not.
contextualization what light do the alien and sedition acts shed on the nature of american politics at the end of the 1700s.
how might a supporter of the acts have defended them.
208 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 people land and a national identity 1800 1848 part outline chapter 6 creating a nation 149 significant dates 1783 the newburgh conspiracy among revolutionary war officers treaty of paris recognizes u s independence 1784 treaty of fort stanwix between iroquois and the united states post revolutionary war economic downturn 1786 annapolis convention 1786 1787 shays s rebellion in massachusetts 1787 constitutional convention in philadelphia northwest ordinance 1787 1788 the federalist papers published state conventions adopt the constitution that their grievances had not been addressed by independence and they continued to complain.
even among those who led the revolution itself there were great differences of opinion especially regarding the best ways to govern the new nation and to maintain the liberty for which they had fought.
what that new order would look like depended on not only where one stood in 1783 but also where one had stood before and during the revolution.
exploring the efforts that helped create a stable and strong nation out of 13 british colonies requires first understanding what the end of the revolution meant for different groups of people who found themselves in different circumstances.
the state of the nation at wars end 64 explain how the outcome of the american revolution affected different groups in the new united states.
for people of all classes races and political persuasions in british north america the revolution brought extensive change.
great inequality remained but few people were willing to defend it as they had in the colonial era.
despite abigail adamss plea to her husband john that the continental congress should remember the ladies or jeffersons assertions about the evils of slavery in his original drafts of the declaration of independence sexism slavery and many forms of inequality survived the revolution intact.
nevertheless something had changed.
no form of inequality survived the separation from great britain untouched.
forces had been unleashed intended or not that would undermine oppression.
thomas paine ever the optimistic recorder of events wrote we see with other eyes we hear with other ears and think with other thoughts than those we formerly used and he explained that freedom to him meant perfect equality.
the floor of freedom is as level as water not all of his contemporaries wanted perfect equality but passive acceptance of inequality or hierarchy was much less common after the revolution.
for the revolutionary army officers the newburgh conspiracy democracy a form of government in which power is vested in the people and exercised by them directly or indirectly through a system of representation.
the american experiment in creating an independent nation that would be a democracy governed by the will of the majority or at least the white male majority almost died before it was born.
during the long months between the victory at yorktown in late 1781 and the treaty that ended the war in march 1783 the army that had won the war came close to a military takeover of the government a coup detat and a military dictatorship.
once the army had won its final battle the continental congress asked the soldiers to wait.
and the army especially the officers did not wait patiently in the year and a half that followed.
by the spring of 1783 the soldiers and officers had many reasons for complaint.
the northern army was in barracks in newburgh new york.
they were bored.
by december 1782 they had not been paid for months.
pensions that the congress had promised looked like they might never be paid.
general alexander mcdougall and colonels john brooks and matthias ogden took a petition from newburgh to the congress in philadelphia that said we have borne all that men can bear our property is expended our private resources are at an end and our friends are wearied out and disgusted with our incessant applications borrowing money from friends to survive did not sit well with these officers.
they warned that any further experiments on their the armys patience may have fatal effects the petition arrived in philadelphia at a crucial moment.
the new nation was governed by the articles of confederation that had been adopted during the revolution.
under the articles which did ensure a democratic government led by a congress of representatives elected by the voters of the 13 states the national government could not levy taxes or raise funds without the unanimous approval of all the states.
in late 1782 some of the states had rejected a proposal to tax imports.
alexander hamilton wrote without certain revenues a government can have no power ihe government that received the petition from the officers was in just that situation.
150 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 those in the congress who supported the idea of a more powerful central government used the army s petition to demand that the congress be given the power to tax so it could raise its own funds and not have to depend on the generosity of state legislatures.
these federalists who in the next decade formed the nucleus of the federalist party led by alexander hamilton made it clear to the armys representatives that they needed to support the move to give the congress the power to tax if they were ever going to get paid.
the other main faction in congress however leaders who later became the republican democrat party that emerged in the 1790s feared maintaining a standing army and opposed a larger government fueled by national taxes.
they wanted to maintain the national government just as it was as a weak alliance of individually strong states.
deadlock followed.
it was a dangerous moment.
the threat by the armys officers to use force was real.
they had been promised payment.
congress had now linked the payments to other agendas and postponed action.
while most of those in the army were angry there were also significant differences among them.
a group of young officers were ready for action.
they thought that george washington was far too moderate.
their hero was horatio gates who had led the victory at saratoga and who disliked washington.
some around gates perhaps in consultation with some federalists in congress began planning for a military takeover of the new republic.
in march 1783 major john armstrong jr published the first of what were called the newburgh addresses anonymously belittling the milk and water style and meek language of the previous petitions to congress and calling for a meeting of the officers to discuss the situation.
general washington was horrified.
military action would undermine everything for which he and the officers had fought.
but washington was a crafty politician.
he simply asked the officers to postpone their meeting by a few days invited gates to preside and requested a full report implying that he would not be there.
the officers who wanted action thought they had won and that they could meet with washingtons blessing.
but when gates called the meeting to order washington entered the room and requested permission to speak.
though he was furious gates knew he could not refuse washington in front of the other officers.
washington then attacked the anonymous newburgh addresses as unmilitary and subversive of all order and discipline he reminded the officers i have been the constant companion and witness of your distresses would the army he asked contemplate attacking the congress.
my god he said what can this writer have in view by recommending such measures.
ihe speech worked.
the officers cheered washington.
all threat of military action against the weak civil government was over.
congress voted to give a lump sum payment to all the officers who had been promised a pension and passed a tax on imports to pay off the national debt including the debt to the army.
the so called newburgh conspiracy was defeated.
in november the last british troops left new york city and the american officers and their troops marched into the city and began its transition to civilian leadership.
instead of seizing power the continental army began to disband with payment as promised.
washington made a triumphal entry into the city and on december 4 1783 gave an emotional farewell to his officers.
he then returned to civilian life at his home in mount vernon virginia.
by january 1784 the army had shrunk to some 600 soldiers ensuring a transition to civilian rule.
for poor white farmers shays s rebellion like the officers of the continental army the poor of colonial society now the poor of the new nation were also unhappy in some cases violently unhappy.
some had served as enlisted soldiers in the revolutionary army and had their own complaints about salaries.
beginning in 1784 the influx of imported goods that came with the wars end created an economic depression that hit hardest those who were already chapter 6 creating a nation 151 having led the american army through the hard years of the revolutionary war and ensured a transition to civilian government george washington said farewell to many of the officers who had served with him.
he retired to mount vernon in december 1783.
shays s rebellion an armed movement of debt ridden farmers in western massachusetts in the winter of 1786 1787 who objected to the state s effort to tax them to pay off the revolutionary war debt.
the most famous response to this unhappiness in the first years of the new republic took place in massachusetts and came to be known as shayss rebellion named for one of its leaders daniel shays.
those who participated in the rebellion called themselves regulators not to be confused with those in the carolinas who had taken the law into their own hands before the revolution but simply people who wanted to regulate the power of the new state governments.
in 1786 farmers in western massachusetts began petitioning the state legislature for relief from economic hardships brought on by a significant increase in their taxes as the legislature tried to pay off revolutionary war debts and by the postwar economic depression that reduced the value of farm products.
for farmers who were used to being self sufficient the reduction in their income and demands for taxes to be paid in cash were too much to accept.
they were being threatened with foreclosure and their way of life was being destroyed because they could not raise the money demanded of them.
they had to do something.
when faced with the petitions of the farmers the massachusetts legislature dominated by commercial leaders from the eastern part of the state blamed the farmers for their own plight.
in response the farmers decided on direct action.
they simply stopped the courts from issuing foreclosure rulings.
on august 29 1786 1 500 farmers armed with clubs and muskets shut down the court in northampton as it attempted to hear cases.
they also stopped courts in four other towns.
the governor and legislature reacted by passing a riot act that prohibited 12 or more armed persons from gathering and authorized county sheriffs to kill those who disobeyed the law.
they also suspended the writ of habeas corpus and authorized the governor to arrest and hold without bail any person or persons whatsoever 152 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 shays s rebellion an uprising of poor farmers who were in danger of losing their land because of increased taxes symbolized the discontent that many americans felt during the economic downturn after the revolution but it also struck fear into many other americans who believed the nation was on the edge of anarchy and needed a much stronger central government to deal with matters.
but the farmers many of whom had fought as soldiers in the revolution were prepared to fight a second time for their rights as free citizens.
from their perspective the massachusetts legislature was acting like the former royal governor.
shays and several thousand of his fellow citizens now took up arms fearing for our lives and families which will be taken from us if we dont defend them by january 1787 the regulators had decided to overthrow the government of massachusetts.
shays himself planned to attack the federal arsenal in springfield and then march to boston to destroy the nest of devils who by their influence make the court enact what they please burn it and lay the town of boston in ashes he came close to succeeding.
by late january thousands of well armed farmers surrounded the federal arsenal in springfield which was defended by 1 000 state militia under the command of major general william shepard.
unfortunately for the rebellion different groups thought the assault was set for different days and so on january 25 as a smaller group than expected marched on the arsenal shepards troops fired over their heads but then directly into their ranks.
four or five were killed and the rest retreated.
they did not immediately give up their idea of overthrowing the state government but no other attack came as close to doing so.
chapter 6 creating a nation 153 6 1 6 2 as 1787 wore on the rebellion slowly ended.
the regulators had few friends in the government of massachusetts or the surrounding states and were not able to establish a political base.
in 1788 the economy began to recover which made life more tolerable for farmers.
some of the rebels left massachusetts for more remote places.
shays himself settled in vermont.
but the rebels had terrified the nation s elite and hastened the movement toward a stronger national government.
fears of the rebellion in massachusetts inspired other revolutionary leaders to act.
when he first heard news of shayss rebellion washington told henry lee of virginia that the rebellion was proof of what our trans atlantic foe has predicted.
that mankind when left to themselves are unfit for their own government but despite their worries men like washington and lee were determined not to let such a proof stand.
the convention that met in philadelphia in the summer of 1787 was a direct result.
for white settlers moving west i v tj northwest st louis terrrr0ry virg n i kentucky ki.
z l t x fort san fernando north carolina south carolina o c fort nogales i natchez georgia r sj t new orleans pensacola st augustine v gulf of mexico the new nation was huge compared to the territorial size of the european powers.
the treaty of paris recognized the eastern border of the united states as running along the atlantic coast from maine to georgia.
since britain had returned florida to spain at the end of the revolutionary war the new nation was cut off from the gulf of mexico and spain was not always a friendly southern neighbor.
the treaty of paris also made the eastern shore of the mississippi river the nations western boundary.
the british proclamation line that had protected indian tribes in the ohio region and caused so much tension was not mentioned in the treaty.
control of the mississippi river itself the right to travel on it would remain contested especially since the river ended at the city of new orleans which spain zealously guarded see map 6 1.
within this vast territory the 13 states hugged the atlantic coast.
american indians dominated the interior but without even the modest protection from white settlers that britain had provided.
more whites were crossing the mountains and claiming western lands despite the lack of government approval and the dangers of indian attack.
royal charters gave many of the states claims to lands far into the interior.
but soon after the revolution ended the continental congress began resolving conflicting land claims and creating new states and territories west of the original 13 states.
one of the first issues to be resolved was over the conflicting claims of new york and new hampshire to the land on the eastern side of lake champlain.
many of the whites who had settled the region wanted independence from both.
local heroes such as ethan allen and his green mountain boys had fought for the american cause in the region and wanted to control their home.
as a result vermont became the first new state in 1791 see map 6 2.
one of the most significant accomplishments of the congress that operated under the articles of confederation was the creation of the northwest territory out of lands claimed by pennsylvania new york connecticut and massachusetts.
between 1784 and 1787 congress set up territorial governments for what would become ohio indiana illinois michigan and wisconsin.
it took years of difficult negotiations before the original states gave up their conflicting claims to the interior lands but ordinances passed between 1784 and 1787 created a new structure for the future midwest.
in 1785 congress ordered that the lands be surveyed set off into a grid pattern with most sections to be sold while some were reserved for future government needs and specifically for the support of schools.
the grid system established in 1785 was used in future territories creating clear and well organized boundaries for farms and towns but encouraging widely dispersed settlements atlantic ocean boundary claimed by spain after 1783 boundary set by pinckney s treaty 1795 area disputed by u s and spain spanish fort spanish settlement map 6 1 the american spanish border 1783 1795.
in the treaty of paris great britain not only recognized american independence but returned control of florida to spain creating the southern border for the united states though as the map shows the border was far from clear.
west of the united states was the vast louisiana territory for the time being also under spanish control.
154 partlll a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 6 1 map 6 2 state claims to western lands.
the huge tract of land that the king s proclamation line had reserved for indian tribes before the revolution became part of the united states in 1783.
different original states claimed this land and one of the first duties of congress was to sort out those conflicting claims.
after 1783 no one in government spoke for the rights of the native americans whose land much of the territory had been.
rhode island connecticut 1 6 2 l i h 1 uij 1 j northwest territory.
virginia claimed this entire region and ceded it to the national government in 1784.
other states ceded their conflicting claims as indicated.
southwest territory other state cessions disputed claim between u s and spain claimed by new york ceded 1782 boundaries for claims by other eastern states rather than compact communities see map 6 3.
the northwest ordinance of 1787 banned slavery in these territories as well as mandating religious freedom and the development of public schools.
the act also declared that the utmost good faith shall always be observed towards the indians their lands and property shall never be taken from them without their consent though little was done to enforce this provision.
further south white settlement was if anything proceeding faster.
an accomplished soldier hunter and trapper daniel boone first explored the trans appalachian territory that would be known as kentucky in 1767 when it was still off limits to whites.
as the revolution was starting in 1775 and the british ability to stop settlement was ebbing boone blazed the wilderness trail through the cumberland gap in the appalachians and established a settlement he called boonesborough.
during and after the war many more settlers followed the wilderness trail.
virginia gave up its long standing claims to the region and the federal government recognizing that there were already slaves in the territory admitted kentucky to the union as a slave state in 1792 and tennessee in 1796.
the northwest ordinance of 1787 legislation passed by congress under the articles of confederation that provided for public schools the sale of government land and prohibited slavery in the northwest territories.
chapter 6 creating a nation 155 6 1 5 2 6 miles 6 5 4 3 2 1 7 8 9 10 11 12 18 17 t 14 13 19 20 21 22 23 24 30 29 28 27 26 31 32 33 34 35 the survey system a township 36 square miles income from section 16 reserved for school support hone section 1 sq.
quarter quarter sections 40 acres half quarter sections pa 1 northwest territory r disputed boundary british fort superior north canada 0837 fort detroit osgrvz i z 4 all pojflf au fer p ontri0 z t c neyjf 1 fort niagara york maine mass.
iy dutclyrtan s poirtt new hampshire z massachusetts 5 vt rhode p a island 4 connecticut s s indiana b j w3 fw jnots.
f i8w7 mr 1 abm 7 f kelutky p c 0 792 x i blsk v z z m 9 t f iv tlw see 17 6 z pennsylvania 7 j no fw carolina delaware iyland atlantic ocean map 6 3 the northwest territory grid system.
the northwest ordinance divided the territory into what would become five states.
it also created a survey system in which the land would be divided into townships made up of 36 sections 35 of which would be available to settlers and one of which would be reserved to support schools.
even further south the land west of georgia that would eventually become the northern two thirds of alabama and mississippi was organized as the mississippi territory in 1798 but the territorial government there was ineffective and georgia did not give up its own claims until 1802.
the southern third of alabama and mississippi was known as west florida part of the spanish controlled territory on the countrys southern border.
while the congress tried to settle conflicting claims to the western lands the indians who had the oldest claim to the land had no inclination to give it up.
for american indians for the federal congress the greatest threat to the new united states came from american indians.
for most of the tribes who lived between the atlantic coast and the mississippi river the end of the american revolution was one more disaster among many.
despite the loyalty of the iroquois to the british during the revolution the kings government agreed to the treaty of paris in 1783 which ceded all the lands between the atlantic coast and the mississippi and south of the great lakes and canada to the new united states without consulting with their old allies.
the proclamation line limiting white settlement was gone.
among the many indian tribes even among the iroquois there were differing responses to the british failure to honor their loyalty.
many indian leaders saw no reason to honor a treaty in which they had played no part and continued to act as if much of new york and pennsylvania and all lands west of the ohio river belonged to them.
under the leadership of joseph brant the mohawks who had fought so hard for the british between 1776 and 1781 petitioned the british authorities in quebec for land on the british side of the new border and were granted a large tract in canada.
but they like other tribes did not let an international boundary limit their range of hunting or living.
new york and pennsylvania petitioned the congress for help with the indian tribes on their western frontiers and the new york legislature considered expelling all the tribes of the six nations because of their alliance with the british during the war see map 6 4.
156 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 6 1 map 6 4 ohio in the 1780s.
the land that would later become the state of ohio was a battlefield in the 1780s.
while great britain included the land as part of the newly independent united states in 1783 in reality native american tribes were the dominant force in the region and they often received aid from their canadian based british allies.
through the treaty of paris the british also promised to withdraw from all forts south of the great lakes.
as a result a power vacuum was looming in the region though the british were slow to honor their commitment to leave their western forts.
rather than depend on state militia congress in 1783 began to create the u s army to occupy fort niagara near todays buffalo new york and fort pitt todays pittsburgh.
although congress could create an army its difficulty in raising funds meant that the secretary of war former general henry knox had to beg for money to keep the army paid fed and supplied which strengthened the hand of indian leaders committed to resisting white expansion.
and many meant to resist.
the iroquois were far from the only indians who began to resist american expansion violently.
these tribes had never formally agreed to peace with the new nation and they attacked both the army and the settlers.
the small battles individual attacks kidnappings and destruction of property continued as they had during the revolution.
the u s army was far too small ill trained and ill supplied to be much of a deterrent.
given how weak the army was the indians held the upper hand in the northwest territory and kentucky.
a temporary peace along the new york border was secured in october 1784 by the treaty of fort stanwix between some of the iroquois and the u s government.
but many including sagoyewatha red jacket of the seneca and joseph brant opposed the treaty and it did not hold.
in fact the indians of the northwest territory would remain virtually at war with the united states from 1785 until 1795.
treaty of fort stanwix a 1784 treaty between one faction of the iroquois and the u s government that sought to end the violent battles over land in new york pennsylvania and the ohio river valley to the west.
chapter 6 creating a nation 157 joseph brant or thayendanegea was a leader among the mohawks who convinced many in the iroquois federation to support the british cause during the revolution and oppose american expansion after the war as he negotiated for native american rights.
he was one of the very few people of any race to meet with both george washington and king george iii.
after the treaty of fort stanwix was signed brant sailed for london where he met with many high ranking british officials and had an audience with king george iii.
he sought financial support for his people as compensation for their role on the british side in the revolution and he and his british hosts also seem to have devel oped a plan for indian resistance to the new american nation.
in 1785 and 1786 brant began to create an indian confederation that could successfully resist the united states.
the confederation included not only representatives of the iroquois but also many other tribes who had been traditional enemies of the iroquois as well as cherokees from much further south and smaller tribes who resided in the ohio river valley.
it would be one of the most unified and effective adversaries that the united states would face.
the indians demanded that the congress ensure that white settlement ended at the ohio river.
while the indians and congress negotiated fitfully the frontier remained a violent place.
in the late 1780s 1 500 white settlers and at least as many indians in ohio and kentucky were killed see map 6 5.
the united states had no intention of ceding as much land to the indians as they demanded but under the articles of confederation it was difficult to organize an army to enforce the governments claims.
the need to create a government strong enough to counter the indians led many to support the constitution in 1787.
for slaves former slaves and those who claimed ownership of them in 1791 benjamin banneker a free african american whose parents had been slaves wrote to thomas jefferson then washingtons secretary of state reminding him that in 1776 jefferson had written that all men are created equal and that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights banneker continued b ut sir how pitiable is it to reflect that although you were so fully convinced of the benevolence of the father of mankind you should counteract his mercies in detaining by fraud and violence so numerous a part of my brethren under groaning captivity and cruel oppression that you should be found guilty of that most criminal act which you professedly detested in others with respect to yourselves.
banneker would not let jefferson forget the contradiction at the heart of the new american enterprise and jeffersons own life.
as bannekers letter indicates many slaves and former slaves understood that the words freedom and liberty also ought to count for them.
by the end of the revolution many whites agreed.
back in 1775 thomas paine asked how americans could complain about british tyranny while they hold so many hundreds of thousands in slavery the issue of freedom and liberty seemed to be gaining ground for some slaves after 1776.
news traveled slowly but word spread that in 1794 in the midst of the french revolution the french national convention had abolished slavery and then that slaves in france s most lucrative caribbean colony had won independence for what became the black led republic of haiti.
when cornwallis surrendered at yorktown in 1781 he had between 4 000 and 5 000 former slaves with his army.
many more were in other british held areas especially new york city.
as the war ended the british returned some slaves to old masters gave others to new masters in the caribbean or simply abandoned them.
but many former slaves also sailed with the british when they left the colonies some settling as free people in canada england or west africa.
a former slave named boston king wrote that the english had compassion upon us in the day of distress.
soon after ships were fitted out and furnished with every necessary for conveying us to nova scotia.
life was not easy for african americans in nova scotia but they were free.
by the time george washington was inaugurated president in 1789 slavery had been abolished in massachusetts new hampshire and vermont and was dying though slowly throughout the north.
northern slaves worked as household help and j 58 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 i i major southeastern indian groups f i attempted state of franklin spanish boundary claim u s boundary set in 1783 treaty with england spanish louisiana eastern boundary spanish east florida northern boundary spanish west florida natchez trace 6 1 6 2 map 6 5 tribal land claims 1783 1788.
especially in the southwest of the new united states strong native american tribes clamed large areas and did not much care whether the u s or spain claimed the territory since they did not want settlers from either country.
labored in factories and farms.
new york had the most slaves in the north concentrated in manhattan but also working on the great estates of the hudson valley.
new jersey and rhode island were next in number.
in the north however more money was made on the slave trade than on slave labor.
the northwest ordinance prohibited slavery in the ohio region.
many thought slavery would also die out in delaware maryland and virginia.
only in the carolinas georgia and the new western areas of kentucky and tennessee was slavery still strong.
despite the regional differences by 1789 1 in 10 african americans was a free person.
some had won their freedom through the army.
some had won through state action.
some had been set free by individual slave owners.
but in 1789 one could not assume that to be black was to be a slave.
that truth was a significant change from 1776 when free blacks were a definite exception in every one of the 13 colonies.
chapter 6 creating a nation 159 r 6 1 6 2 after massachusetts new hampshire and vermont abolished slavery other northern states with more slaves moved exceedingly slowly toward gradual emancipation table 6 1.
the pennsylvania law of 1780 declared slavery disgraceful to any people but then set up a system in which the first slaves would not be freed until 1808 and the last would not be emancipated until 1847.
new yorks abolition law of 1799 and new jerseys of 1804 as well as similar laws in connecticut and rhode island were equally slow in their operations.
although every northern state had started the process of ending slavery before 1800 it was almost 1850 before slavery disappeared in the north.
free blacks sometimes found work in the same households where they had been slaves.
black men worked on merchant ships whaling vessels or even in the navy.
the racially diverse crew of the whaling ship pequod in herman melvilles 1851 novel moby dick was not unusual.
in philadelphia new york providence and boston many blacks worked on the docks.
throughout the northern states more and more free blacks referred to themselves as africans or as the free african society of philadelphia said free africans and their descendants in the region encompassing delaware maryland virginia and north carolina slavery did not die out but slave life changed after the revolution.
some masters heeded the revolutionary language of freedom.
james madison freed one slave named billy because he came to fear that billys love of freedom meant he was no longer a fit companion for fellow slaves george washington wrote often of his wish that slavery could be gradually abolished and left instructions in his will that all his slaves should be free after he and martha died.
other planters in the region also freed slaves.
slaves who had run away during the war managed to establish new identities and maintain their freedom especially in cities like baltimore richmond and the new district of columbia.
by 1810 almost a quarter of the african americans in maryland a third in the district of columbia and six or seven percent in virginia and north carolina were free.
a thriving community of free people of african descent emerged.
as a sign of their growing confidence in 1792 thomas brown a black revolutionary war veteran in baltimore ran although unsuccessfully for the maryland legislature promising to represent so many hundreds of poor blacks table 6 1 the free black population in the early united states state free black population in 1790 total black population in 1790 percentage of free blacks in total black population free black population in 1810 total black population in 1810 percentage of free blacks in total black population new hampshire 630 788 80 970 970 100 vermont 255 271 94 750 750 100 massachusetts 6 001 6 001 100 7 706 7 706 100 connecticut 2 808 5 572 50 6 453 6 763 95 rhode island 3 407 4 355 78 3 609 3 717 97 new york 4 654 25 978 18 25 333 40 350 63 new jersey 2 762 14 185 19 7 843 18 694 42 pennsylvania 6 537 10 324 63 22 492 23 287 97 delaware 3 899 12 786 30 13 136 17 313 76 maryland 8 043 111 079 7 33 927 145 429 23 virginia 12 866 305 493 4 30 570 423 088 7 north carolina 4 975 105 547 5 10 266 179 090 6 kentucky 114 12 544 1 1 713 82 274 2 tennessee 361 3 778 10 1 317 45 845 3 district of columbia 2 549 7 944 32 south carolina 1 801 108 895 2 4 544 200 919 2 georgia 398 29 662 1 1 801 107 019 2 partlll american voices prince hall from slavery to equality 1797 born a slave prince hall was freed before the revolution and after the war he played a leading role in abolishing slavery in massachusetts.
hall helped create the african lodge of the masons in boston and delivered the following speech to that group.
he makes it clear that although african americans in his city are free they are far from equal still he urges his audience to take heart at the promise of freedom seen in the revolution in haiti.
now my brethren nothing is stable all things are changeable.
let us seek those things which are sure and steadfast and let us pray god that while we remain here he would give us the grace of patience and strength to bear up under all our troubles which at this day god knows we have our share of.
patience i say for were we not possessed of a great measure of it we could not bear up under the daily insults we meet with in the streets of boston much more on public days of recreation.
how at such times are we shamefully abused and that to such a degree that we may truly be said to carry our lives in our hands and the arrows of death are flying about our heads.
helpless women have their clothes torn from their backs i was told by a gentleman who saw this filthy behavior in the common that in all places he had been in he never saw so cruel behavior in all his life and that a slave in the west indies on sundays or holidays enjoys himself and friends without molestation my brethren let us not be cast down under these and many other abuses we at present are laboring under for the darkest hour is just before the break of day.
my brethren let us remember what a dark day it was with our african brethren six years ago in the french west indies.
nothing but the snap of the whip was heard from morning to evening.
hanging breaking on the wheel burning and all manner of tortures were inflicted upon those unhappy people.
but blessed be god the scene is changed.
they now confess that god hath no respect of person and therefore receive them as their friends and treat them as brothers.
thus doth ethiopia stretch forth her hand from slavery to freedom and equality.
source prince hall thus doth ethiopia stretch forth her hand from slavery to freedom and equality 1797 in manning marable and leith mullings editors let nobody turn us around voices of resistance reform and renewal lanham md rowman littlefield 2000 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what light does hall s speech shed on race relations in boston in the late 1700s.
historical interpretation what connection did hall make between the revolts that would produce an independent haiti and the situation confronting african americans.
how might his analysis of events in the french west indies have differed from that of many white observers.
in this region slaves and free blacks worked in an economy that was more diverse than before the war.
by 1790 slaves in virginia and maryland for example were increasingly engaged in growing wheat a crop that required horses that needed tending plows and fertilizer.
they also worked in flour mills and the ironworks blacksmith shops and other enterprises that were springing up in the region.
some slaves were rented out and moved from job to job giving them a chance to learn more skills travel short distances make a little money and gain a taste of freedom.
other slaves from the region were far less fortunate.
in the years after the revolution with the plantations of virginia and maryland stabilized in size slave owners needed fewer slaves.
so they increased their wealth by developing a new internal market in humans.
they encouraged slaves to have more children and then as those children reached adolescence sold them as they sold other agricultural products for transport to places that needed more and more slave labor.
slaves were taken to join the white settlers who established the new states of kentucky and tennessee.
other slaves were transported to south carolina and georgia.
further south in south carolina and georgia life for slaves was very different.
some of the fiercest fighting of the revolution had disrupted almost every aspect of life in south carolina and georgia and slaves had more opportunities to run away.
with the coming of peace however the planter elite in these states was determined to reestablish a way of life that depended on slavery.
slaves represented between 40 and a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 chapter 6 creating a nation 161 60 percent of the population in south carolina and georgia.
slave labor had produced great fortunes for the plantation owners before the war and it would produce new fortunes for them after the war ended.
whereas many planters in delaware maryland virginia and north carolina felt the need to consider the rhetoric of freedom and perhaps modify the tyranny of slavery planters in south carolina and georgia made it clear that they believed such language did not apply to slaves.
as a result the few free blacks in the southernmost states often people who had black white and indian heritage were kept as far away from the slave community as possible so the slaves would not hear the contagious language of freedom.
in the 20 years after 1790 the number of slaves doubled in south carolina from 100 000 to 200 000 and in georgia it more than tripled from 30 000 to over 100 000.
the rapid growth of the slave population in south carolina and georgia at the end of the 1700s also led to a new kind of community life in the slave quarters of these large plantations.
unlike those who owned a lone slave or a single slave family which could be closely supervised the largest plantations in south carolina and georgia had hundreds of slaves in the 1790s.
slave labor created great wealth and the owners of these plantations were the economic elite of their states but they were often away preferring the social life of charleston or savannah.
slaves though driven by overseers were able to develop their own community lives and norms within the slave quarters which had not been possible on the smaller farms and plantations of an earlier era.
having their own vegetable gardens sometimes gave slaves limited economic freedom.
religious gatherings provided communal support.
for women the rise of republican motherhood in april 1776 abigail adams wrote to her husband john while the future president was attending the congress that would issue the declaration of independence in philadelphia and she was managing the family and farm in quincy massachusetts from which he was so often absent.
she told him to remember the ladies and she warned do not put such unlimited power into the hands of husbands.
if particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice or representation abigail was quite serious in her demand.
her husband however treated his wifes plea as a kind of joke.
john adams wrote back to his wife saying our struggle has loosened the bonds of government everywhere that children and apprentices were disobedient but he said abigails letter was the first intimation that another tribe more numerous and powerful than all the rest were grown discontented we do not know how she responded to having her husband lump her plea for a voice in government with the discontent of children and apprentices.
abigail and john had a close marriage but while she was serious about wanting the american revolution to recognize more rights for women he was equally determined to ignore her plea.
women of course fell into all of the different groups that men did.
american indian women most of whom like the men had supported the british often paid a high price for their loyalty to britain.
mary molly brant the sister of joseph brant convinced many iroquois to support an iroquois british alliance during the war.
when the war ended she found a new home in canada reminding the british authorities that they were not providing the support they had promised her people.
slave women also sided with the british more often than with the american revolutionaries.
with british armies operating in the southern colonies and the british welcoming slaves to their side women as well as men fled to freedom with the british.
of the 23 slaves who ran away from thomas jeffersons plantations during the revolution 13 were female.
more than 40 percent of all of the former slaves who left with the british at the end of the war were women.
162 partlll a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 some white women rich and poor also supported the british cause and paid dearly for it.
with the coming of the war many loyalist wives stayed behind to mind their homes when their husbands joined the british army or fled to canada.
these women faced hostile neighbors and local governments and many lost their homes.
for white women who supported the revolution life was also hard but the outcome was usually better.
the revolutionary war shaped the lives of most women who had supported it.
for some it changed virtually every aspect of life.
after the war deborah sampson who had pretended to be a man and fought in the war married and lived in sharon massachusetts but she was also entertained by president washington was granted a revolutionary soldiers pension by congress and became something of a national hero.
other women did not easily return to their old ways limited to the private sphere of their families.
with many men away for months or years women took on household duties that were by long tradition mens exclusive sphere.
mary bartlett whose husband represented new hampshire in congress reflected a changed attitude experienced by many.
in her first letters in 1776 she wrote about your farming business but by 1778 it had become our farming business the difference of one word that made it clear she now included herself in the ownership of their farm was an important change.
many women who had coped with years of isolation during the war found that the political independence of the united states brought personal independence too.
more women postponed marriage demanded divorces from unhappy marriages and sought higher education as well as new if limited political involvement in the new republic.
for many americans women and men the book a vindication of the rights of woman written in 1792 by british writer mary wollstonecraft gave words to ideas that had been taking shape since the revolution.
in her appeal for equality wollstonecraft called for equal education and coeducation for girls and boys.
in america judith sargent murray expanded wollstonecrafts arguments and insisted that women are indeed in every respect equal to men important as they were the ideas about total equality developed by wollstonecraft and murray did not become the dominant ideology of the new nation.
instead something much more moderate known as republican motherhood came to dominate public discussions of womens place in the new united states.
as the ideology of republican motherhood was developed in pulpits and magazines after the revolution women would have an important role but a limited one not full citizenship but also no return to a merely passive role in the domestic sphere that had been prescribed before 1776.
republican motherhood was a kind of middle position.
its advocates suggested that women would advise their husbands and raise their sons to be active citizens and their daughters to be part of another generation of republican mothers who shaped the nation from home.
but to play this role its advocates insisted that women also needed an education perhaps a different education from men but a better one than that given to their mothers and grandmothers.
in 1778 abigail adams wrote i regret how fashionable it has been to ridicule female learning after the war she and many others planned to do something about it.
private academies which had educated white male leaders for a century began to open their doors to women or more often separate private academies for women were founded like the young ladies academy of philadelphia that benjamin rush opened in 1787.
rush whose views reflected his belief in the ideology of republican motherhood believed that the attention of our young ladies should be directed as soon as they are prepared for it to the reading of history travels poetry and moral essays to the present state of society in america when priscilla mason graduated from rushs young ladies academy in 1794 however she condemned the arbitrary limitations that have denied us the means of knowledge and then reproached us for the want of it she continued the church the bar and the senate are shut against us.
having lived through the revolution in massachusetts and become a leader in the universalist churches judith sargent murray also came to be one of the strongest voices demanding absolute equality for women in the new nation.
republican motherhood the belief that women should have more rights and a better education so that they might support husbands and raise sons who would actively participate in the political affairs of society.
chapter 6 creating a nation 163 american voices judith sargent murray on the equality of the sexes 1792 judith sargent murray was born into a merchant family in massachusetts in 1751 and lived through the revolution as a young woman.
she was a leader of the universalist movement in religion which believed that all people were saved a belief that led them to emphasize equality including equality of the sexes.
she argued that differences between the sexes were due to educational opportunities rather than inherent qualities and she wanted an education that would make women the equals of their brothers husbands and sons.
she argued that the way society constructed women s roles perpetuated the stereotype of women as overly emotional and not thoughtful.
with an equal education she insisted women could at least equal men.
her most famous book on the equality of the sexes was published in 1792.
is it upon mature consideration we adopt the idea that nature is thus partial in her distributions.
is it indeed a fact that she hath yielded to one half of the human species so unquestionable a mental superiority may we not trace its source in the difference of education the one is taught to aspire and the other is early confined and limited.
as their years increase the sister must be wholly domesticated while the brother is led by the hand through all the flowery paths of science.
grant that their minds are by nature equal yet who shall wonder at the apparent superiority if indeed custom becomes second nature at length arrived at womanhood the uncultivated fair one feels a void which the employments allotted her are by no means capable of filling she experiences a mortifying consciousness of inferiority which embitters every enjoyment now was she permitted the same instructors as her brother with an eye however to their particular departments for the employment of a rational mind an ample field would be opened a mind thus filled would have little room for the trifles with which our sex are with too much justice accused of amusing themselves and they would thus be rendered fit companions for those who should one day wear them as their crown should it still be vociferated your domestic employments are sufficient i would calmly ask is it reasonable that a candidate for immortality for the joys of heaven an intelligent being who is to spend an eternity in contemplating the works of deity should at present be so degraded as to be allowed no other ideas than those which are suggested by the mechanism of a pudding or the sewing the seams of a garment.
pity that all such censurers of female improvement do not go one step further and deny their future existence to be consistent they surely ought.
yes ye lordly ye haughty sex our souls are by nature equal to yours the same breath of god animates enlivens and invigorates us and that we are not fallen lower than yourselves.
source judith sargent murray on the equality of the sexes first published in the massachusetts magazine april 1790 reprinted in eve kornfeld creating an american culture 1775 1800 a brief history with documents boston bedford st martin s 2001 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what differences did murray note between the education of boys and girls.
what consequences did she attach to those differences.
historical interpretation what vision of republican womanhood did murray support.
how did her vision differ from that embodied in the emerging ideology of republican motherhood.
who shut them.
man despotic man an education that produced such a speaker may have been more than rush envisioned when he proposed the school.
women also took a more direct role in politics when they could.
new jerseys 1776 constitution gave women the right to vote but the provision was repealed in 1807.
ihe bill of rights that was added to the federal constitution in 1791 gave all citizens women as well as men the right to petition the government for a redress of grievances and women regularly petitioned congress and state legislatures.
after the revolution women also gained significant new rights to control their own property which they had not had before the war.
it would be a long time before law and culture would support the equality that abigail adams or judith sargent murray advocated.
but attitudes had begun to change.
within the ideology of republican motherhood however two double standards emerged.
first middle and upper class white women were expected to be the guardians of sexual morality.
men might stray but as a philadelphia newspaper editorialized ladies much depends on you towards a reformation in the morals of our sex and if men did stray it was expected they would do so only with lower class or poor white women or with blacks slave or free.
second servants and working women were part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 although it is often forgotten new jersey s 1776 state constitution gave that state s women the right to vote a right they exercised enthusiastically until the provision was repealed in 1807 not included in either the rules or the opportunities for education and influence that the ideal of republican motherhood gave to supposedly all women but in reality the increasingly well educated and active women of higher social and economic status.
quick review did the revolutionary war have a truly revolutionary effect on britain s former colonies.
address the changes or lack thereof among at least two groups in your answer.
creating a government writing the u s constitution explain the needs pressures and compromises that led to writing and adopting the constitution.
6 2 the years immediately after the revolution were not easy ones in the new united states of america.
many americans were unhappy with the situation in which they found themselves.
farmers were angry about taxes.
frontier whites and indians fought for control of the land.
many women were agitating for their own rights.
some of the most famous revolutionary leaders including washington franklin and hamilton were determined to end the growing chaos and reshape the new nation they had helped to create.
the crisis of the 1780s the failure of the articles of confederation the problems that the nation faced in the 1780s had many sources.
ihe articles of confederation that governed the nation were essentially a treaty among 13 independent nations.
all 13 states needed to agree to levy any taxes and 9 states had to agree to pass a law.
real sovereignty in this case the ability to make the most important decisions about how americans should govern themselves and pay for their government rested with the state governments.
chapter 6 creating a nation 165 annapolis convention conference of state delegates that issued a call in september 1786 for a convention to consider changes to the articles of confederation.
for present day citizens who live in a world in which a national government rules almost every spot on the planet such a loose federation may seem surprising.
but for the revolutionary generation the arrangement was not strange at all.
the separate colonies had experienced over a century of independent relationships with london.
until the 1760s the links between each colony and britain were much stronger than the ties between the various colonies.
when americans looked to europe they saw that small independent states and cities were the rule in what is now germany and italy.
in that context viewing massachusetts new york and virginia as independent states that were linked only in a loose confederation did not seem odd.
nevertheless leading citizens were concluding that the american confederation was not working.
they believed that it was too weak the state legislatures too strong and that this imbalance was causing serious problems.
unlike their european models the american confederation had acted as a united front to achieve independence and that effort had a ripple effect on subsequent actions.
under the treaty that ended the revolution the united states all of the states together had promised to pay debts that it had incurred during the war pensions for soldiers as well as the repayment of loans to u s citizens and foreign creditors.
but congress had no money and could not seem to raise any given the requirement that all 13 states agree to any tax.
the credit rating of the new nation was dropping quickly and the lack of faith in the governments ability to pay its debts was strangling the national economy.
if the government could not pay off the loans negotiated during the revolution many european creditors thought why loan any more money to either the american government or american commercial enterprises.
the financial crisis had additional impacts.
indian tribes along the frontier were growing stronger and the new nation risked losing control of its western lands because it could not afford a strong army to protect them.
in 1785 a shawnee leader piteasewa told commissioners sent by the congress we are aware of your design to divide our councils but we are unanimous although the tribes were never actually unanimous in the 1780s they were still more than a match for the u s army or the various state militias.
moreover many state legislatures not only failed to raise taxes or pay their state debts but also often simply gave in when mobs of farmers like those in massachusetts took control of the court houses and stopped trials of those who had failed to pay debts or taxes.
charles lee one of virginias leading citizens complained to george washington in 1788 of the legislatures willingness to grant too much tax relief the public debts and even private debts will in my opinion be extinguished by acts of the several legislatures in september 1786 five states sent delegates to a convention in maryland known as the annapolis convention to try to deal with yet another weakness of the articles of confederation economic rivalry between the states that had led to a battle over navigation rights on the potomac river between maryland and virginia and to a violent boundary dispute between new york and what would become vermont.
ihe convention never had a quorum and did no business but it did give some leaders a chance to talk about the nations problems.
as a result alexander hamilton wrote to the congress asking that the states appoint delegates to meet in philadelphia in may 1787 to devise such further provisions as should appear to them necessary to render the constitution of the federal government adequate to the exigencies of the union in february 1787 5 months after receiving hamiltons letter the congress agreed to call a convention but with limitations.
they voted to ask the states to send delegates to philadelphia for the sole and express purpose of revising the articles of confederation and reporting to congress and the several legislatures such alterations and provisions therein as shall when agreed to in congress and confirmed by the states render the federal constitution adequate to the exigencies of government and the preservation of the union on the surface this call was hardly a mandate for wholesale change.
but it launched the constitutional convention of 1787 and the convention would far exceed its authority.
some including madison and hamilton planned it that way from the beginning.
the result would be a radically different form of government than the one under which the united states had won its freedom.
ill a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 the constitutional convention of 1787 the 55 white men who gathered in what later came to be known as independence hall in philadelphia in spring of 1787 for the constitutional convention had instructions from congress merely to propose amendments to the articles of confederation.
the group represented the elite of the new nation.
they had been appointed by 12 states rhode islands legislature distrusted any effort to strengthen the central government and refused to send anyone to philadelphia.
most were fairly young.
twenty nine had college degrees at a time when that achievement was rare.
only eight had signed the declaration of independence in 1776.
except for george washington and benjamin franklin some of the most prominent leaders of the revolution were absent.
virginias patrick henry and massachusettss john hancock and sam adams refused to attend because they too worried that the convention would undermine the rights of individual states.
jefferson was away as u s ambassador to france.
john adams was ambassador to britain.
women and the rebels of western massachusetts who had marched with daniel shays slaves and free blacks and american indians were not represented.
but in that summer gathering in 1787 the delegates produced a frame of government that has served the united states well for more than 200 years.
constitutional convention convention that met in philadelphia in 1787 and drafted the constitution of the united states.
decisions on the structure of a unified government coming to agreement at the constitutional convention involved long arguments and difficult compromises.
the final result that the convention produced in september 1787 disappointed many.
surprisingly all the delegates even those who left in anger kept to a pledge to keep their deliberations secret.
all of the delegates wanted to be sure they had the time and freedom to talk through the difficult issues of the day without undue pressure from outside groups.
no one outside the convention including members of congress that were still meeting in new york had a clue what the distinguished group in philadelphia would recommend.
in the spring of 1787 delegates from 12 of the 13 states gathered in independence hall now a national historic site to write a new plan of government.
after a summer of hard negotiations they proposed what became the constitution of the united states.
chapter 6 creating a nation 167 although he held no special office at the constitutional convention serving simply as one of several delegates from virginia james madison planned carefully and did his best to guide the convention s deliberations.
his notes on the meeting provide the best record of what happened that summer.
virginia plan the first proposal put forward at the constitutional convention which included two houses of congress both elected by proportional representation and a national executive and judiciary.
separation of powers a core aspect of the constitution by which different parts of the new national government would have their authority always limited by other parts.
federalism a system of government in which power is clearly divided between state governments and the national or federal government.
proportional representation a way of selecting representatives in congress based on the total population of a state as opposed to having each state receive equal votes in congress.
new jersey plan a proposal of the new jersey delegation to the constitutional convention by which both houses of congress would be elected by states with equal size delegations for every state.
connecticut plan or the great compromise plan proposed for creating a national bicameral legislature in which all states would be equally represented in the senate and proportionally represented in the house.
a relatively young delegate from virginia james madison 1751 1836 who had served in the virginia legislature during the revolution and had authored the virginia statute of religious freedom was the key architect of the constitution that emerged although he never held a special office at the convention.
in preparation for the convention madison privately arranged for the virginia and pennsylvania delegates to arrive in philadelphia a week before the convention opened.
he used that week to craft a plan that could be presented as soon as the convention got underway.
on may 29 the first day of business at the convention virginias governor edmund randolph following madisons plan presented what came to be known as the virginia plan the first outline of a new constitution.
in randolphs plan a new congress with two houses whose members would be elected based on proportional representation reflecting the population of the various states would replace the current congress.
the new government would represent the people not necessarily 13 equal states.
if more people lived in certain states especially virginia and massachusetts then those states would have more votes in the congress.
the congress would have the power to levy taxes regulate interstate commerce and veto state laws.
randolph also proposed creating a national executive and judiciary or a set of federal courts.
the next day may 30 the delegates endorsed a resolution from pennsylvanias gouverneur morris that a national government ought to be established consisting of a supreme legislative executive and judiciary the basic outline of a strong new national government one that included the separation of powers between the congress the executive branch and the courts had emerged quickly.
the new system that madison randolph and morris were proposing was also known as federalism a system of government in which both the central national government and the individual state governments had real power but in separate spheres of influence.
but there would be many days of meetings in a hot and stuffy independence hall before the details would be resolved and the constitution itself would be completed.
from the opening day there was a battle between those generally from larger states who wanted the new congress to have proportional representation that is representatives elected directly by the voters of districts based on the size of a states population and those generally from smaller states who wanted congress to be made up of representatives of the states themselves so that each state would have an equal number of votes.
the virginia plan called for proportional representation but a subsequent plan put forward by new jerseys william paterson not surprisingly known as the new jersey plan called for a congress in which both houses would be made up of delegates elected by state legislatures with an equal number from each state.
while the delegates from the largest states especially james madison and edmund randolph insisted that proportional representation was essential to a strong and democratic national government paterson along with delegates from delaware and surprisingly some from new york and massachusetts insisted that members of congress should represent only state governments and that each state should be treated equally.
a compromise first proposed by connecticuts roger sherman and sometimes called the connecticut plan was to split the difference and create a house of representatives with members elected by districts based on population and a senate made up of two senators from each state no matter what its population elected by the state legislature.
but adopting this great compromise which was the key to the future constitution did not come easily.
other issues were even more difficult to resolve.
the convention came to a standstill over the office of president.
everyone assumed that the conventions presiding officer george washington would be the first president in the new government but few could agree on the details of the office or on how to select his successors.
some 8 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 wanted an executive of several individuals in a cabinet of equals while others insisted on a single leader.
most wanted to ensure that only the wisest and best citizens voted for the president and almost none trusted the people to elect the president by a direct popular vote.
but how to select the president by the congress by state legislatures or by some other formula seemed impossible to resolve until madison proposed the electoral college.
he suggested that each state select presidential electors according to the number of its senators and representatives in congress by whatever method it preferred and that these electors would then select the president.
if a majority of the electors did not agree on any one candidate the choice would fall to the house of representatives but with each state delegation in congress having only one vote.
this proposal seemed like a compromise that could work.
the convention also decided on a 4 year term for the president with no limit on the number of terms that could be served.
there were many arguments about how much power to give the president.
delegates remembered that they had just fought a war against the tyranny of george ills government.
on the other hand after a decade of chaos they wanted a strong executive who could make tough decisions and have the authority to make them stick.
ihe delegates compromised and agreed that the president could veto legislation but that a two thirds vote of each chamber of the congress could override a veto.
those wanting a strong executive won though it would fall to washington and subsequent presidents to flesh out the job.
ihe delegates spent almost no time on the judiciary.
they created a supreme court and lower courts but left the details to subsequent generations.
while they considered an arrangement whereby the judges of the supreme court and the president together might declare both federal and state laws unconstitutional they dropped the idea.
only later after john marshall became chief justice in 1800 did the supreme court take on its role as arbiter of the constitutionality of laws.
electoral college a system in which each state selects presidential electors according to the number of its senators and representatives in congress by whatever method it prefers and these electors then select the president.
6 2 the effects of slavery on a unified government while the convention spent much of its time debating issues that divided large states from small ones madison understood that the real divide was between northern and southern states or more specifically between states where slavery was growing rapidly and those where it was dying out.
later he remembered that the institution of slavery and its implications formed the line of discrimination on many issues.
ihe existence of slavery in the united states embarrassed most of the framers of the constitution.
they were careful not to use the words slave or slavery even once in the final document.
but they were equally careful to protect the institution and appease slaveholders.
madison like his fellow virginians jefferson and washington embodied all the contradictions of slavery.
madison owned slaves yet despised slavery.
he told the convention that the distinction of color represented the basis for the most oppressive domination ever exercised by man over man nevertheless he later assured the virginia convention that ratified the constitution that the constitution offered slavery better security than any that now exists he was right in his assurance.
although many of the delegates including some who were slaveholders understood that slavery was incompatible with life liberty and the pursuit of happiness they were willing to live with the contradiction.
the framers of the constitution were also willing to live with slavery because of their belief that a key to securing life liberty and the pursuit of happiness was ensuring the inviolable right of private property.
slaves were seen first as the private property of their owners and only second as human beings if as humans at all.
for many at the convention all private property including property consisting of other humans was sacrosanct.
without the security of property they did not think any of their other rights were chapter 6 creating a nation 169 6 1 6 2 three fifths clause another compromise from the constitutional convention by which slaves though the term was never used would be counted as three fifths of a person for purposes of establishing a state s representation under the proportional representation plan.
they were willing to sacrifice their moral qualms about slavery to protect their rights to their own property.
the first time slavery intruded into the convention was when the delegates argued about representation in congress.
if representation was to be by population then who would be counted as people.
defenders of slavery wanted slaves to be counted in equal numbers with free citizens in assigning seats in the house of representatives to states.
delegates from states where slavery was shrinking or gone wanted to count only free citizens.
pennsylvanias james wilson offered a compromise resolution quickly seconded by south carolinas charles pinckney who owned more slaves than almost any other delegate which said that representation in congress would be apportioned in proportion to the whole number of white and other free citizens and inhabitants of every age sex and condition including those bound to servitude for a term of years and three fifths of all other persons not comprehended in the foregoing description except indians not paying taxes in each state.
everyone knew that all other persons meant slaves.
after further debates the final document kept the three fifths clause.
some delegates objected.
pennsylvanias gouverneur morris condemned the three fifths clause as creating a situation in which the inhabitant of georgia and south carolina who goes to the coast of africa and in defiance of the most sacred laws of humanity tears away his fellow creatures from their dearest connection and damns them to the most cruel bondages shall have more votes in a government instituted for the protection of the rights of mankind than the citizen of pennsylvania or new jersey who views with laudable horror so nefarious a practice.
but in the end the nefarious practice won.
moreover the three fifths clause was far from the only concession to slaveholders.
when a committee was appointed to start drafting a document charles cotesworth pinckney warned them if the committee should fail to insert some security to the southern states against an emancipation of slaves and taxes on exports i will be bound by duty to my state to vote against the report he need not have worried.
the first draft of the constitution included a clause that said congress could neither tax nor prohibit the migration or importation of such persons as the several states shall think proper to admit such persons referred to slaves and the insistence that congress could not tax or prohibit their migration or importation meant that the new government could not use its power in interstate commerce to limit the slave trade.
however the wording of the final draft did allow congress to change the policy after 1808 and when that year arrived congress did end the slave trade and stop the importation of slaves from africa.
nevertheless between 1787 and 1808 over 200 000 africans were forcibly taken from africa and sold into slavery in the american south.
in that one short 21 year period half as many slaves were brought to the united states as the 400 000 africans who had been brought to america over the previous 177 years between 1610 and 1787.
the final compromise about slavery came quickly.
the draft of the constitution f prepared by the committee of detail had said that each state had an obligation to deliver up any person charged with a serious crime in another state.
delegates from south carolina and georgia asked the convention to add a clause that required fugitive slaves and servants to be delivered up like criminals delegates from pennsylvania and connecticut objected.
however when it came time to vote the convention embraced the request without a single dissent.
it was the end of august.
the delegates were tired and anxious to end their work.
and the issue of slavery was just not as important to northerners as it was to southerners.
as a result the final version of the constitution contained a clause article iv section 2 that 0 partlll a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 required states to extradite criminals from one state to another and a separate clause that stated no person held to service or labour in one state under the laws thereof escaping into another shall in consequence of any law or regulation therein be discharged from such service or labour but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or labour may be due.
once again the word slavery did not appear but the meaning of person held to service or labour was slaves.
the fugitive slave clause gave slaveholders a new and powerful tool.
as the 1800s wore on it led to increasing strife because many northerners resented it and southerners became angry at northern slowness in complying with one of the planks of the constitution that united them.
the delegates who met in philadelphia in 1787 compromised on many issues slavery most of all but one area where they did not compromise despite the pleas of several delegates would bedevil them for some time.
on september 10 only a week before their final vote george mason of virginia said he wished the plan had been prefaced with a bill of rights a guarantee of freedom of speech press religion trial by jury and so on that would give great quiet to the people mason had been the author of the virginia declaration of rights and he anticipated that the lack of a formal guarantee of rights in the final document would create strong opposition.
but not a single state delegation approved masons proposal though several states now had their own bills of rights.
some delegates argued that such guarantees were unnecessary but more of them were hot tired and ready to be done with their work.
it was too late to add something new but the failure to include a bill of rights in the original document almost derailed the whole plan for a new federal government.
forty one of the original 55 delegates gathered for the final vote.
edmund randolph who had introduced the virginia plan to the convention would not sign the final document.
the constitution gave far more power to the federal government than he ever imagined it would.
george mason worried about the lack of a bill of rights.
elbridge gerry of massachusetts objected to the constitution because first the three fifths clause gave too much power to slaveholding states and second the power to raise armies was a dangerous step toward a military establishment.
the remaining 38 were ready to sign the document that began with these words we the people of the united states in order to form a more perfect union establish justice insure domestic tranquility provide for the common defense promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity do ordain and establish this constitution for the united states of america.
many perhaps agreed with benjamin franklin who said that there were several parts of this constitution which i do not at present approve but the older i grow the more apt i am to doubt my own judgment and pay more respect to the judgment of others and he added a realistic note i doubt too whether any other convention we can obtain may be able to make a better constitution.
debating and adopting the constitution as mandated by the call to the constitutional convention once the 38 delegates had signed the draft constitution it was sent to the congress that was meeting in new york.
ten of the delegates from the philadelphia convention were also members of that congress and they transported the document.
the delegates meeting in philadelphia had far exceeded their instructions to propose amendments to the articles of confederation but those members of the congress who had not 6 2 chapter 6 creating a nation 171 federalists supporters of the constitution those who favored its ratification.
antifederalists opponents of the constitution those who argued against its ratification.
participated in drafting the new document were in no mood for a fight.
they simply sent the proposed constitution to the states for their consideration even though they understood that it replaced rather than amended the articles of confederation and were aware that the constitution itself stated the conditions for its national launch ratification by only 9 of the 13 states.
however the members of congress did require that the battles about whether to adopt this radical new experiment in government would be fought on a state by state basis in conventions of specially elected delegates who would choose to ratify or not ratify the constitution.
this approach would increase the power of the voters in each state to decide instead of representatives in the political bodies of the legislatures.
in the fall of 1787 the outcome was by no means clear.
to ensure that the document they had worked so hard to create actually became the fundamental law of the united states delegates from the constitutional convention quickly went to work.
james madison one of the chief architects of the new constitution set out to persuade the state conventions to adopt it.
in the fall of 1787 he along with alexander hamilton and john jay three leaders who did not normally get along with one another wrote 85 newspaper articles to support the constitution later published as the federalist papers.
in these articles the three argued passionately that the new nation needed a strong national government and described the problems that they believed the constitution addressed.
the constitutions advocates who called themselves federalists entered the state conventions with important advantages.
they had a specific document and specific arguments on how theirs was a clear plan for improving the government.
the new constitution addressed the fears of many who would vote for delegates to the conventions and sit in them.
for those afraid of another shayss rebellion for those wanting a strong u s army to protect them from indians along the allegheny frontier and for those worried about the nations credit rating the constitution provided reassurances not found in the articles of confederation.
in contrast for those known as antifederalists people who worried that a strong national government would trample on the rights of sovereign states and the liberties of individual white male citizens the constitution offered little to calm their fears.
the constitution which lacked a bill of rights and shifted significant powers from the states to the federal government provoked attacks by many who had fought hardest against british authority in the revolution.
like many antifederalists virginias richard henry lee feared that a new consolidated government had been created and would be dominated by a coalition of monarchy men military men aristocrats and drones ratification would not be easy.
the pennsylvania legislature which met upstairs in the same building as the one the constitutional convention had met in ordered the election of delegates even before congress officially sent the constitution to the states.
although backcountry farmers in pennsylvania resisted strong government in any form the majority of delegates to the pennsylvania convention wanted to ratify the document and if possible be the first state to do so possibly securing the seat of the national government in pennsylvania.
but while pennsylvanians debated a convention in delaware unanimously adopted the constitution after only 5 days of discussion beating pennsylvania as the first state to ratify.
delegates to new jerseys convention who liked the idea that taxes on imports arriving through new york harbor would now be paid to the federal government instead of to the state of new york also ratified quickly.
they were joined by georgia which wanted immediate protection from indian raids and by connecticut which had a strong federalist party.
decisions among other states got more difficult.
172 partlll a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 american voices james madison the federalist papers 1787 and patrick henrys response 1788 6 2 james madison alexander hamilton and john jay published their federalist papers as individual pieces in newspapers in the fail and winter of 1787 7 788.
hamilton wrote 51 of them madison 29 jay only 5.
madison s were among the most articulate arguments for a strong federal government including his argument in federalist no.
7 0 that a national government would reduce the danger of a political faction trampling on the liberties of others.
these articles were later collected as a book the federalist papers and remain one of the most often cited descriptions of the meaning of the new constitution.
but not everyone was convinced by the arguments put forward by the constitution s defenders in the federalist papers and in the various state conventions.
there was opposition to adopting the constitution in almost every state.
in virginia patrick henry one of the constitution s staunchest opponents gave a stirring speech against the proposed new form of government.
where madison placed his faith in a strong federal government henry trusted state governments as more accountable to the people and therefore more likely to protect their liberty.
james madison federalist no.
10 november 22 1787 among the numerous advantages promised by a well constructed union none deserves to be more accurately developed than its tendency to break and control the violence of faction a zeal for different opinions concerning religion concerning government and many other points as well of speculation as of practice an attachment to different leaders ambitiously contending for pre eminence and power or to persons of other descriptions whose fortunes have been interesting to the human passions have in turn divided mankind into parties inflamed them with mutual animosity and rendered them much more disposed to vex and oppress each other than to co operate for their common good.
so strong is this propensity of mankind to fall into mutual animosities that where no substantial occasion presents itself the most frivolous and fanciful distinctions have been sufficient to kindle their unfriendly passions but the most common and durable source of factions has been the various and unequal distribution of property.
those who hold and those who are without property have ever formed distinct interests in society.
those who are creditors and those who are debtors fall under a like discrimination.
a landed interest a manufacturing interest a mercantile interest a moneyed interest with many lesser interests grow up of necessity in civilized nations and divide them into different classes a rage for paper money for an abolition of debts for an equal division of property or for any other improper or wicked project will be less apt to pervade the whole body of the union than a particular member of it in the same proportion as such a malady is more likely to taint a particular county or district than an entire state.
in the extent and proper structure of the union therefore we behold a republican remedy for the diseases most incident to republican government.
and according to the degree of pleasure and pride we feel in being republicans ought to be our zeal in cherishing the spirit and supporting the character of federalists.
patrick henry speech against the federal constitution june 5 1788 patrick henry a firebrand during the revolution spoke to the virginia convention called in 1788 to consider ratifying the constitution.
although madison tried hard to persuade him to support the document henry was adamant in his opposition.
here is a resolution as radical as that which separated us from great britain the rights of conscience trial by jury liberty of the press all your immunities and franchises all pretensions to human rights and privileges are rendered insecure if not lost by this change so loudly talked of by some and inconsiderately by others.
is this tame relinquishment of rights worthy of freemen.
is it worthy of that manly fortitude that ought to characterize republicans.
guard with jealous attention the public liberty.
suspect everyone who approaches that jewel.
unfortunately nothing will preserve it but downright force.
whenever you give up that force you are inevitably ruined we are come hither to preserve the poor commonwealth of virginia if it can be possibly done something must be done to preserve your liberty and mine.
the confederation this same despised government merits in my opinion the highest encomium it carried us through a long and dangerous war it rendered us victorious in that conflict with a powerful nation it has secured us a territory greater than any european monarch possesses and shall a government which has been thus strong and vigorous be accused of imbecility and abandoned for want of energy.
i am not well versed in history but i will submit to your recollection whether liberty has been destroyed most often by the licentiousness of the people or by the tyranny of rulers.
i imagine sir you will find the balance on the side of tyranny before you abandon the present system i hope you will consider not only its defects most maturely but likewise those of that which you are to substitute for it.
may you be fully apprized of the dangers of the latter not by fatal experience but by some abler advocate than i.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis according to madison what led to the emergence of political factions.
why did he think a strong federal government would limit the impact of factions.
historical interpretation compare and contrast madison s and henry s views on the new constitution.
what do they tell you about how each man saw the challenges and dangers facing the new nation.
chapter 6 creating a nation 173 6 2 thinking historically james madison vs patrick henry madison said he wanted a strong national government because while a political faction might capture a particular state there was far less chance of such a group capturing the national government.
thus he saw a strong national government as the best means of protecting liberty.
in opposing adoption of the constitution patrick henry had the opposite fear that a strong national government would not only be distant from the people but would lead inevitably to a loss of the rights of conscience trial by jury liberty of the press all your immunities and franchises which were best protected by state and local governments.
thinking critically 1.
contextualization looking back over the story of the american revolution and this chapter what sorts of liberties do you think madison and henry were worried about.
whose liberty was more or less important to them.
crafting an argument how did the proposed constitution without the bill of rights protect or threaten liberties.
two hundred years later whose fears do you think were more justified madison s or henry s.
nrn in massachusetts the outcome was far from certain.
although reaction to the rebellion of western massachusetts farmers had helped launch the constitution these farmers themselves sent delegates to boston who did not trust these lawyers and men of learning and moneyed men that talk so finely and gloss over matters so smoothly to make us poor little people swallow down the pill as an antifederalist delegate said.
two of the states most respected revolutionaries governor john hancock whose name was at the top of the declaration of independence and sam adams of boston tea party fame believed that the constitution sought to solve problems that were not serious and that the states not the national government were best situated to protect individual liberty.
in the end the massachusetts convention adopted the constitution by a close vote of 187 to 168 but only on the condition as adams insisted that it be immediately amended to further protect the peoples liberties and the rights of state governments.
the constitutional conventions failure to add a bill of rights to the constitution was already creating problems.
the next states to consider the document faced even more difficulties.
the ratifying convention in new hampshire adjourned without taking action.
in addition just as they had refused to attend the constitutional convention the rhode island legislature refused even to call a convention.
they did however submit the question to town meetings in the state and the voters rejected it 2 708 to 237.
marylands convention approved the document but also called for 28 amendments to limit the power of the federal government.
south carolina approved the constitution despite delegates fears about the interests of the northern states and the federal governments potential to limit that states peculiar species of property slaves.
because of these fears south carolinas convention voted for an amendment that would guarantee that states retain every power not expressly relinquished by them virginia the largest state in the union was divided.
madison and washington were strong advocates for the constitution.
but others were not enthusiastic.
george mason worried about the lack of a bill of rights.
patrick henry perhaps the most respected virginian after washington adamantly opposed the constitution.
his loyalty was to the sovereign state of virginia.
he was willing to be part of a loose federation of states but only one that ensured that real authority rested with a government 174 partlll a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 when opposite bowling qr en the president and members of congress were discovered standing upon the fort and the ship instantly brought to.
and tired a salute of thirteen guns followed by three cheers ushioh were returned by the congressional dignitaries age mhmhmnwmnhmmm as it became clear that the constitution would be ratified and that the country would have a new and stronger government crowds celebrated.
in spite of the strong opposition to the constitution once it became law most americans supported it though many also insisted that a bill of rights be added as quickly as possible.
close enough to its citizens to ensure their rights.
in the end virginia ratified the constitution in june 1788 partly because its opponents were split among themselves.
virginias convention also demanded a bill of rights as soon as possible.
with the vote in virginia and a positive vote in a reconvened convention in new hampshire earlier that same month the constitution was ratified having reached its quota of nine states to support it.
although enough states had supported ratification to launch the constitution no national government could thrive without new york.
new york was already emerging as the financial center of the new nation and the state sat in a strategic location between new england and the rest of the country.
the new york convention debate was long and bitter.
alexander hamilton led the charge for the constitution but antifederalists were strong in new york.
given what was happening in other states it would have been hard for new york to reject the constitution especially when many new yorkers still hoped that the federal capital would remain in new york city.
in the summer of 1788 the new york convention considered 55 possible amendments a call for a second convention to revise the constitution after its adoption and a conditional vote that would ratify the document only fit were amended.
in the end however by a slim margin 30 27 new york ratified the constitution in july 1788 the 11th state to do so.
chapter 6 creating a nation 175 the last states to ratify the constitution north carolina and rhode island made their choice only after the new government was already functioning.
by the time they acted there was no practical way for any state to remain outside of the new united states or its government.
refusing to ratify would have made a state a foreign government amid the formal united states.
it remained for americans to translate the document into an actual government and work out their complex relationships across divisions of class race gender and degrees of freedom and nonfreedom as well as the extraordinary distances in geography and belief that separated them.
quick review what failures of the articles of confederation did the constitution address.
conclusion with the end of the revolution and the recognition of american independence the government of the new united states now faced the same problem that had faced the british royal government in the past how to pay for a war and how to govern a restive populace enjoying both the benefits and disappointments of their liberty.
officers in the continental army threatened to rebel when payment for their services was not forthcoming.
poor farmers some of whom had served in the army during the revolution and had never been paid suffered because an influx of expensive imported goods that came with the wars end created an economic depression.
many began petitioning state legislatures for relief and resorted to rebellion when that approach failed.
from new york and pennsylvania to the carolinas and georgia various native american tribes challenged the new united states as white settlers streamed over the allegheny mountains into territory that the british government had kept off limits before the revolution.
at the same time congress began to resolve states claims to lands far into the interior creating new states and territories for white settlers.
the issues of freedom and liberty that had rallied a new nation also took hold with slaves and they and some white allies increasingly began to call for changes.
northern states where slavery was less essential to the economy slowly began to phase out slavery but southern states whose economic base depended on slave labor were adamantly against emancipation and imported record numbers of new slaves.
in addition women in all levels of society began to expect more equal treatment and broader opportunities particularly the right to education.
womens expectations were translated in the male dominated society to an ideology of republican motherhood in which women were expected to be better educated than their mothers and grandmothers but only so they could support the political development of their husbands and sons.
many believed that at the core of many of the new nations problems was the fact that the governing document for the united states the articles of confederation was too weak a foundation on which to base a central government in part because it lacked the means to support itself through any kind of taxation.
the constitutional convention that met over the summer of 1787 had been tasked by congress to revise the articles of confederation.
instead the representatives debated and designed a completely new constitution a very different document laying out a new form of government with three branches of government an executive branch including the president and cabinet a legislative branch consisting of two houses of congress and a judicial branch including a supreme court.
a key purpose of this design was to balance power preventing one person or group from dominating the government while at the same time giving the national government the authority to act.
176 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 in many ways the u s constitution reflected the needs and aspirations of its creators white men who were the elite of their society.
although the constitutions language never used the terms slave or slavery the ideas and points within it upheld the institution a benefit to many of the constitutions creators.
when the constitution was presented to congress for approval congress mandated that each state should call a special convention of delegates specifically elected to ratify or not ratify the document.
as laid out in the body of the constitution itself a total of nine states would be needed to launch this new form of government.
throughout the states debate was heated.
federalists and antifederalists supporters and opponents of the constitution took strong and contentious stands.
eventually all states ratified the document some by very narrow margins.
no state wanted to be left behind on its own.
however no state found the document to be completely acceptable and demands were strong to amend it immediately particularly by adding a bill of rights to protect all citizens.
but by 1788 even before those changes were enacted and even before the last two states had ratified the constitution a new form of government for the united states was ready to be launched.
chapter review does the constitution created in philadelphia in 1787 embody or contradict the goals of the revolution.
chapter 6 creating a nation 177 chapter 6 chapter review 6 1 the state of the nation at war s end explain how the outcome of the american revolution affected different groups in the new united states.
review questions 1.
historical interpretation what light do the newburgh conspiracy and shayss rebellion shed on the economic challenges facing the new nation at the conclusion of the revolutionary war.
what do they suggest about the connection between economic problems and political divisions during the period.
comparison compare and contrast the situation of african americans both enslaved and free in the northern states the middle states and the southern states in the decades following the american revolution.
what might explain the differences you note.
contextualization how did revolutionary ideology shape ideas about gender roles in the late 1700s and early 1800s.
6 2 creating a government writing the u s constitution explain the needs pressures and compromises that led to writing and adopting the constitution.
review questions 4.
historical interpretation what role did economic issues play in prompting calls for the creation of a stronger central government.
crafting an argument is it fair to describe the constitution as ratified in 1788 asa proslavery document.
why or why not.
contextualization why did antifederalists view the constitution as a threat to liberty.
how did the experience of british colonial rule shape their views.
m new birth of freedom creating the united states of america h b president george washington reviews troops at fort cumberland on the potomac before leading them to suppress the whiskey rebellion.
frederick kemmelmeyer general george washington reviewing the western army at fort cumberland the 18th of october 1794 after 1794.
oil on paperbacked with linen 18 1 8x23 1 8.
courtesy of winterthur museum.
when new hampshire and virginia voted to ratify the constitution in june 1788 it became the law of the land.
but putting that new law into effect was not easy.
the old congress as well as local and state officials in the 13 states needed to conduct elections.
those elected to the new positions as members of the u s house of representatives and senate and as the new president would breathe life into the words of the constitution and set precedents based on their interpretation of its meaning or their preferences that would last for generations.
different americans however interpreted the constitution differently.
americans discovered that they wanted the country to develop in diverse ways and began long term arguments with one another about policy.
soon after the new congress was elected it created and enacted the bill of rights 10 amendments that many thought should have been part of the original document.
with this addition more americans felt comfortable that they had created a government that would protect their rights and maintain their freedom.
once elected as president george washington quickly set out to define this important american role.
he appointed the first members of the supreme court and other judges and created a presidential cabinet to carry out the work of his administration.
one cabinet member secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton laid the foundation for the nations economic system.
washington himself asserted federal authority and expanded the u s army to win indian wars on the nations frontier.
washingtons vice president john adams and his secretary of state thomas jefferson who would later become the next two presidents worked together in this early government but eventually became bitter rivals whose arguments represented different directions for the country.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how the federal government worked under the new constitution.
learning objectives convening a congress inaugurating a president adopting a bill of rights analyze the first federal elections and the adoption of the bill of rights.
creating an economy alexander hamilton and the u s economic system analyze the enduring argument begun by hamilton s economic vision for the united states and the alternative vision of jefferson and madison.
setting the pace the washington administration explain the precedents set by george washington s presidential administration.
the birth of political parties adams and jefferson explain the growing split between the federalist and democratic republican parties including how the french revolution and the personal differences between hamilton adams and jefferson affected american politics.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 1754 1783 prelude to revolution the revolution was in the minds of the people the war for independence chapter 6 creating a nation 1783 1789 the state of the nation at war s end creating a government writing the u s constitution chapter 7 practicing democracy 1789 1800 convening a congress inaugurating a president adopting a bill of rights creating an economy alexander hamilton and the u s economic system setting the pace the washington administration the rise of political parties and iii will adams and jefferson 1754 1783 far more than anyone else george washington dominated the era leading up to and through the american revolution.
it is important to remember that for much of this time he was as pictured here an officer in the british army.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how britain s victory over france in the war of 1754 1763 exacerbated the grievances of many colonists and led to renewed conflict culminating in the american revolution and the declaration of independence.
5 1 preludes to revolution explain britain s victory over france in the french and indian war and what conflicts followed this victory.
5 2 the revolution was in the minds of the people explain why in the 15 years before the revolutionary war began support for the patriot cause spread so quickly among many different groups of north americans who opposed britain for different reasons.
the war for independence explain how political and military strategy support for the patriot cause and american alliances with france and spain led to an american victory in the war for independence.
on may 28 1754 george washington then a 22 year old gentleman farmer recently promoted to lieutenant colonel in the virginia militia and tanaghrisson an iroquois chief led a force of virginia militia and indians to attack french soldiers in what is now western pennsylvania.
the french troops had been sent from fort duquesne modern pittsburgh to look for washingtons force.
fort duquesne was part of a string of french forts built along the ohio and mississippi rivers to maintain new frances claims in the region.
the french perspective was that the english were trespassing on their territory.
washington however was asserting the british claim to the ohio river valley.
the english iroquois force surprised the french with a dawn attack.
it had been raining and the french had failed to post sentries.
ten of the french were killed and 22 taken prisoner.
the shots fired that may morning in what came to be called jumonville glen after the french commander who was killed there were among the first in a war that would have effects worldwide.
although washington defeated the french in that first attack he knew that a much larger french force actually controlled the ohio river valley.
he retreated from jumonville glen and built a small armed camp that he named fort necessity.
in july 50 french soldiers and 300 of their indian allies forced washington to surrender.
the french allowed the english to return to virginia but only after washington signed a document admitting that he had attacked and killed or assassinated depending on how one translated the french french troops in the may skirmish while britain and france were officially at peace.
that skirmish in western pennsylvania helped provoke a world war in the 1750s and that war then influenced the residents of british north america including george washington to fight for and win their independence in the 1770s.
far more than anyone else george washington dominated the era leading up to and through the american revolution.
it is important to remember that for much of this time he was an officer in the british army before becoming as shown here a leader of the american forces.
preludes to revolution significant oates 5 1 5 1 explain britain s victory over france in the french and indian war and what conflicts followed this victory.
in north america the world war that started near pittsburgh was known as the french and indian war.
because of its outcome french canadians came to call it the war of conquest.
in most of europe it was called the seven years war.
whatever the war was called it was fought over more of the planet than any previous war.
the voyages of columbus and subsequent maritime trade and migrations had created a vast interactive world and in 1756 that world exploded.
the french and indian war 1754 1763 in north america the formal declaration of war in 1756 two years after washingtons skirmish with the french surprised no one.
the english and their iroquois allies were in constant tension with the french and their ottawa delaware and shawnee allies.
both sides hated each other and were ready for war.
during that time britain and france were also sliding toward war in europe asia africa and the caribbean.
in january 1756 england and the german kingdom of prussia agreed to defend each other s territory.
in response austria signed a treaty with france.
war among these countries was declared in may 1756 and the french navy defeated a british fleet in the mediterranean the next month.
counting on his english allies to provide support king frederick the great of prussia then attacked austria and russia.
sweden and saxony joined the french alliance against prussia.
the war quickly spread to asia.
the british east india company and the french compagnie des indes each controlled parts of the indian subcontinent either directly or through alliances with local rulers.
suraj ud dowlah the ruler of bengal who was allied with france used the situation to attack and capture british calcutta.
a british force 1754 1763 french and indian war 1763 1766 pontiac s rebellion f i paxton boys attack pennsylvania indians 1765 stamp act crisis mid 1760s regulator movement in north and south.
1770 boston massacre j 1772 slavery declared illegal in england 1773 boston tea party 1774 closing of the port of boston quebec act and other intolerable acts first continental congress meets in philadelphia 1775 first battles of the revolution at lexington and concord second continental congress convenes at philadelphia battle of bunker hill british governor of virginia lord dunmore declares freedom for slaves that join the british cause 1776 thomas paine s common sense british evacuate boston but take new york city congress adopts the declaration of independence washington s troops capture trenton new jersey 1777 congress adopts the articles of confederation to govern the new united states american victory at saratoga new york 1778 france and united states agree to an alliance 1779 washington s troops attack british allied iroquois villages spain enters war against britain 1780 british victories in the south british take charleston south carolina 1781 american victory at cowpens south carolina lord cornwallis surrenders to george washington and allied french forces 1783 treaty of paris french and indian war known in europe as the seven years war and in french canada as the war of conquest this war was fought in north america between 1754 and 1763 and ended with the defeat of the french.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 119 53 118 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 under robert clive retook the city and the french post at chandernagor.
british control of bengal won in that war laid the foundation for britains 200 year rule in india.
ihe british also attacked the main african slave trading island of goree off the coast of senegal and took control of it from the french hurting the french economy but having no impact on the slave trade on the island.
goree had been the port for transshipment of slaves since the portuguese founded it in the 1500s and was valuable no matter which while battles took place in north america europe india and africa much of the seven years war was fought in the caribbean.
british warships based in jamaica captured the french islands of grenada the grenadines st vincent dominica and tobago as well as martinique and guadeloupe with their rich sugar plantations.
at the wars end in 1763 martinique and guadeloupe were returned to france in exchange for concessions in north america but the british kept the remaining islands.
after spain entered the war on the side of france in 1761 the british captured havana cuba and manila in the philippines all of which were returned to spain in 1763 in exchange for spanish florida.
the war changed the landscape of north america see map 5 1 and map 5 2.
in 1758 after a french force defeated the english at fort ticonderoga in new york a b.
british conquest of new france bui french settlements estt british settlements cz3 iroquois settlements land claimed by the ohio company of virginia french victories british victories french forts british forts washington gives up ft.
necessity to french july 3 4 1754 braddocks army destroyed near ft duquesne july 9 1755 british yield ft william henry to montcalm aug 9 1757 british capture french fort at louisburg july 26 1758 british take ft frontenac from the french aug 27 1758 johnson captures ft niagara from the french july 25 1759 wolfe defeats montcalm plains of abraham sept 13 1759 amherst accepts french surrender of montreal sept 8 1760 map 5 1 north america before and during the french and indian war 1754 1763.
creating the united states of america 1754 1800 120 part iii a new birth of freedom british dominance in eastern north america ms acquired by britain from france acquired by britain from spain i i prior british colonies as of 1763 reserved to indians under british rule spanish louisiana points of violence 1763 1766 british forts seized during pontiacs rebellion in 1763 towns demonstrating against the stamp act in 1765 distribution of british troops british posts 100 250 soldiers british posts 250 600 soldiers 1 british posts over 600 soldiers 5 2 53 british force with george washington as one of its officers took fort duquesne renaming it fort pitt todays pittsburgh in honor of william pitt who had led britain as prime minister during the war.
that same year teedyuscung leader of the delaware tribe decided that his french allies could not be trusted and sought an alliance with the english and the iroquois.
although teedyuscung and the delaware did not get the pennsylvania lands they sought they and the iroquois received a british promise that after the war there would be no white settlement west of the alleghenies a promise the british attempted to keep until the american revolution.
in the most significant north american battle a british army under general james wolfe defeated a french army led by the marquis de montcalm and captured quebec the capital of french canada in september 1759.
the british victory ended french control of all of canada.
map 5 2 north america after the french and indian war 1763.
maps 5 1 and 5 2 show the extraordinary changes brought about by the french and indian war of 1754 1763.
the first map shows the relatively limited range of control exercised by both the british and the french colonies in north america when the war began as well as significant battles between the powers the second map shows the huge expanse of territory claimed by the british at the war s end in 1763 including the 13 colonies along the atlantic coast the large indian reserve of land promised to the tribes that had supported the british the former french colonies in canada and the former spanish colonies of east and west florida that were also in british hands.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 121 l 5 2 i 5 1 53 pontiac s rebellion indian uprising 1763 1766 led by pontiac of the ottawas and neolin of the delawares.
ga kl v x oki c k.
by the early 1760s both britain and france were exhausted from the fighting.
although britain had won major victories its new king george iii r 1760 1820 wanted peace and in 1763 the two countries signed the treaty of paris to end the war.
both this treaty and the later treaty ending the american revolution in 1783 were known as the treaty of paris.
the world war had many outcomes.
all of the governments that fought the war emerged deeply in debt.
in europe little land changed hands but in other parts of the world the changes were dramatic.
britain made concessions to bring hostilities to an end but was still the biggest winner.
its dominance of india was secure and the british presence on the coast of africa and in the caribbean was enhanced.
in addition spain ceded florida to england.
most significantly the war eliminated france as a north american power although france did regain its control of the rich sugar producing islands of guadeloupe and martinique in the caribbean.
france ceded canada and the land east of the mississippi river to the british.
to compensate its spanish allies for their support france also ceded its claim to the lands west of the mississippi river along with new orleans to spain.
the french threat to new england and new york ended.
britain now controlled most of north america east of the mississippi river.
pontiac and indian responses hendrick a chief of the mohawk tribe one of the nations of the iroquois was a close ally of the british until killed in battle in 1755.
for american indians living between the mississippi river and the atlantic the end of the french and indian war was an unmitigated disaster.
as a british official had said to preserve the balance between us and the french is the great ruling principle of the modern indian politics for the tribes further south including the cherokee and creeks the spanish presence in florida had allowed them to play a three way balancing act between britain france and spain.
but with the french and spanish out of eastern north america for the time being the potential for bargaining virtually disappeared.
even for the iroquois the cost was high.
although they were allied with the british iroquois power had partly come from britains need for iroquois allies in its competition with the french.
after 1763 the french were gone.
at the wars beginning the iroquois chief hendrick or theyanoguin had told the representatives of the british colonies who met at albany new york brethren the governor of virginia and the governor of canada are both quarrelling.
the governor of virginia and pennsylvania have made paths thro our country they should have first asked our consent.
without the presence of the french in canada the british governors of virginia and pennsylvania had little reason to ask the iroquois for consent to anything.
the british general lord jeffrey amherst seeking to save money for his government and seeing no reason now to placate the indians refused to provide the gifts of ammunition and gunpowder that various tribes had come to see as a kind of rent for the use of their lands.
the indians considered the move to be both an insult and a fundamental threat since the tribes survival depended on the gunpowder to hunt deer.
for the indians who had sided with the french the outlook was even worse.
neolin a delaware living on the ohio river preached resistance to the dogs clothed in red as he called the british.
his visionary message calling on the indians to return to the original state that they were in before the white people found out their country sparked a wide ranging indian movement to return to former indian ways.
pontiac an ottawa chief was inspired and heeded neolins call sparking what came to be known as pontiacs rebellion.
in the spring of 1763 only months after the treaty of paris was signed pontiac 122 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 5 1 thinking historically pontiac s vision seeking support for an uprising pontiac described a vision similar to neolin s in which the master of life or the great spirit told him to return to living by the bow and arrow with no need of gun or powder and to cleanse his people and their land of the ways of the whites.
pontiac said this land where ye dwell i have made for you and not for others.
whence comes it that ye permit the whites upon your lands.
can ye not live without them.
i know that those whom ye call the children of your great father supply your needs but if ye were not evil as ye are ye could surely do without them.
ye could live as ye did live before knowing them before those whom ye call your brothers had come upon your lands.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis who did pontiac blame for the occupation of indian lands by whites the english colonists or his own people.
historical interpretation in what ways does pontiac s vision represent a call for cultural and spiritual reform.
what connections might pontiac have seen between such reforms and successful resistance to white encroachment.
ill convened a meeting of ottawa chippewa pottawatomi and wyandot people near detroit.
pontiac told his listeners of his vision in which he had been promised that if they would cleanse themselves of the ways of the whites they would see their lands and old powers restored.
he insisted it is important for us my brothers that we exterminate from our lands this nation which seeks only to destroy us pontiac and his followers attacked british forts across the region.
the british held detroit and fort pitt but many other forts surrendered to the indians fort miamis near fort wayne indiana fort ouiatenon near lafayette indiana fort michilimackinac on the great lakes and most of the old french posts in indiana and ohio.
most of the ohio country was again in indian hands.
the british were caught off guard but fought back.
the english commander jeffrey amherst ordered his troops to put every indian in your power to death his troops won several battles.
amherst also encouraged the distribution of smallpox infected blankets to indians a move that rapidly spread the disease.
in october pontiac received a letter from the french telling him that the french were not going to come to his aid.
on receiving this news pontiac initiated a peace process.
he met with the british authorities in oswego new york in july 1766 and signed a treaty of peace.
three years later he was murdered probably by other indians who resented both the deaths his rebellion had caused and his relatively quick surrender that meant the deaths were in vain.
the proclamation line of 1763 soon after the long french and indian war the new british monarch king george iii and his first minister george grenville tried to ensure peace in north america.
they meant to honor the commitments they had made in 1758 to the delaware and iroquois tribes and protect them from white settlement.
already embroiled in pontiacs conflict which largely involved formerly french territories they did not want other rebellions and they were wary that land hungry settlers would quickly begin to expand into indian dominated areas.
in october 1763 the king issued a proclamation that there should be no british settlement west of the crest of the appalachian mountains and that indian rights to western lands would be protected forever.
the proclamation also directed any colonists who had already settled in these lands forthwith to remove themselves from such settlements for many of the tribes who lived on the chapter 5 the making of a revolution 123 the proclamation line royal proclamation of 1763 designed to protect indian tribes by setting a boundary at the peaks of the appalachian mountains beyond which no western white settlement was to take place.
western slopes of the mountains and beyond the proclamation line fulfilled what they believed they had been promised.
the grenville administration took other steps to keep peace with the indians.
they replaced amherst with the more conciliatory general thomas gage who immediately resumed negotiations and gift giving with the tribes.
the grenville administration also strengthened the authority of the superintendents of indian affairs who had sought accommodations with the tribes since the 1750s.
the proclamation line slowed white settlement into western pennsylvania ohio and what would become kentucky.
but it also infuriated the british colonists both land hungry farmers and rich speculators and did far too little to protect the indians.
grenville and parliament were too far away and despite the british military outposts their efforts to enforce the line were ineffectual which had fateful consequences in the.
next decade.
the paxton boys and rural white responses in the town of paxton in pennsylvanias lancaster county a group of farmers decided that the way to end warfare between whites and indians on the frontier was to get rid of j all indians whether they were allied with the british or the french.
calling themselves s the paxton boys or the hickory boys these frontier vigilantes said we have long been convinced from sufficient evidence that the indians that lived as independent commonwealths among us or near our borders were our most dangerous enemies.
in december 1763 the paxton boys attacked a delaware village killed six people and burned the town.
then they killed 14 indian survivors who were in protective custody in the town of lancaster.
they began a march to philadelphia to find other indians especially delawares who had taken refuge there.
before the mob got to philadelphia benjamin franklin and a delegation of the colonys leading citizens negotiated an end to the rebellion but the hatred of indians would haunt the inhabitants of north america for a long time to come.
after 1763 many white residents of british north america began to lump all american indians together as an enemy race even though their parents and grandparents had viewed different tribes quite separately depending on a tribes relationship to the british cause.
like many earlier wars the fighting in the french and indian war was between the british and the iroquois allies on one side and the french and the ojibwa ottawa shawnee wyandot and other tribes allied with them.
soon after the war the lines came to be seen as much more racial with all whites allied against virtually all indians.
this change in attitudes had far reaching consequences for the residents of north america.
threats of new taxes relations between the british colonists and the american indians were not the only concern of british authorities after 1763.
victory in the war had virtually drained the kingdoms treasury.
britains national debt was double what it had been when the war began.
in 1764 george grenville and the majority in parliament asked britains north american colonists to pay what the authorities in london thought was a fair share of the war s cost.
their argument was that the war had protected colonists far more than it had anyone living in britain.
what seemed just and equitable in london however was seen quite differently in the colonies.
these differences on who should bear the cost of the war would soon have significant consequences.
5 1 quick review what expectations and concerns did indians come to have regarding the british in the aftermath of the war of 1756 1763.
what expectations and concerns were colonists beginning to have regarding native americans.
regarding the british government.
how were the various expectations and concerns in conflict.
124 partlll a rf freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 5 2 revolution was in the minds of the people explain why in the 15 years before the revolutionary war began support for the patriot cause spread so quickly among many different groups of north americans who opposed britain for different reasons.
long after the revolution was over former president john adams wrote to another former president thomas jefferson describing the revolutionary war that began in 1775 as only an effect and consequence according to adams ihe revolution was in the minds of the people and this was effected from 1760 to 1775 in the course of fifteen years before a drop of blood was shed at lexington he was right.
for many british north americans a revolutionary change did indeed take place in their minds between 1760 and 1775 and it took place for many different reasons.
while people like adams and jefferson and many of their peers moved from being loyal british subjects to revolutionary advocates of independence in those years others did not.
people such as thomas hutchinson of massachusetts william franklin benjamins son and perhaps a fifth of the white colonists remained loyalists americans who wanted to maintain loyal ties to great britain and who opposed the american revolution.
for reasons of their own a majority of african slaves were probably also loyalists.
the loyalists lived through the same momentous changes as those who embraced the revolutionary cause but they came to different conclusions.
still other colonists remained neutral throughout the struggle focusing on personal matters or simply not caring who ultimately governed them.
in addition people in the colonies came to their own differing conclusions at varying times.
sailors and shop owners in boston new york and philadelphia as well as backwoods farmers in western pennsylvania virginia and the carolinas were sometimes much more ready for revolution much sooner than their better known leaders.
for african slaves the growing spirit of revolution held both potential and danger.
some slaves and free blacks saw in the revolutionary rhetoric the possibility of their own freedom.
in contrast other african americans saw the british government as a potential protector and even liberator against slave owners who embraced the patriot cause.
potential for freedom was not a guarantee in any scenario however.
ihe iroquois cherokee and other indian tribes knew that frontier whites had little use for the kings ban on white settlement and if freed from british authority would stream west.
as the possibility of expanded settlement fueled revolutionary fervor among frontier whites it also fed fears among indians most of whom sided with the british after 1776.
in effect during the 15 fateful years that john adams described above many different groups of people with wide ranging hopes and fears considered the possibility of an american revolution and arrived at different conclusions.
each of these groups fought their own revolutions sometimes in alliance with each other sometimes acting at cross purposes.
far from being clear the goals and tactics of the revolutionaries were an ever changing patchwork as different groups fought for their own purposes and made shifting alliances.
loyalists the name given to those in the colonies perhaps one fifth to one third of the total population who supported the british and opposed american independence.
transition from the rights of man to revolt many residents of the british colonies had grown up reading john lockes defense of britains glorious revolution of 1689.
long before tensions between the colonies and the government in london reached a crisis colonists believed as locke said that the people always retained a supreme power to remove or alter the legislative authority when they wanted to.
throughout the 1770s lockes ideas guided some of the revolutions most articulate advocates such as ihomas jefferson john adams and benjamin franklin as well as backwoods rebels like ethan allen a man of modest chapter 5 the making of a revolution 125 republicanism a complex changing body of ideas values and assumptions that held that self government by the citizens of a country or their representatives provided a more reliable foundation for good society and individual freedom than rule by kings or any other distant elite.
education who was the leader of vermonts green mountain boys.
using lockes arguments in their speeches and lawsuits they taunted royal governors and ultimately they used lockes ideas to justify armed resistance.
revolutionary leaders also read and cited french philosophers voltaire rousseau and montesquieu and authors from ancient greece and rome all of whom advocated a commitment to liberty and the need to overthrow unjust authorities.
leaders of the patriot cause became convinced that england represented the evils of empire while the colonists represented the virtues of republicanism which supported a broad distribution of power to people enabling them to determine how and by whom they would be governed.
leaders on both sides of the atlantic those who argued for independence and those who argued to maintain the ties between britain and the american colonies all read the same literature.
nearly all of them believed that george iii ruled only by the consent of parliament not from any sort of divine right.
for a hundred years before the american revolution british subjects in the old and new worlds constituted a community of people who valued the rights of englishmen and distrusted efforts to undermine those rights.
when in 1776 thomas jefferson wrote that the colonies had a right to independence because it was a self evident truth that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights he was reflecting a way of thinking that was familiar in america and britain.
those who shared common ideas about rights liberty and freedom extended beyond just residents of britain and north america.
the world that was at war in the 1750s and 1760s became a world involved in revolution in the 1770s and 1780s and beyond.
although the government of the king louis xvi of france would play an essential role in the american victory louis xvi himself would lose his throne and his head to a french revolution within the next decade.
the french and american revolutions led to further revolutionary efforts across much of europe as people in germany poland scandinavia and italy attempted their own revolutions.
future president james madison wrote in 1792 that america has set the example and france has followed it of charters of power granted by liberty madison did not however mention another revolution that was much closer to the united states than those in europe.
in 1791 slaves in the french colony of saint domingue modern haiti rebelled.
saint domingue was one of the richest and most oppressive slave systems in the world where some 500 000 african slaves grew sugar and coffee that made the 40 000 french owners very rich.
a free black toussaint l overture who quoted the same philosophers as north american revolutionaries led the rebels in haiti to win a series of victories.
loverture himself was captured and died in france but a new free republic of haiti was proclaimed in 1804.
the rebellion was the most successful slave revolt in history and another in a long line of revolutions against distant authorities.
in addition not long after the american revolution between 1810 and 1826 most of latin america expelled its spanish and portuguese colonial masters.
simon bolivar led revolutionary movements in his native venezuela and helped establish the republics of columbia ecuador peru and bolivia.
his 1812 manifesto of cartagena expressed the same philosophical ideas as those of his counterparts in north america and europe.
the american revolution then was part of a worldwide revolution against distant authorities and old ideas and it was based on a new philosophical understanding of the rights of man and the way the world should be organized.
126 partlll a new birth of fr the accompanying revolution in religion in 1740 a presbyterian minister gilbert tennent one of the leaders of the great awakening see chapter 4 preached a sermon on the danger of an unconverted ministry in churches throughout new jersey and pennsylvania.
tennents sermon with its plea to test the personal faith of ministers was a direct challenge to the leaders creating the united states of america 1754 1800 of the major protestant denominations presbyterian congregational and episcopal.
as a result of the great awakening church members claimed permission indeed the responsibility to judge their ministers.
it was not a great leap for citizens to claim the same permission and responsibility for judging those in civil authority.
one visiting revivalist asserted that patrick henry rector of the episcopal church in hanover virginia and uncle to the patriot leader patrick henry was a stranger to true religion reverend henry in return demanded that virginias governor stop these strolling preachers who were in his view a set of incendiaries enemies not only to the established church but also common disturbers of the peace in a way henry was right.
the great awakening disturbed the peace split churches and undermined all authorities.
seaport radicalism from the stamp act to the boston massacre and boston tea party the boston tea party of 1773 was probably the most famous act of resistance in america before the revolution but it was far from the first.
between 1747 and 1774 dockworkers sailors and townspeople drove the leading british officials customs officials navy officers and even governors away from the docks and out of boston five times.
similar acts of rebellion took place from new york to the carolinas.
impressment had been british navy policy for centuries and since the 1690s had been a source of riots in colonial ports.
when a warship was short of sailors which happened often due to high rates of death and desertion the captain had the authority to impress or kidnap likely sailors from merchant ships or ports and sign them up for naval service.
commercial sailors were paid higher wages than those in the navy and often had better working conditions so impressments were as one senior british naval officer noted a source of hatred for the kings service.
and a spirit of rebellion for many who lived along the waterfront.
in november 1747 british commodore charles knowles sent sailors in search of new recruits while his ship was in boston harbor.
they impressed 46 men into service.
a rebellious crowd responded taking some of knowless officers hostage and chasing the royal governor out of town.
a successful brewer samuel adams defended the rioters as an assembly of people drawn together upon no other design than to defend themselves and repel the assaults of a press gang he insisted that they had a natural right to do so.
perhaps his cousin john adams should have considered an earlier date than 1760 for the start of revolutionary thinking in the colonies.
british actions in the 1760s and 1770s escalated tensions in north american cities.
the british government desperately needed to pay off the debt from the french and indian war and attempted to do so in part by imposing new taxes.
with each attempt the sugar and currency acts of 1764 the stamp act of 1765 the townshend duties of 1767 and the tea act of 1773 colonial resistance grew.
in a spiraling series of encounters parliament sought to raise funds backed off in the face of colonial resistance and then enacted new get tough policies that also backfired see table 5 1.
the impact of the persistent but failed efforts to raise taxes fueled colonial resistance and the sense that resistance was effective.
the taxes seemed fair only to those in britain who were in power.
the colonists saw each tax as a new attack on their liberty and each british effort at compromise as a sign of weakness.
the sugar act of 1764 the first tax and the currency act of 1764 provoked limited but spirited resistance.
the tax on sugar included rum and molasses both made from sugar.
the currency act prohibited colonies from issuing their own paper money as legal tender for either public debts including paying taxes or private debts including paying merchants for goods made in britain.
in response merchants and artisans in new york and boston joined in a nonimportation movement in 1764 that was the beginning of a growing refusal to buy or use anything manufactured in britain.
impressment the british policy of forcibly enlisting sailors into the british navy against their will.
it had long been a source of resentment toward the british government in port towns.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 127 name of act the sugar act of 1764 the currency act of 1764 the stamp act of 1765 the declaratory act of 1766 the revenue act of 1766 the second revenue act of 1767 also known as the townshend duties after charles townshend chancellor of the exchequer the tea act of 1773 table 5 1 parliamentary acts that fueled colonial resistance description increased duties and strengthened collection of customs on rum and molasses which particularly affected merchants and importers prohibited the colonies from issuing their own paper money as legal tender for public or private debts to britain taxed all legal and commercial documents creating an immediate hardship for business leaders and building resentment in many ports where people depended on those businesses for jobs repealed the stamp act but said parliament could legislate for the colonies in all cases whatsoever restricted trade in sugar which helped british and caribbean merchants at the expense of north american merchants placed new duties on paper lead paint glass and tea.
all but the tax on tea were repealed in 1770 the same day as the boston massacre.
the intolerable acts of 1774 allowed the british east india company to ship tea to the colonies without having to pay normally required duties making it cheaper than most smuggled tea.
the townshend tea tax would still apply once it reached the colonies.
the act supported the east india company almost bankrupt because so many customers were purchasing cheaper smuggled tea from elsewhere.
parliament s response to the tea riots they closed the port of boston expanded the royal governor s authority shifted control of the ohio river country to the british governor in quebec the quebec act and allowed british troops to use any uninhabited building as a barracks without the owner s authorization the quartering act.
sons of liberty secret organizations in the colonies formed to oppose the stamp act.
from 1765 until independence members spoke wrote and took direct action against british measures especially the stamp tax and the tax on tea.
128 part iii a nev g of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 a year later resistance to the stamp act of 1765 was stronger and it united colonists of many social classes.
the act required legal and commercial documents including magazines newspapers and playing cards to be printed on special paper showing an official stamp.
payment for the stamped paper had to be in british currency.
in the spring of 1765 patrick henry asked virginias legislature the house of burgesses to pass resolutions that came to be known as the virginia resolves opposing the tax.
middling and upper class new yorkers including lawyers and merchants who would have had to pay the highest taxes if the law was enforced began writing articles against the tax in the citys many newspapers which circulated widely.
some also formed a new secret organization the sons of liberty which sent delegates to all the colonies to create a kind of underground resistance to the tax a tax they described as a sign of british tyranny.
nine colonies sent delegates to a gathering known as the stamp act congress in new york city in october 1765.
there they issued a declaration of rights and grievances which said that parliament had no right to tax the colonies and they petitioned for a repeal of the stamp and sugar acts.
more important than the petition was the fact that leaders of the growing resistance movement met together and began to sense their unity.
as one of the organizers of the congress said there ought to be no new england men no new yorker etc.
known on the continent but all of us americans this appeal to unity was a new sentiment in colonies that had up until now jealously guarded their independence from each other.
britain s parliamentary action had provoked this increasing unity.
while colonial leaders met and wrote petitions some of the strongest resistance to the stamp tax developed in the working class taverns where laborers and sailors gathered.
poor people had little reason to actually pay the tax because they did not use many legal documents or paper products that would require the stamped paper but the tax was a symbol of british arrogance and threatened to slow the colonial economy which could put sailors and laboring people out of work.
to the poor the haughty british authorities were becoming intolerable.
when lieutenant governor cadwallader colden placed the embossing stamps in fort george at the tip of manhattan until the new tax went into effect on november 1 1765 public protests mounted into what came to be known as the new york stamp act riot.
new york merchants and groups like the sons of liberty agreed not to import any british goods while the stamp act was in force.
in taverns across the city angry citizens shared their discontent with the british.
on the evening of november 1 a crowd paraded around the city with torches as well as effigies of the lieutenant governor and the devil.
they dared the british troops to fire on them and burned coldens coach.
next the crowd broke into the home of major james of the royal artillery drank his considerable supply of liquor and burned the house.
calling themselves the sons of neptune to distinguish themselves from the more middle class sons of liberty the crowd resisted efforts to end the violence.
months later when news reached new york in may 1766 that the stamp act had been repealed celebrating crowds fired guns broke windows and erected a liberty pole to taunt british authorities.
similar riots by the lower sorts took place in other colonial cities.
in boston a mob ransacked the governors home and in annapolis maryland a crowd burned the stamp distributors warehouse and forced him to flee the colony.
in wilmington north carolina a mocking angry crowd paraded the stamp collector through the streets.
and in charleston south carolina a crowd of workers and seamen burned effigies of the stamp distributor.
in response to the unrest british authorities under the new prime minister the marquess of rockingham decided to repeal the stamp and sugar taxes but also to show force.
in 1766 while repealing the taxes parliament also voted the declatory act which claimed its right to tax and regulate the colonies in all cases whatsoever in addition parliament passed the revenue act of 1766 restricting trade in sugar which helped british and caribbean merchants at the expense of colonial merchants.
a year later charles townshend chancellor of the exchequer treasurer in a new british government imposed new taxes on lead paint paper and tea known as the second revenue act of 1767 also known as the townshend duties of 1767.
the new british government was desperate to find a way to pay off the war debt but also wanted to assert parliaments authority over the colonies.
in particular parliament wanted to curtail smuggling by some of the most prosperous colonial merchants and to control the mobs that kept rioting in boston and new york.
in september 1768 the warships of the royal navy arrived in boston and british troops marched through town in a show of the governments authority.
according to paul revere the troops formed and marched with insolent parade drums beating fifes playing and colours flying up king street the presence of so many troops created a sense of siege in boston.
a year and a half later british soldiers were still stationed in boston creating constant tensions with residents who resented their presence.
one source of the tension was the fact that off duty soldiers were allowed to work on their own part time increasing competition with colonists for jobs by accepting lower wages.
on the evening of march 5 1770 an angry crowd began to throw snowballs at british soldiers.
they taunted the lone british sentry at the state house private hugh white.
as the crowd around white grew more people joined in the taunting or watched from the sidelines.
john adams called the crowd a motley rabble but they had strong support in a city tired of the presence of so many soldiers.
british captain thomas preston sent more soldiers to support white while the crowd grew to 300 or 400.
preston asked the crowd to disperse assuring them that the soldiers would not fire since he himself was standing directly in front of them.
however someone threw something that knocked one of the soldiers down and some of the soldiers started firing even though no one heard preston give any orders.
three men were killed including a seaman crispus attacks a former slave who was part african and part american indian and who would be celebrated as the first man and first black hs.
tutm i v x this picture titled the bostonians paying the excise man shows many forms of resistance to british taxes that developed including the mob actions that sometimes coated an offending tax collector with tar and feathers or forced him to drink boiling tea.
in the background a liberty tree symbol of freedom sports a hangman s noose and colonists dump tea off a ship.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 129 boston massacre after months of increasing friction between townspeople and the british troops stationed in the city on march 5 1770 british troops fired on american civilians in boston who were throwing projectiles at them killing five and stirring even greater hatred toward the british army.
daughters of liberty organized as a women s response to the sons of liberty the daughters opposed british measures avoided british taxed tea spun their own yarn and wove their own cloth to avoid purchasing british goods.
in this print designed to fuel hostility toward the british more than provide an accurate record paul revere showed the british soldiers more organized than they actually were firing on a helpless crowd.
person to die in the revolution.
two more later died of their wounds.
the boston massacre as colonists called it fueled anger at the british authorities.
to avoid further confrontation the royal governor pulled the troops out of boston.
his action also left most of the town in the hands of an increasingly anti british population.
some of the british troops involved were accused of murder.
john adams defended them in a subsequent trial in which they were found not guilty.
later adams said that his defense of the soldiers though highly unpopular was one of the most gallant generous manly and disinterested actions of my whole life.
nevertheless adams also said that there was no reason why the town should not call the action of that night a massacre paul revere described the event as a deliberate military attack on a peaceful crowd.
sam adams created a committee of correspondence to encourage resistance in other colonies.
with such rhetoric many bostonians would likely never again be loyal british subjects.
in 1773 britain decided to maintain the tax on tea but repeal the other townshend duties.
the tea act of 1773 not only asserted parliaments authority to levy whatever taxes it wished but also attempted to protect the almost bankrupt british east india company which was struggling because customers were purchasing cheaper smuggled tea elsewhere.
under the act the east india company could ship large quantities of tea to the colonies without paying required duties making the tea cheaper for the colonists even with the townshend tea tax.
the plan was to encourage colonists to buy the taxed british east india company tea instead of smuggled teas.
given the tension and anger in boston the citys response could easily have been predicted.
city residents had no intention of paying that tax even on discounted tea.
in new york philadelphia and charleston patriotic groups often led by the sons of liberty convinced merchants not to allow the tea to land from the british ships.
no taxation without representation became the rallying cry from colonists who were fed up with having no say in matters that affected them.
in november 1773 a shipment of british tea arrived in boston on the ship dartmouth.
even before it arrived crowds had forced the tea merchants to barricade themselves in their warehouse.
once the dartmouth appeared a crowd forced the ship to move to griffins wharf where dockworkers sailors and merchants not the british authorities controlled the dock.
the customs commissioners fled rather than risk getting tarred and feathered an increas ingly popular punishment by patriotic crowds for those who supported royal authority.
governor thomas hutchinson would not let the dartmouth sail back to england and the crowd would not let the tea be unloaded.
ihe stand off lasted into december.
on december 16 angry citizens met at the old south meeting house.
when the governor would not back down samuel adams said this meeting can do nothing more to save the country the crowds response probably well rehearsed was a series of faked indian war whoops a shout of boston harbor a tea pot tonight and a call to gather at griffins wharf.
as thousands watched from the shore men slightly disguised as mohawks boarded the dartmouth and dumped the tea into boston harbor.
ihe boston tea party galvanized anti british sentiment in other colonies and the city was seen as the incubator of revolutionary activity long before the next shots were fired.
in response to the incident the british closed the port of boston to all shipping creating a financial crisis that led to further anger and unrest among not only dock workers but also the merchant elites who depended on the port for their wealth.
women too became increasingly involved in leading their own protests.
in response to the stamp act crisis of 1765 small groups of women who were determined to boycott british goods in protest began calling themselves the daughters of liberty.
new england women organized spinning bees to make their own cloth so they could avoid buying english textiles.
among the elite and working people wearing homespun clothing j30 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 a british publication ridiculed american women s efforts to boycott tea but the hostility shown in the cartoon reflects the degree to which women s protests were effective.
became a symbol of loyalty to the patriot cause.
their efforts continued to strengthen and spread especially with the strong support they got from newspapers.
in 1774 51 women in edenton north carolina promised not to consume english goods including tea and other women organized similar boycotts elsewhere.
when war broke out after 1775 and many goods became scarce women protested when colonial merchants hoarded goods or demanded higher prices.
in 1777 women in poughkeepsie new york broke into the house of a merchant they thought was hoarding goods.
as the war continued women led food riots throughout the colonies.
revolts in the back country rural people on the frontier from new york to the carolinas were also taking matters into their own hands but for different reasons.
backcountry virginians had rebelled in various ways against royal authority since bacons rebellion in 1676 and in all of the colonies major splits reflected gaps between coastal areas that had more access to and more representation in colonial governments than rural inland settlements.
in the mid 1760s feeling ignored and cheated by what they saw as distant and corrupt coastal authorities farmers in the western regions of north and south carolina created what they called the regulator movement.
in south carolina regulators attacked when gangs of outlaws stole from isolated farms.
the governor eventually agreed to create circuit courts in the back country which diminished the violence.
in north carolina the movement protested corrupt practices of sheriffs and court officials who forced settlers to pay illegally high taxes and legal fees.
regulators rallied settlers who refused to pay the taxes closed the courts and attacked officials.
the governor sent in state militia from the coastal areas and in their largest encounter with the regulators 29 people were killed and 150 wounded.
throughout the colonies however the most contentious issue for inland communities was relationships with indian tribes.
inland people complained that those on the coast used inland settlers as a buffer from the indians.
in pennsylvania there were also ethnic splits between the regions.
pennsylvanias mostly english quaker elite had settled around philadelphia.
as pacifists they tried to maintain peaceful relations with the indians.
but between the quakers and the indians was a zone inhabited by scots irish and germans who did not share the pacifism of the quakers and who found themselves much closer to potential indian hostility.
the rapid growth of the white population exacerbated the conflicts between frontier whites and indians.
the ever increasing pressure for more land a lot more land could be satisfied only by white movement into areas that belonged to indian tribes.
as whites encroached attacks by indians increased.
settlers wanted and expected the british to protect them.
but after 1763 king georges proclamation line halted further movement west at least legally.
ihe british imposed barrier caused intense anger on the frontier.
british agents sought to not only relieve the pressure among land hungry white settlers but also honor the kings commitment to the indians.
a 1768 treaty allowed white settlement in present day west virginia and kentucky.
a similar treaty opened parts of western pennsylvania and new york to white settlement.
but colonists wanted much more land than these treaties gave them and were prepared to fight to get it whether with indian tribes or with the king s representatives.
violence extended all along the lines of settlement.
a german immigrant frederick stump was arrested for murdering 10 indians in western pennsylvania in 1768 and then freed from jail by a white mob.
in virginia vigilantes who called themselves the augusta boys killed cherokees.
general thomas gage the senior british commander in north america found the situation intolerable.
he complained to london that all the people of the frontiers chapter5 the making of a revolution 131 5 2 first continental congress meeting of delegates from most of the colonies and held in philadelphia in 1774 in response to the british efforts to tax the colonies.
somerset decision a 1772 ruling by britain s lord chief justice in the case of james somerset that set him free and essentially declared slavery illegal in england though not in british colonies.
rnbnbsmmmhi phillis wheatley lived an unusual life for an african slave.
before she was given her freedom she was given considerable opportunity to learn and to write by the wheatley family that claimed her.
her poems reflected the yearning for freedom that all colonists felt but specifically the hopes of enslaved africans among them.
from pennsylvania to virginia inclusive openly avow that they never find a man guilty of murder for killing an indian in response to the frontier resistance parliament passed the quebec act of 1774 assigning all lands north and west of the ohio river to the british controlled province of quebec.
that action effectively took indian policy out of the hands of frontier agitators or royal governors along the coast.
the quebec act also recognized the legal rights of the catholic church which deeply offended the overwhelmingly protestant americans.
colonists saw the quebec act as one of what they called the intolerable acts a series of laws that included the act that closed the port of boston until the price of the tea and the tax on it was paid a revision of the colonial charter of massachusetts and a quartering act that allowed governors to place troops in any uninhabited building.
patriots insisted that because parliament was enacting these laws with no representation from colonists britain was violating the rights of english subjects in north america.
parliaments actions including closing the port of boston and challenging frontier farmers were unintentionally provoking a common sense of grievance among people who had previously been quite separate in their complaints.
growing unity in the colonies the first continental congress while people began to organize and challenge british authorities from virginia to massachusetts leaders of the rebellion in massachusetts asked the other colonies to join it in united action against what they saw as british tyranny.
all of them except georgia which was fighting creek indians and wanted britains support sent delegates to philadelphia in september 1774 to what became known as the first continental congress.
most of the delegates who came to philadelphia agreed that parliament had no right to tax the colonies without their consent.
the delegates also sought unified opposition to the british treatment of boston.
however few were ready for a break with britain.
the virginians wanted to continue to export tobacco and south carolina depended on the export of rice and indigo.
finding common ground was not easy.
but the delegates did gain experience working together even when they argued which they did a lot.
there was little talk of war or independence at the 1774 gathering.
but before they adjourned on october 26 the delegates declared that their rights were based on the laws of nature the british constitution and the colonial charters and were not to be trifled with.
they also agreed to a ban on british imports to take effect in december 1774 a ban on exports that would take effect in september 1775 after the tobacco and rice crops were safely on their way to britain and for symbolic reasons an immediate ban on the consumption of tea from the east india company.
they agreed to meet again in may 1775 if relations with britain did not improve.
talk of freedom for slaves for african slaves in british north america the most revolutionary moment of the 1700s took place in london in july 1772.
an american slave named james somerset had been taken from virginia to england as a personal servant by his master charles stewart.
in london somerset became friends with free blacks and white abolitionists.
in october 1771 he ran away.
he was caught and put on a ship bound for jamaica.
but somersets white friends petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus requiring that somerset be brought before a judge to determine whether he was imprisoned lawfully.
they insisted that he was held against his will which like all slaves he certainly was.
eventually the lord chief justice ruled that since parliament had never legalized slavery in england itself as opposed to the english colonies somerset had to be freed because the state of slavery is of such a nature that it is incapable of being introduced on any reason moral or political but only by positive law this decision basically ended slavery in england itself.
the somerset decision caused a considerable stir in the colonies and in britain.
in september 1773 the virginia gazette noted that as news of the decision spread running away to england was a notion now too prevalent among the negroes greatly 132 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 american voices phillis wheatley poem to the earl of dartmouth 1773 phillis wheatley was born in west africa in 1753.
she was captured at age seven or eight and brought to boston as a slave where she was purchased by john and susanna wheatley who provided her with a good education.
the young phillis was moved by english poets christianity and the talk of democracy that she heard in upper class boston in the 1760s and 1770s which she believed applied to slaves as well as free people.
in response she wrote poems about religion slavery and freedom including this one titled to the right honorable william earl of dartmouth his majesty s principal secretary of state for north america c she was allowed to travel to london to see some of her poems published in 1773 and was later freed on the eve of the american revolution.
she died in 1784.
no more america in mournful strain of wrongs and grievance unredress d complain no longer shalt thou dread the iron chain which wanton tyranny with lawless hand had made and with it meant t enslave the land.
should you my lord while you peruse my song wonder from whence my love of freedom sprung whence flow these wishes for the common good by feeling hearts alone best understood i young in life by seeming cruel fate was snatch d from afric s fancy d happy seat what pangs excruciating must molest what sorrows labour in my parent s breast.
steel d was that soul and by no misery mov d that from a father seiz d his babe belov d such such my case.
and can i then but pray others may never feel tyrannic sway.
source phillis wheatley to the right honorable william earl of dartmouth his majesty s principal secretary of state for north america c in herb boyd editor autobiography of a peop e new york anchor books 2001 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did wheatley connect her personal experiences to the revolutionary cause.
historical interpretation what light does this poem shed on wheatley s hopes for the coming revolution.
how might her vision of revolution have differed from that of her white bostonian neighbors.
to the vexation and prejudice of their masters benjamin franklin who was living in london had once owned slaves but now like many others he was turning against the institution calling it this pestilential detestable traffic in the bodies and souls of men in massachusetts after successfully defending a slave in a trial to obtain his freedom in the nantucket court of common pleas john adams said i never knew a jury by a verdict to determine a negro to be a slave.
they always found him free legal challenges were not the main ways in which slaves sought freedom before and during the american revolution however.
slaves heard about the protests of the stamp act and saw how effective mob action was.
some 107 slaves ran away from a plantation near charleston to join other runaways who were creating their own communities in hard to penetrate swamps.
whites on both sides of the atlantic noted the absurdity of colonists protesting their own perceived enslavement by parliament while as one wrote those same colonists enslaved thousands of tens of thousands of their fellow creatures the most consistent voice for abolition in the 1760s and 1770s came from the quakers who made it mandatory for members of their denomination to free their slaves or allow them to purchase their freedom.
others such as virginias arthur lee from a great slaveholding family in the colony wrote that freedom is unquestionably the birthright of all mankind of africans as well as europeans in the 1700s the slave trade was still a profitable institution.
while some whites wrote anti slavery letters and pamphlets 7 000 slaves were imported into charleston in 1765.
the debate around slavery was as heated as the debate around british rule and no one living through these years could fail to notice the contradiction of fighting for liberty and enforcing slavery.
5 2 quick review did americans revolutionary ideas contradict their attitudes towards indians and slaves.
to answer this question consider the time and context in which the american revolution took place.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 133 the war for independence 5 3 explain how political and military strategy support for the patriot cause and american alliances with france and spain led to an american victory in the war for independence.
as talk of rebellion spread in 1774 not long after the boston tea party john adams overheard rural farmers discussing the events in boston.
one insisted if parliament can take away mr hancocks wharf and mr rowes wharf they can take away your barn and my house adams realized that if isolated farmers were agreeing with a mob in boston revolution was possible.
indeed battles would soon break out in lexington and in concord starting the american revolution.
at the same time word was quickly spreading among africans regarding the disputes about slavery.
they were poised to take action to support either the colonists or the british whichever side would benefit them the most.
beginning in 1775 what had been occasional mob actions turned into outright warfare as increasingly well disciplined colonial militia fought against the british army.
while some colonial leaders met in congress and declared independence in 1776 other colonists later aided by french forces fought a long and bitter series of battles that won the actual independence that had been declared.
from lexington and concord to bunker hill revolt becomes war general thomas gage also understood the growing rebellion.
when parliament passed the intolerable acts gage was charged with moving british troops back into boston and allowing no trade until massachusetts submitted to the crown see map 5 3.
gage recommended to london that efforts be made to conciliate the colonists.
but the leaders in parliament were in no mood for conciliation and gage received orders to restore order at all costs.
as he moved his troops gage kept a close eye on the massachusetts rebels who kept an equally close eye on him.
paul revere who had helped lead the boston tea party now led an informal group of unemployed artisans who noted every troop movement in boston.
the battles of lexington and concord april 1775 in the inland towns of concord and worcester the colonial militia was collecting arms and gage knew it.
hoping for secrecy he ordered troops to prepare to march to concord to seize the arms.
the colonists had been expecting such a move.
paul revere was to report any troop movements by hanging lanterns in the steeple of the north church one lantern if the troops moved inland and two if by sea meaning by boats across the back bay.
when the british troops started to move revere had two lanterns hung in the steeple the british took the water route.
then he and william dawes began their famous rides through the night to alert the colonial militia.
revere himself was arrested by british troops but dawes woke sam adams and john hancock who made it to concord to organize the militia.
when the british reached lexington town green at little after 4 30 a m on april 19 1775 they were met by colonial militia.
shots were fired killing eight militiamen and wounding 10 others.
only one british soldier was wounded in this first battle of the revolution.
there was no further gunfire until the british entered the town of concord where they found few arms.
as they left to march the 16 miles back to boston militiamen hidden behind trees buildings rocks and fences attacked their easy targets.
at the end of the day the british had 273 casualties the militia 95.
what had been unrest was now a war.
word of the battles of lexington and concord spread quickly.
many shared thomas jeffersons belief that the last hopes of reconciliation had now ended.
people who were not sure about independence felt they had to make decisions.
some perhaps as many as a third of all white colonists remained loyal to the crown though in new england they did so quietly.
but many began to commit to what they saw as a patriotic cause some even taking matters into their own hands.
ethan allen who since 134 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 ghi british ruled providence of quebec 1774 boundary set by quebec act of 1774 ez3 british ruled providence of east florida t i british ruled providence of west florida.
reserved to indians under british rule i spanish louisiana major battles distribution of british troops british posts 100 300 soldiers british posts 300 500 soldiers british post 4 800 soldiers the spread of news concerning the battles of lexington and concord april 19 1775 within 1 7 days a within 8 14 days a more than 14 days 5 1 53 53 map 5 3 british courts and troops stationed in the colonies as the revolution began.
as unrest grew in the colonies british authorities made every effort to assert control.
they stationed more troops in all of the colonies especially in restive boston and established a series of courts vice admiralty courts in charleston philadelphia boston and halifax nova scotia.
stationing more troops and clamping down on smuggling did nothing to end colonial resistance and as word spread of the battles of lexington and concord after april 19 1775 colonial resistance only grew.
1770 had led his green mountain boys in challenging royal authority in vermont and benedict arnold of connecticut then on the rebels side organized their own militia and captured fort ticonderoga on lake champlain on may 10 1775.
the cannons from the fort would play a large role in the coming struggle.
from the battle of bunker hill to the formation of the colonial army in the weeks after the battles at lexington and concord the massachusetts militia fortified with recruits from connecticut began to dig in on the hills surrounding british occupied boston dorchester heights to the south bunker hill and breeds hill to the north.
colonel william prescott of the massachusetts militia was put in charge of fortifying the northern hills.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 135 general gage again felt that he had to act.
on june 17 gage ordered an attack on breeds hill.
it was a british victory but at a high cost 226 british dead and 828 wounded compared with 140 militia killed and 271 wounded.
as one englishman remarked if we have eight more such victories there will be nobody left to bring the news.
ihe battle which later became known as the battle of bunker hill even though it had taken place on breeds hill had been between ill organized militia and regular units of the british army.
after that battle however the american forces became better organized and gained support from all 13 colonies.
african americans in the armies of both sides the outbreak of war opened a new avenue to freedom for american slaves.
while some like wheatley embraced revolution for liberty and freedom others heeded different words.
jeremiah a free black in charleston heard the rumor that the british intended to come to help the poor negroes he did not wait for that help but began to organize one of several slave uprisings in the carolinas in 1775 and 1776.
plans for an insurrection were discovered and he was hanged and burned at the stake.
in august 1775 by prorevolutionary authorities in south carolina.
there was a good reason for the rumors among the slaves.
in 1775 lord dunmore the royal governor of virginia under attack from the rebels fled williamsburg.
in november of that year from his refuge on a british warship he announced i do hereby further declare all indented servants negroes or others free that are able and willing to bear arms they joining his majestys troops as soon as may be.
the proclamation terrified whites.
with it the slaves perspective of the revolutionary struggle was transformed into a struggle about who would give them their liberty and in south carolina where there were 80 000 slaves 60 percent of the population such liberty would be a radical revolution indeed.
many slaves responded to the invitation.
between 800 and 1 000 slaves joined the british army.
dunmore organized them into what he called the ethiopian regiment whose members wore a sash reading liberty to slaves in one engagement an american colonel joseph hutchings was captured by two of his own former slaves.
when the british landed on staten island in 1776 new york and new jersey slaves joined them.
when they royal navy sailed up rivers in pennsylvania and maryland more slaves joined them and when the british attacked charleston still more joined.
runaway slaves built forts tended the wounded carried supplies and fought alongside white soldiers.
british generals understood that in recruiting slaves they were also disrupting the economies of the rebellious colonies.
although disease took a terrible toll among black soldiers and their families and though many were captured and reenslaved the loyalty of slaves to the british cause eventually brought freedom to some of them.
approximately 300 former slaves sailed with dunmore when he left virginia in 1776 and by the end of the war british forces had relocated some 3 000 more in canada or in colonies in west africa.
the american army was much slower to enlist free blacks or slaves than the british.
african americans however did serve among the colonial troops at lexington and concord in 1775 including lemuel haynes who became one of the leading ministers in massachusetts after the war.
washington was reluctant to arm black soldiers fearing not only the reaction of white troops but also the possibility that arms given to black soldiers might eventually support a slave revolt.
nevertheless by the winter of 1777 1778 when things looked grim for the revolution washington finally embraced black volunteers.
shortly after in february 1778 rhode island offered freedom to every able bodied negro mulatto or indian man slave in this state to serve during the continuance of the present war with great britain perhaps one in four male slaves in the state eventually enlisted in what was known as rhode islands black regiment.
those who survived the war were given their freedom in 1783.
16 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 moving toward independence when the delegates to the second continental congress gathered as promised in philadelphia on may 10 1775 the battles of lexington and concord had changed everything.
they knew that they had to manage a war and attempted to create the continental army.
the obvious choice to command it was george washington a respected member of congress and veteran of the french and indian war.
washington took command of the colonial militia such as it was in cambridge massachusetts on july 2 1775 shortly after the battle of bunker hill.
american resistance would be more coordinated than it had been during the early skirmishes.
washington commanded between 9 000 and 14 000 troops he was never sure while gage led about 5 000 in boston.
despite the difference in numbers the royal navy controlled the water and gages troops were highly disciplined soldiers.
washingtons troops were a ragtag army capable of effective guerrilla fighting and great courage but hard to discipline easily bored and ready to return to their homes if fighting dragged on.
after selecting washington and beginning to find the money mostly in foreign loans to support an army the second continental congress turned to another pressing question what did they want from the war.
john dickinson of pennsylvania wanted reconciliation with britain if parliament would respect the rights of the colonists.
john adams and most of the virginia delegates wanted independence.
others were not sure.
it took a year for the debate to be resolved and before then other matters intervened.
thomas paines common sense while the congress debated independence a new arrival from england thomas paine published a pamphlet common sense in january 1776.
soon over 100 000 copies were in circulation.
paine asked why is it that we hesitate.
for gods sake let us come to a final separation the birthday of a new world is at hand paine made two basic points that monarchy was always a bad way for people to be governed and that the time was right to declare independence.
with his passionate words and exquisite timing paine shaped public opinion.
common sense appeared on the same day george iii declared the north american colonies to be in a state of rebellion.
the two events could not have contrasted more clearly.
john adams was no admirer of paine or his pamphlet which he saw as simple minded and needlessly antagonistic though he agreed with its conclusion.
nevertheless adams said that he expected common sense to become the common faith of the new nation.
declaring independence 1776 on june 7 1776 after months of debate in the congress richard henry lee a delegate from virginia offered a motion resolved that these united colonies are and of a right ought to be free and independent states that they are absolved from all allegiance to the british crown and that all political connection between them and the state of great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved.
john adams immediately seconded the motion.
in the debate that followed delegates led by john dickinson opposed the resolution.
most of the delegates had likely come to this congress with the hope of reconciliation not with any plan for permanent separation.
but the fighting with british troops and the influence of publications like common sense had changed many minds.
congress eventually agreed to delay a vote on independence until july 1 but to also appoint what became known as the committee of five thomas jefferson benjamin franklin john adams roger sherman and robert livingston to draft a declaration in case congress did vote for independence.
jefferson known for his skill with words was chosen to write the first draft.
adams and franklin and ultimately the full congress made adjustments which frustrated and hurt the sensitive jefferson.
the most important changes included removing recently arrived from england thomas paine took up the patriot cause with a fervor that many more established colonists lacked.
in his easy to read pamphlet common sense he attacked not only the british treatment of the colonies but also the very idea of monarchy.
his words were significant in fanning the flames of the independence movement.
second continental congress an assemblage of delegates from all the colonies that convened in may 1775 that eventually declared independence adopted the articles of confederation and conducted the revolutionary war.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 137 jeffersons passionate attack on the slave trade which was hypocritical in light of the fact that jefferson owned many slaves and made no move to free them.
in addition far too many of the others in the congress had investments in the trade to accept jeffersons language anywhere in the document.
however no one suggested removing jeffersons assertion that the king has endeavored to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless indian savages even when they all knew that it was whites on the frontiers who were invading indian territory and the kings government was trying to keep the two apart.
those in congress saw the frontier whites as essential supporters of the patriot cause and were in no mood to antagonize them.
the waiting period before the vote paid off.
by july 1776 no one was willing to go on record as being opposed to independence.
on july 2 a unanimous congress voted for independence and on july 4 they adopted a declaration of independence that began with these powerful words when in the course of human events it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another and to assume among the powers of the earth the separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and of natures god entitle them a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
the philosophical ideas that john locke had used to defend englands change in monarchs were now a hundred years later used to announce to the world that monarchy itself was being abolished in englands former colonies.
in philadelphia people celebrated with bonfires and ringing bells with other great demonstrations of joy when word of the declaration of independence reached new york city a mob of soldiers and residents celebrated by pulling down the statue of king george iii that stood on lower broadway.
the metal was eventually melted down to make bullets for the revolutionary cause.
138 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 a crowd in new york tore down the statue of george iii washington built up morale in the army by reading the declaration to his troops and the celebrations continued up and down the coast.
the articles of confederation a year later the congress adopted a governing document for the new and fragile country they had created.
in 1777 the articles of confederation created a national though weak government for what was now called the united states of america.
although 11 of the colonies ratified the articles within a year the last maryland did not do so until 1781.
nevertheless with the articles of confederation states banded together in a formal and ultimately successful alliance to prosecute the war and govern the nation in the peace they hoped would follow.
with the declaration of independence the 13 different colonies declared themselves to be 13 independent states that agreed to work together for certain limited common purposes.
although they were committed to cooperate especially in fighting for independence the representatives were distrustful of centralized government.
under the articles of confederation there would be no national executive or court system in the new nation.
in addition congress could raise money through taxes only if every state agreed.
nevertheless this government really an alliance of independent states more than anything that looked like a modern nation was able to coordinate its fight and win the revolution.
whether such a government could build a nation however remained to be seen.
articles of confederation written document setting up the loose confederation of states that made up the first national government of the united states from 1781 to 1788.
5 3 george washington and his victorious patchwork army the american revolution was a long and bloody war between two strikingly different armies.
on one side were washingtons patchwork continental army and various rebel militias later supported by troops from france and spain.
in the course of the long war some 200 000 of the 350 000 men who could have served participated in some military activity but the turnover was such that no more than 25 000 served at any one time.
fighting against them was a corps of extremely well trained british troops supported by organized units of loyalist colonists as many as 8 000 at the start of the war and increasing as the war continued and hired soldiers from germany.
ultimately many factors led to the success of the ragtag rebels and their allies in their battles with the british troops see map 5 4 and perhaps more important their ability to survive in spite of the british effort to eliminate them as a fighting force.
most of the revolutionary minute men who fought at lexington and concord called minute men because they had pledged to be ready to fight on a minutes notice were farmers who owned their own weapons and knew how to shoot.
in some of the early battles the popular image of the citizen soldier may have been true as farmers and townspeople took up arms to defend their communities.
but as the war continued and as washington and his officers created the kind of discipline necessary for an effective army more and more of the early volunteers faded away replaced by recently indentured servants impoverished transients or those who traded a jail cell for a uniform.
a colonial officer called the troops a wretched motley crew but washington was an effective leader who never seemed to lose control when others started to panic and he was deeply committed to the cause.
despite being ill trained ill fed ill clothed and restless these troops continued to fight even after seeing the horrors of battle in all their hideousness as one soldier remembered.
surprisingly these often forgotten men are who won the independence that others celebrated.
a few women also took a direct role in the war.
armies in the 1700s usually included women known as camp followers.
some were the wives of soldiers who could not or would not leave their husbands.
others were single women seeking adventure or simply survival in army life and army rations.
camp followers carried water to the battlefield fed and supported the troops nursed the wounded and occasionally fought in battles mary ludwig hays known as molly pitcher for the water she carried chapter 5 the making of a revolution 139 overview of the revolutionary war british victories patriot victories.
ro 3 j 0 x k map 5 4 major battles of the american revolution.
the revolutionary war was fought all across british north america not only in almost all of the 13 colonies along the atlantic coast but well into british canada and in the mississippi river valley.
also supposedly loaded her husband s cannon after he was wounded at the battle of monmouth in 1778.
deborah sampson disguised herself as a man joined the army and fought for years until a doctor discovered her identity after she was wounded.
washington understood that though his army could fight it could not withstand a direct battle with british regulars.
he told congress that he needed to fight a defensive war and avoid any general action.
for much of the war his goal was not a decisive victory but avoiding a decisive loss.
the longer washington was able to keep his army together and out of too many battles the better the chance that the british would tire of the war.
he knew how well trained the british army was having served in it but he also expected that training and discipline had narrowed their conception of war and would give him the edge as long as his troops could use nontraditional tactics and avoid capture or defeat.
140 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 american voices joseph plumb martin narrative of a revolutionary soldier 1775 1783 joseph plumb marin was a private in the american army through eight years of war.
he saw few direct battles but many small skirmishes.
martin knew that his primary task was to survive and avoid capture.
his humorous journal written when he was 70 years old makes clear that his greatest enemies were neglect and hunger.
i the redoubtable hero of this narrative first made my appearance in this crooked fretful world upon the twenty first day of november in the year 1760 i remember the stir in the country occasioned by the stamp act but i was so young that i did not understand the meaning of it i likewise remember the disturbances that followed the repeal of the stamp act until the destruction of the tea at boston and elsewhere i was then thirteen or fourteen years old and began to understand something of the works going on time passed smoothly on with me till the year 1774 arrived the smell of war began to be pretty strong but i was determined to have no hand in it happen when it might i felt myself to be a real coward.
what venture my carcass where bullets fly.
that will never do for me 1 was ploughing in the field about half a mile from home about the twenty first day of april 1775 when all of a sudden the bells fell to ringing what the cause was we could not conjecture during the winter of 1775 6 by hearing the conversation and disputes of the good old farmer politicians of the times i collected pretty correct ideas of the contest between this country and the mother country as it was then called i felt more anxious than ever if possible to be called a defender of my country.
1777 next morning we joined the grand army near philadelphia and the heavy baggage being sent back to the rear of the army we were obliged to put us up huts by laying up poles and covering them with leaves a capital shelter from winter storms about this time the whole british army left the city came out and encamped or rather lay on chestnut hill in our immediate neighborhood we hourly expected an attack from them we had a commanding position and were very sensible of it.
we were kept constantly on the alert and wished nothing more than to have them engage us for we were sure of giving them a drubbing being in excellent fighting trim as we were starved and as cross and ill natured as curs.
the british however thought better of the matter and after several days maneuvering on the hill very civilly walked off into philadelphia again.
starvation seemed to be entailed upon the army and every animal connected with it 1780 here was the army starved and naked and there their country sitting still and expecting the army to do notable things while fainting from sheer starvation.
source joseph plumb martin a narrative of the adventures dangers and sufferings of a revolutionary soldier originally published 1830 republished new york signet classics 2010.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did martin characterize his own journey toward support of the revolutionary cause.
historical interpretation what does this passage suggest about the differences between the american and british armies.
5 3 the british evacuate boston after the battle of bunker hill the british controlled boston but were hemmed in there.
through the winter of 1775 1776 washington commissioned a promising soldier henry knox a young boston bookseller as a colonel in the continental army and sent him and his men to move the guns captured at fort ticonderoga on sleds over snow covered mountains to boston.
on the night of march 1 1776 washingtons troops assembled the guns on dorchester heights and then bombarded the city until march 17 when the british finally evacuated boston.
the war in the north manhattan trenton and valley forge the victory in boston was one of the few outright victories washington would achieve.
washingtons goal however was to engage in more indirect strategies that would wear down the british while preserving his own limited troops.
just as the american congress was declaring independence in philadelphia in 1776 sir william howe who had replaced gage as the british commander landed his army on staten island across from manhattan.
howe had some 32 000 troops including 8 000 german mercenaries essentially soldiers for hire known as hessians since many were from the german province of hesse.
during the war some 30 000 hessians fought for the british approximately a quarter of all of their soldiers.
hessian troops were chapter 5 the making of a revolution 141 recruited often by force from among the poorest germans and german princes would rent them out as units especially to the british.
many hessians soldiers had little interest in the british cause but had little choice except to fight for it.
washington had his own morale problems but his soldiers were somewhat more willing to fight.
as the two sides watched each other washingtons troops dug fortifications to defend brooklyn and manhattan.
in late august howes larger and better trained force attacked brooklyn.
rather than risk battle and capture at this point washington abandoned brooklyn and brought all 9 500 of his troops across the east river to manhattan on the night of august 30.
when howe attacked manhattan in september washington again retreated.
throughout the early fall washington continued a retreat and the british advanced through new jersey.
as they settled down for the winter the british held most of new jersey while washingtons army was across the delaware river in pennsylvania.
then on christmas night of 1776 washington and 2 400 troops made a daring raid across the delaware river and captured trenton new jersey.
they also captured many hessian soldiers some of whom quickly joined the rebel side.
in january they would go on to successfully attack a british force in princeton.
by the winter of 1776 1777 washington controlled southern new jersey while the british held northern new jersey and new york city which they would control throughout the war.
in may 1777 british general john burgoyne assembled a large army in canada.
his plan was to proceed down the hudson river and smash the unnatural rebellion in new york and new england.
initially the plan went well.
burgoyne had some 8 300 men including 3 000 german troops.
he led his army across lake champlain overran the americans at fort ticonderoga and continued south into new yorks hudson river valley an exhausting effort that involved moving a large army with heavy supplies through dense forests.
as he moved through the area burgoynes sometimes pompous pronouncements to colonists and the german troops inability to communicate with them bred additional colonial resentment and motivated fresh volunteers for the american cause.
in september 1777 near saratoga new york burgoynes army encountered american troops under the command of an experienced general horatio gates and benedict arnold still on the american side but soon to be caught negotiating a plan with the british to defect.
the british were surprised that their bayonet charge could not break the american lines.
both armies suffered heavy losses but neither won a decisive victory.
burgoynes army was now cut off from its winter quarters and shortly after was forced to negotiate.
some 5 800 british troops were captured and held as prisoners until the end of the war.
the battle of saratoga was a turning point for the colonial cause.
it eliminated a significant british force and it proved to the world especially those in france and spain who were watching the war closely that the americans could stand up to britains toughest troops.
as a result american diplomats including benjamin franklin were able to negotiate an agreement with the french and later the spanish to recognize the united colonies and provide military assistance.
the british wanted not only to split the colonies and especially to capture washington and his army but also to catch the members of the continental congress by overtaking philadelphia where the congress met.
in september 1777 british troops captured philadelphia but the members of congress escaped before the british arrived.
washington was able to block supplies into the city and the following spring the british abandoned philadelphia which remained in colonial hands for the rest of the war though there were continued riots between patriots and loyalists in the city.
before the british left philadelphia however the american forces had to survive perhaps their most difficult winter.
washington selected valley forge pennsylvania 18 miles northwest from philadelphia as a place to keep an eye on the british in the city.
his army was exhausted cold and hungry and they got colder and hungrier as the winter continued.
for weeks there was little to eat.
in time however washington was able to appoint commissary officers who found food and clothing for the soldiers.
a prussian 142 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 officer volunteering in the american cause baron von steuben began training the troops in close order drills.
von steuben possessed expertise in military training and hoped to make a name and a home for himself in a free america.
in addition a french officer the marquis de lafayette was recruited to lead forces that harassed the british.
by the time the british sailed out of philadelphia the american troops were better fed and clothed better trained and ready for new battles preparation they would need in the next years.
in 1778 general sir henry clinton replaced howe and a new british strategy took shape.
clinton ordered the royal navy to harass the colonists up and down the atlantic coast and encouraged britains indian allies to attack frontier settlements.
in addition he sent the main british land force south to overrun the carolinas and georgia.
if he could detach those three colonies clinton thought the revolution might crumble.
after 1778 the major battles of the war would be in the colonies western and southern regions.
the importance of france and spain the revolution was won by the rebels for many reasons including the key fact that france and spain were willing to help.
the two countries had their own reasons for wanting to embarrass the british and reduce britains power on the world stage.
in particular both france and spain wanted greater access to trade with north america which was highly restricted as long as the british controlled the colonies.
by the 1770s the french still resented the british victory in the seven years war and wanted to ensure that france not britain was the dominant power in europe.
as early as 1775 france sent agents to america to see what might be gained from assisting in the rebellion.
similarly spain started to supply the colonists with food and gunpowder from spanish held new orleans and cuba.
while they were willing to support the rebellion neither france nor spain wanted to engage in war with britain unless the colonists were serious.
in arguing for a declaration of independence in 1776 adams told the congress foreign powers cannot be expected to acknowledge us till we have acknowledged ourselves and taken our station among them as a sovereign power an independent nation he had two specific foreign powers in mind.
in 1776 benjamin franklin led an american delegation in paris to seek further help.
franklin with his simple fur cap and plain spectacles yet sophisticated manner charmed the french.
however franklin needed more than charm to win real help.
with the americans declared independence and victory over britains troops at saratoga french leaders started to take him more seriously.
his diplomatic efforts secured important supplies and in february 1778 a full french alliance with the united states of america the first diplomatic recognition of the new nation.
a few months later france formally declared war on great britain.
for the rest of the war washington could count on the french army and navy to fight the british.
in 1779 spain also declared war on britain.
spanish forces moved up the mississippi river from new orleans and along the gulf coast and took the british forts at baton rouge natchez mobile and pensacola.
spanish attacks in the mississippi river valley diverted british troops from the atlantic coast helping the american effort.
once france and spain went to war with britain the american revolution became a world war.
the french and british navies fought in the english channel spain attacked british held gibraltar in the mediterranean and all of them fought battles in the caribbean.
most important for the american cause the french fleet supported washingtons troops throughout the latter part of the war while spanish funds and smuggling efforts provided badly needed supplies.
the iroquois and the british the iroquois were divided about how to respond to the rebellion and at the beginning of the war most sought to remain neutral.
however many saw britain as the key to their independence and as the war continued neutrality faded.
beginning in the summer of 1777 mohawks under the leadership of thayendanegea also known as joseph brant attacked white communities 5 1 2 53 chapter 5 the making of a revolution 143 sarah franklin bache unlike her half brother william was a staunch defender of the patriot cause.
she led an effort to raise funds for the troops in the continental army and later led an effort in which philadelphia women made 2 200 shirts for the soldiers.
across new york and pennsylvania.
the attacks on farms threatened a crucial colonial food supply.
in response in the summer of 1779 washington sent perhaps a third of his army to attack the iroquois and lay waste all the settlements around that the country may not be merely overrun but destroyed from washingtons perspective the iroquois had to be stopped.
for the iroquois washingtons fierce response was proof that the american leadership would always be an implacable enemy.
both sides adopted brutal scorched earth tactics that left long lasting hatreds.
british loyalists colonists who remained loyal to britain formed their own militia and in the carolinas an army of over a thousand loyalists challenged rebel forces.
other loyalists joined british regiments.
american rebels had nothing but contempt for them.
in the new york new jersey area catherine and phillip van cortland one of the areas leading families remained loyal to britain.
when washington gained control of their part of new jersey he ordered that the van cortland house be used as an army hospital.
with her husband away catherine and her children were told to leave.
she described their february 1777 departure our youngest children could not pass a far yard where they were milking cows without wishing for some.
my little willing was almost in agonies springing in my arms and calling for milk.
i therefore rode up and requested the good man to let me have some from one of his pails the man stopped asked who we were and swore bitterly he would not give a drop to any tory bitch.
i offered him money my children screamed and as i could not prevail i drove on.
in some cities including newark new jersey in 1777 and philadelphia in 1780 the wives of missing loyalists were exiled by the american forces.
some loyalist families were able to blend back into their old homes after the war but many left for canada or england and never returned.
womens support for washingtons army in 1780 at a par ticularly bad time for the continental troops esther de berdt reed wife of the governor of pennsylvania and sarah franklin bache benjamin franklins daughter asked patriot women to give up all luxuries and contribute to a fund for the continental army.
eventually the women raised 300 000 a huge sum at the time.
the womens goal was to give 2 in hard currency to every soldier.
washington refused the offer and asked the women instead to buy cloth and sew shirts for the soldiers.
the women agreed and produced thousands of shirts for the ill clad troops.
the experience also led to the creation of the ladies association the first intercolonial organization of women in america and a model for future national organizations of women.
women throughout the colonies found additional ways to support the cause.
in fishing creek south carolina young girls went from farm to farm asking is the owner out with the fighting men if the answer was yes then they harvested the land.
in five or six weeks they had completed the harvest for the whole county saving patriot farmers from economic ruin and providing food stores for the revolutionary cause.
stories of similar efforts abounded.
the war in the south from charleston to yorktown after capturing savannah georgia in december 1778 the british attacked charleston south carolina in 1780 and on may 12 1780 that city surrendered.
the loss was significant.
if the british took control of georgia and the carolinas it would be hard to continue the resistance in the name of the united colonies and the strategy seemed to be working.
144 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 as the battle for control of the south continued washington named one of his generals nathaniel greene to lead a southern campaign.
greene divided the american forces taking command of half and assigning others a contingent of maryland and virginia militias to daniel morgan an experienced officer from virginia.
the british commander lord cornwallis also divided his army between himself and lieutenant colonel banastre tarleton who had a reputation for exceptional cruelty.
while the two armies maneuvered smaller independent units fought their own battles.
not every resident of south carolina supported independence and local loyalists fought against colonial units.
throughout 1780 and 1781 the south carolina backcountry was filled with ugly and often personal conflicts.
unlike other colonies the civilian death toll was high in south carolina as a result.
morgan made a stand against the british forces in a south carolina pasture known as cowpens in january 1781.
in one of the last full scale battles of the war the american troops defeated tarletons army and captured some 800 british soldiers a crucial american victory.
although the british still held charleston and small units loyal to the british harassed the revolutionaries after cowpens the americans were in control of the south carolina countryside.
cornwallis saw little chance of further success in the carolinas and marched into virginia in may 1781.
he decided to fortify yorktown on the york river where he thought he could count on being resupplied by water.
as cornwalliss troops dug in at yorktown washington was in the north planning another attack on new york city.
greenes army was far to the south.
at the prodding of the french washington moved quickly to take advantage of the situation.
in september the french navy blockaded the york river and cut cornwallis off from resupply.
then supported by french troops under the count de rochambeau washington marched his own army from new york 450 miles south at surprising speed.
on september 28 washingtons 16 000 troops attacked yorktown.
the siege continued for the next 2 weeks but after failing at an attempted escape cornwallis surrendered on october 17 1781.
5 1 5j 5 3 pleading illness cornwallis actually failed to show up for the surrender ceremony which was handled by junior british officers.
but everyone knew how significant the event was.
without the army that cornwallis led british efforts to defeat the continental army were at a standstill.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 145 explore the american revolution on myhistorylab how did the american revolution unfold.
between 1775 when fighting broke out near boston and the 1783 treaty of paris the british and rebellious american colonists fought the revolutionary war.
this war however was in reality a civil war as some colonists remained loyal to the british empire while their neighbors rebelled against imperial power.
even though george washington s continental army was outmatched in military manpower and lost more major battles than it won the superior decision making of its leaders combined with patriotic support throughout the colonies led to a victory for the americans and the thirteen colonies emerged as the independent united states of america.
the idealized prominence of general george washington as a war leader is shown as he meets with other generals and officers of the american colonies in a large state room.
highest level of troop strength 50 000 45 000 40 000 35 000 30 000 25 000 20 000 15 000 10 000 5 000 0 american loyalist in british army british 1778 1781 1782 source longman american history atlas 1998 key questions use myhistorylab explorer to answer these questions f comparison where did the americans have military successes.
map the losses and victories of the two sides in the revolutionary war.
analysis which regions were loyalist and patriot strongholds.
consider the roles of these two groups in the unfolding of the war.
response what position did the major cities play in the conflict.
understand the importance of urban areas for the two sides.
146 part iii a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 the treaty of paris the surrender of cornwallis at yorktown did not end the war but it virtually guaranteed that it would eventually end favorably for the americans.
british troops still controlled new york city charleston savannah and parts of the countryside but many in parliament were tired of the war and public opinion in britain had turned against continued hostilities.
in june 1780 congress had sent john jay to join benjamin franklin and john adams in paris to negotiate peace.
after news of the yorktown surrender arrived the british delegates agreed to a draft treaty that began his britannic majesty acknowledges the said united states to be free sovereign and independent states the two sides continued to negotiate boundaries fishing rights and legal claims and britain concluded separate treaties with france and spain.
the final treaty was signed in paris on september 3 1783.
the revolutionary war was over and a new nation had been born.
quick review did the french and indian war lead directly to the coming of the american revolution.
what other factors might have prevented or caused the outbreak of war in 1775.
make a list of some of the different groups that came to the conclusion that life would be better for them if the colonies were independent from great britain.
why did they want independence.
could any independent nation satisfy such diverse goals.
conclusion many factors led to the beginning of the american revolution.
as american colonists sought to evade british taxes john lockes ideas about the rights of man influenced some men and women and provided a moral justification for disobeying the crown.
ihe first great awakening led many to challenge religious and civil authority.
while ideas fueled the conflicts the aftermath of the french and indian war led to some of the most decisive events leading up to the colonies break with britain.
while the colonists benefitted from the british takeover of new france many rebelled against parliaments efforts to get colonists to help pay the cost of this war through increased taxation without representation in britains parliament.
many colonists too would not honor george ills proclamation line of 1763 which prevented them from appropriating indian land.
slaves in the american colonies welcomed news that courts in england were moving toward outlawing slavery there however plantation owners who depended on slavery and the slave trade now had another reason for supporting an open break with the mother country.
as resistances to british policies and taxes grew parliament responded with new taxes and sent more troops which only inflamed colonists passions and further united them against british rule.
at the first and second continental congresses representatives of the colonies debated the best course of action.
in 1775 violence escalated.
the combination of unwanted british armed forces in north america as well as unwanted taxes and oppressive laws culminated in armed resistance by the colonists.
by mid 1775 americans had formed their own army under george washington.
the protracted war that followed engulfed the colonies involving not only white men but also white women slaves and the indians along with armies and aid from france and spain.
finally after years of avoiding capture by the british army and some successful victories by the patriot forces new alliances with france and spain helped the colonists army commanded by george washington win the surrender of the largest british army in north america.
with the surrender of the british forces at yorktown in 1781 and the treaty of paris in 1783 the independence of the united states became a reality.
chapter review which factors do you think were most important in leading to the colonists victory against the british empire.
chapter 5 the making of a revolution 147 chapter 5 chapter review 5 1 preludes to revolution explain britain s victory over france in the french and indian war and what conflicts followed this victory.
review questions 1.
crafting an argument is it valid to describe the seven years war as a world war.
why or why not.
comparison compare and contrast the position of the european powers in north america before and after the seven years war.
what were the most important changes.
historical interpretation how did british victory in the seven years war alter the relationship between indian peoples and british colonists.
revolution was in the minds of the people explain why in the 15 years before the revolutionary war began support for the patriot cause spread so quickly among many different groups of north americans who opposed britain for different reasons.
review questions 4.
contextualization explain what john adams meant when he said that the revolution was in the minds of the people and this was effected from 1760 to 1775 in the course of fifteen years before a drop of blood was shed at lexington 5 2 53 5.
historical interpretation what were the political consequences of the revolution in religion during the mid 1700s.
historical interpretation what might explain the fact that seaport cities were important centers of revolutionary activity.
crafting an argument why in some ways is the term american revolutions more appropriate than american revolution.
the war for independence explain how political and military strategy support for the patriot cause and american alliances with france and spain led to an american victory in the war for independence.
review questions 8.
chronological reasoning how and why did colonial resentment of british policies move from protest and demonstration to war and the declaration of independence between 1774 and 1776.
contextualization what do the articles of confederation indicate about the political ideals and hopes and fears of the delegates to the second continental congress.
crafting an argument what factors do you think are most important in explaining the american victory in the revolutionary war.
148 partlll a new birth of freedom creating the united states of america 1754 1800 creating a nation having won independence the new united states faced many crises.
in an effort to resolve some of the tensions some of the nation s leaders proposed a new form of government and met in philadelphia over the long hot summer of 1787 to produce a new constitution.
1783 1788 in 1787 a philadelphia physician benjamin rush wrote the american war is over but this is far from the case with the american revolution.
on the contrary nothing but the first act of the great drama is closed for the generation that had lived through the 1760s and 1770s opportunities abounded to help shape the new nation they had created.
when congress adopted the official seal of the new nation found today on the back of every dollar bill they included the latin phrase novus ordo seclorum a new order of the ages thomas paine wrote we have it in our power to begin the world over again many in the new united states of america thought they could do just that.
the revolutionary leaders washington adams jefferson have become cardboard characters.
their words have been invoked too often their deeds too sanitized.
but if todays citizens are to make sense of the revolution and the creation of a new nation they need to see those leaders as real.
in addition people today need to realize that many other actors were also asserting their place in or in the case of american indians and loyalists on the margins of the new nation.
those known as the founding fathers were far from the only actors.
women who had lived through the revolution were far less willing to leave political or domestic decisions to men than their mothers and grandmothers had been.
poor farmers often felt objectives chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how the revolution affected diverse groups of people and how independence ultimately led to the adoption of a new form of government.
the state of the nation at war s end explain how the outcome of the american revolution affected different groups in the new united states.
creating a government writing the u s constitution explain the needs pressures and compromises that led to writing and adopting the constitution.
the revolutionary era 109 3 1 the french and indian war surprise attacks in the forests braddock s men moved slowly and noisily through the forests.
although warned of danger by washington and by indian scouts braddock pushed ahead.
as the british neared fort duquesne the french and their indian allies launched a surprise attack.
sharpshooters hid in the forest and picked off british soldiers whose bright red uniforms made easy targets.
braddock himself had five horses shot out from under him before he fell fatally wounded.
almost half the british were killed or wounded.
washington too was nearly killed.
british setbacks at lake ontario and lake george during the next two years the war continued to go badly for the british.
british attacks against several french forts failed.
meanwhile the french won important victories capturing fort oswego on lake ontario and fort william henry on lake george.
both forts occupied land that is now part of new york state.
all these defeats put a serious strain on the alliances with the iroquois who had been counting on the british to protect them from the french.
the iroquois faced the french and their indian allies had the advantage of familiarity with the forests of north america.
general braddocks forces were ambushed in the forests on their way to fort duquesne in 1755 increasing danger from enemy tribes who fought them for prisoners and goods.
m infntlfy supporting details why were french attacks in the forests successful.
1 quebec and new france fall in 1757 william pitt became prime minister meaning he was the new head of the british government.
pitt made it his first job to win the war in north america.
once that goal was achieved he argued the british would be free to focus on victory in other parts of the world.
so pitt sent britain s best generals to north america.
to encourage the colonists to support the war he promised large payments for military services and supplies.
under pitts leadership the tide of battle turned.
in 1758 major general jeffrey amherst captured louisbourg the most important fort in french canada.
that year the british also seized fort duquesne which they renamed fort pitt after the british leader.
the city of pittsburgh later grew up on the site of fort pitt.
the war turns in favor of the british the british enjoyed even greater success in 1759.
by summer they had pushed the french from fort niagara crown point and fort ticonderoga ty kahn duh roh guh.
next pitt sent general james wolfe to take quebec capital of new france.
climbing cliffs to attack quebec quebec was vital to the defense of new france.
without quebec the french could not supply their forts farther up the st lawrence river.
quebec was well defended though.
the city sat on the edge of the plains of abraham on top of a steep cliff high above the st lawrence.
an able french general the marquis de montcalm was prepared to fight off any british attack.
general wolfe devised a bold plan to capture quebec.
he knew that montcalm had only a few soldiers guarding the cliff because the french thought that it was too steep to climb.
late at night wolfe ordered british troops to row quietly in small boats to the foot of the cliff.
in the dark the soldiers swarmed ashore climbed up the cliff and assembled at the top.
the next morning montcalm awakened to a surprise.
a force of 4 000 british troops was drawn up and ready for battle on the plains of abraham.
quickly montcalm marched his own troops out to join in battle.
by the time the fierce fighting was over both montcalm and wolfe lay dead.
moments before l2 3 1 the french and indian war i north america in 1763 key i claimed by britain 1 claimed by spain n claimed by france i i claimed by russia 13 colonies territory boundary from the proclamation of 1763 how did the balance of european power in north america change between 1753 and 1763.
what role did spain play in the war and what effect did the treaty of paris have on new spain.
interactive chart wolfe died a soldier gave him the news that the british had won.
wolfe is said to have whispered now god be praised i will die in peace on september 18 1759 quebec surrendered to the british.
british make huge gains the fall of quebec sealed the fate of new france though fighting dragged on in europe for several more years.
finally in 1763 britain and france signed the treaty of paris bringing the long conflict to an end.
the treaty of paris marked the end of french power in north america.
by its terms britain gained canada and all french lands east of the mississippi river except new orleans.
france was allowed to keep only two islands in the gulf of st lawrence and its prosperous sugar growing islands in the west indies.
spain which had entered the war on the french side in 1762 gave up florida to britain.
in return spain received all french land west of the mississippi.
in addition spain gained the vital port city of new orleans.
spain retained control of its vast empire in central america and south america.
after years of fighting peace returned to north america.
yet in a few short years a new conflict would break out.
this time the struggle would pit britain against its own 13 colonies.
b identify supporting details how did pitt persuade more colonists to support the war.
assessment 1.
interpret why did the iroquois choose to side with the british.
make predications about george washington as a military leader based on what he did in the ohio river valley in 1754.
identify central issues what choices did general braddock make that endangered himself and his men.
draw conclusions based on the text how much of a priority do you think the french and indian war was to britain before william pitt became head of the british government.
summarize what the british gained in north america by defeating the french and signing the treaty of paris.
the revolutionary era the revolutionary era 113 3 1 the french and indian war by 1760 the british and their indian allies had driven france from the ohio valley.
their troubles in the region were not over however.
for many years fur traders had sent back glowing reports of the land beyond the appalachian mountains.
the dense forests of the ohio valley offered new resources that were in short supply in the east and with the french gone british colonists wanted to head west to claim the lands for themselves.
the british secure the frontier later that year pontiac led an attack on british troops at fort detroit.
a number of other indian nations joined him.
in a few short months they captured most british forts in the ohio country.
british and colonial troops then struck back and regained much of what they had lost.
pontiacs war as it came to be called did not last long.
in october 1763 the french told pontiac that they had signed the treaty of paris.
because the treaty marked the end of french power in north america the indians could no longer hope for french aid against the british.
one by one the indian nations stopped fighting and returned home.
b identify supporting details what arguments did pontiac have against the british.
i i i i tensions with britain objectives describe conflicts in the west after the french and indian war.
explain how britain attempted to ease tensions with the proclamation of 1763.
explain why colonists opposed new british taxes such as the stamp act.
describe new colonial leaders who emerged as conflicts with britain escalated.
summarize the significance of the boston massacre.
key terms pontiacs war proclamation of 1763 stamp act petition boycott repeal townshend acts writ of assistance boston massacre committee of correspondence abigail adams samuel adams mercy otis warren orispus attucks patrick henry john adams king george iii free enterprise system conflict over land conflicts in the ohio valley many native american nations lived in the ohio valley.
they included the senecas delawares shawnees ottawas miamis and hurons.
as british settlers moved into the valley they often clashed with these native americans.
in 1760 the british made lord jeffrey amherst military commander and governor general of its north american colonies.
the british sent amherst to the frontier to keep order.
french traders had always treated native americans as friends holding feasts for them and giving them presents.
amherst refused to do this.
instead he raised the price of goods traded to indians.
also unlike the french amherst allowed settlers to build farms and forts on indian lands.
angry native americans found a leader in pontiac an ottawa chief who had fought on the french side during the french and indian war.
l an english trader remarked that pontiac commands more respect amongst these nations than any indian i ever saw in april 1763 pontiac spoke out against the british calling them dogs dressed in red who have come to rob us of our hunting grounds and drive away the game pontiac led violent raids against british forts.
hundreds of british were tortured and killed leading some officials to fear for the safety of colonists near native american land.
causes of the american revolution the proclamation of 1763 pontiacs violent raids against british troops convinced officials that they should prevent british subjects from settling beyond the western frontier for their own safety.
to do this the government issued the proclamation of 1763.
the proclamation drew an imaginary line along the crest of the appalachian mountains.
colonists were forbidden to settle west of the line.
all settlers already west of the line were to remove themselves at once.
the purposes of the proclamation the proclamation was meant to protect indians in the western lands.
to enforce it britain sent 10 000 troops to the colonies.
few troops went to the frontier however.
most stayed in cities along the atlantic coast.
the proclamation also created four new places where colonists could settle.
french canada became part of the province of quebec.
florida once a spanish colony was divided into east and west florida.
british territories in the caribbean became the province of granada.
colonists disagree with the proclamation the proclamation angered many colonists.
they thought it was unnecessary and unjust.
they did not think the british government had the power to restrict state settlements.
nor were they concerned with the rights of native americans.
after winning the french and recess your digital lesson.
indian war many colonists felt they had rights to the land.
also colonists now had to pay for the additional british troops that had been sent to enforce the proclamation.
in the end many settlers simply ignored the proclamation and moved west anyway.
the proclamation remained most controversial in the west where colonists clashed with native americans.
some colonies including new york pennsylvania and virginia claimed lands in the west.
the proclamation would continue to cause problems up to the american revolution from the tension it caused between the colonists and britain.
one colonist who defied the proclamation of 1763 was daniel boone.
in 1767 boone visited kentucky west of the appalachians.
in 1769 he began what became a two year journey of exploration through kentucky.
he traveled as far as the falls of the ohio the site of the present day city of louisville.
later he led settlers through the cumberland gap along an old indian path.
during his travels boone fought a number of battles against the indians and was taken captive for a short period.
check understanding what was the reasoning behind the proclamation of 1763.
in april 1763 chief pontiac of the ottawa addressed a gathering of native americans to rally them against the british.
soon after pontiac led an attack on british troops at fort detroit.
interactive chart 114 the revolutionary era 115 3 2 tensions with britain causes of the american revolution mercantilism and taxation the seven years war which included the french and indian war plunged britain deeply into debt.
as a result the taxes paid by citizens in britain rose sharply.
the british prime minister george grenville decided that colonists in north america should help share the burden.
in a mercantilist system colonies were expected to serve the colonial power.
grenville reasoned that the colonists would not oppose small tax increases.
the colonists however strongly resented these taxes.
they argued that mercantilism was unfair because it limited trade and made goods more expensive.
many colonists also objected that the power to raise these new taxes was not granted by the english constitution.
grenvilles policy led to the political and economic conflicts that would divide the colonies and england.
the sugar act taxes the colonies in 1764 grenville asked parliament to approve the sugar act which put a new tax on molasses.
the sugar act replaced an earlier tax which had been so high that any merchant who paid it would have been driven out of business.
as a british prime minister george grenville wanted colonists to help share the burden of debt that britain had incurred from the seven years war.
result most colonial merchants simply avoided the tax by smuggling molasses into the colonies.
often they bribed tax collectors to look the other way.
the sugar act of 1764 lowered the tax.
at the same time the law made it easier for british officials to bring colonial smugglers to trial.
grenville made it clear that he expected the new tax to be paid.
b identify what arguments did the colonists have against more british taxes.
causes of the american revolution the stamp act grenville also persuaded parliament to pass the stamp act of 1765.
the act placed new duties taxes on legal documents such as wills diplomas and marriage papers.
it also taxed newspapers almanacs playing cards and even dice.
all items named in the law had to carry a stamp showing that the tax had been paid.
stamp taxes were used in britain and other countries to raise money.
however britain had never required american colonists to pay such a tax.
resistance to the stamp act when british officials tried to enforce the stamp act they met with stormy protests from colonists.
lieutenant governor hutchinsons house in massachusetts was looted by a mob.
he was not the only official to feel the mobs anger.
some colonists threw rocks at agents trying to collect the unpopular tax.
in addition to riots in boston other disturbances broke out in new york city newport and charleston.
in new york city rioters destroyed the home of a british official who had said he would cram the stamps down american throats at the point of his sword.
the fury of the colonists shocked the british.
after all britain had spent a great deal of money to protect the colonies against the french.
the british at home were paying much higher taxes than the colonists.
why british officials asked were colonists so angry about the stamp act.
as one english letter writer commented our colonies must be the biggest beggars in the world if such small duties appear to be intolerable burdens in their eyes.
pacificus maryland gazette march 20 1766 3 2 tensions with britain the revolutionary era h6 lack of representation in parliament colonists replied that the stamp act taxes were unjust and unnecessary.
no taxation without representation they cried.
that principle was rooted in english traditions dating back to the magna carta.
colonists insisted that only they or their elected representatives had the right to pass taxes.
since the colonists did not elect representatives to parliament parliament had no right to tax them.
the colonists were willing to pay taxes but only if the taxes were passed by their own colonial legislatures.
they also felt that mercantilist policies like the navigation acts were unfair because they restricted their trade which negatively affected colonists income.
peaceful protests lead toward revolution the stamp act crisis united colonists from new hampshire to georgia.
critics of the law called for delegates from every colony to meet in new york city.
there a congress would form to consider actions against the hated stamp act.
in october 1765 nine colonies sent delegates to what became known as the stamp act congress.
the delegates drew up petitions to king george iii and to parliament.
a petition is a formal written request to someone in authority signed by a group of people.
in these petitions the delegates rejected the stamp act and asserted that parliament had no right to tax the colonies.
parliament paid little attention.
the colonists took other steps to change the law.
they joined together to boycott british goods.
to boycott means to refuse to buy certain goods and services.
the boycott of british goods took its toll.
trade fell off by 14 percent.
british merchants complained that they were facing ruin.
so too did british workers who made goods for the colonies.
the colonists wanted the government to have less of a say over businesses and trade.
they wanted a free enterprise system in which the market rather than the government determines what goods and services cost.
british taxes the colonists argued unfairly restricted economic growth.
finally in 1766 parliament repealed or canceled the stamp act.
at the same time however it passed a law asserting that parliament had the right to raise taxes in all cases whatsoever btrace what events led to the repeal of the stamp act in 1766.
though tarring and feathering was practiced in britain as a form of punishment tax collectors escaped this fate in the colonies.
however colonists imagined punishing tax collectors in this way as a protest of the stamp act.
rioters in boston protest against the stamp act.
infer what does the sign being carried through the street imply about the impact the stamp act might have on the colonies relationship with britain.
the revolutionary era 117 3 2 tensions with britain causes of the american revolution townshend acts in may 1767 parliament reopened the debate over taxing the colonies.
in a fierce exchange george grenville now a member of parliament clashed with charles townshend the official in charge of the british treasury.
you are cowards you are afraid of the americans you dare not tax america grenville shouted.
cowards townshend snapped back.
i dare tax america the next month parliament passed the townshend acts which taxed goods such as glass paper paint lead and tea.
the taxes were low but colonists still objected.
the principle was the same parliament did not have the right to tax them without their consent.
searches without reason cause unrest the townshend acts also set up new ways to collect taxes.
customs officials were sent to american ports with orders to stop smuggling.
using legal documents known as writs of assistance the officers would the townshend acts are named after charles townshend the british statesman who passed measures through parliament to tax colonists for goods jjch as glass paper paint and tea.
be allowed to inspect a ships cargo without giving a reason.
colonists protested that the writs of assistance violated their rights as british citizens.
under british law a government official could not search a persons property without a good reason for suspecting that the person had committed a crime.
yet the writs of assistance allowed persons and their property to be searched and even seized without reason in the colonies.
colonists angrily cited the words of james otis of massachusetts.
arguing against a british attempt to impose writs of assistance six years earlier he had said now one of the most essential branches of english liberty is the freedom of ones house.
a mans house is his castle and while he is quiet he is as well guarded as a prince in his castle.
this writ if it should be declared legal would totally destroy this privilege.
customhouse officers may enter our houses when they please.
break locks bars and everything in their way.
james otis febiuaiy 24 1761 colonists rebel against british economic policies colonists responded swiftly and strongly to the townshend acts.
from north to south colonial merchants and planters signed agreements promising to stop importing goods taxed by the townshend acts.
the colonists hoped that the new boycott would win repeal of the townshend acts.
to protest british policies some angry colonists formed the sons of liberty.
from boston to charleston sons of liberty staged mock hangings of cloth or straw effigies or likenesses dressed as british officials.
the hangings were meant to show tax collectors what might happen to them if they tried to collect the unpopular taxes.
some women joined the daughters of liberty.
they paraded signed petitions and organized a boycott of fine british cloth.
they urged colonial women to raise more sheep prepare more wool and spin and weave their own cloth.
a slogan of the daughters of liberty declared it is better to wear a homespun coat than to lose our liberty some sons and daughters of liberty also used other methods to support their cause.
they visited merchants and urged them to boycott british imports.
a few even threatened people who continued to buy british goods.
b describe how did many colonists respond to the townshend acts.
significant individuals provide colonial leadership as the struggle over taxes continued new leaders emerged in all the colonies.
men and women in new england and virginia were especially active in the colonial cause.
massachusetts citizens fight for their beliefs samuel adams of boston stood firmly against britain.
sam adams seemed an unlikely leader.
he was a failure in business and a poor public speaker.
often he wore a red suit and a cheap gray wig for which people poked fun at him.
still adams loved politics.
he always attended boston town meetings and sons of liberty rallies.
adamss real talent was organizing people.
he worked behind the scenes arranging protests and stirrrng public support.
sam s cousin john was another important massachusetts leader.
john adams had been a schoolteacher before becoming a skilled lawyer.
adams longed for fame and could often be difficult.
still he was more cautious than his cousin sam.
he weighed evidence carefully before taking any actions.
his knowledge of british law earned him much respect.
mercy otis warren also aided the colonial cause.
warren wrote plays that made fun of british officials.
the plays were published in newspapers and widely read in the colonies.
warren formed a close friendship with abigail adams the wife of john adams.
the two women used their pens to spur the colonists to action.
they also called for greater rights for women in the colonies.
virginians join the cause virginia contributed many leaders to the struggle against taxes.
in the house of burgesses george washington joined other virginians to protest the townshend acts.
a young lawyer patrick henry became well known as a vocal critic of british policies.
his speeches in the house of burgesses moved listeners to both tears and anger.
once henry attacked britain with such fury that some listeners cried out treason henry boldly replied if this be treason make the most of it.
henry s mercy otis warrens popular plays making fun of british officials motivated colonists to take action against britain.
interactive gallery words moved a young listener thomas jefferson.
at the time jefferson was a 22 year old law student.
identify how did some colonists show leadership.
the boston massacre port cities such as boston and new york were centers of protest.
in new york a dispute arose over the quartering act.
under that law colonists had to provide housing candles bedding and beverages to soldiers stationed in the colonies.
the colonists did not want to house the soldiers.
many including sam adams did not think the soldiers should be stationed in the colonies at all during peacetime.
when the new york assembly refused to obey the quartering act britain dismissed the assembly in 1767.
britain also sent two regiments to boston to protect customs officers from local citizens.
to many bostonians the soldiers were a daily reminder that britain was trying to bully them into paying unjust taxes.
when british soldiers walked along the streets of boston they risked insults or even beatings.
a serious clash was not long in coming.
i the revolutionary era 118 3 2 tensions with britain the revolutionary era 119 3 2 tensions with britain a crowd challenges british soldiers on the night of march 5 1770 a crowd gathered outside the boston customs house.
colonists shouted insults at the lobsterbacks as they called the red coated british who guarded the building.
then the boston crowd began to throw snowballs oyster shells and chunks of ice at the soldiers.
the crowd grew larger and rowdier.
suddenly the soldiers panicked.
they fired into the crowd.
when the smoke from the musket volley cleared five people lay dead or dying.
among the first to die were samuel maverick a 17 year old white youth and crispus attucks a free black sailor.
colonists were quick to protest the incident which they called the boston massacre.
a boston silversmith named paul revere fanned anti british feeling with an engraving that showed british soldiers firing on unarmed colonists.
sam adams wrote letters to other colonists to build outrage about the shooting.
the soldiers were arrested and tried in court.
john adams agreed to defend them saying that they deserved a fair trial.
he wanted to show the world that the colonists believed in justice even if the british government did not.
at the trial adams argued that the crowd had provoked the soldiers.
his arguments convinced the jury.
in the end the heaviest punishment any soldier received was a branding on the hand.
samuel adams later expanded on the idea of a letter writing campaign by forming a committee of correspondence.
members of the committee regularly wrote letters and pamphlets reporting to other colonies on events in massachusetts.
within three months there were 80 committees organized in massachusetts.
before long committees of correspondence became a major tool of protest in every colony.
the king repeals most colonial taxes by chance on the very day of the boston massacre a bill was introduced into parliament to repeal most of the townshend acts.
british merchants harmed by the american boycott of british goods had again pressured parliament to end the taxes.
the quartering act was repealed and most of the taxes that had angered the americans were ended.
however king george iii asked parliament to retain the tax on tea.
there must always be one tax to keep up the right to tax he argued.
parliament agreed.
news of the repeal delighted the colonists.
most people dismissed the remaining tax on tea as unimportant and ended their boycott of british goods.
for a few years calm returned.
yet the basic issue britains power to tax the colonies remained unsettled.
the debate over taxes had forced the conflict0 1765 1765 of 1763 restricted the movement of colonists west taxed all printed paper legal documents newspapers even playing cards tax collectors were attacked and colonists staged violent protests.
act repealed in 1766.
forced colonists to house bntish soldiers and provide them food drink other supplies.
families were forced to leave their homes.
colonial expansion ends.
colonist support for british soldiers turned to resentment.
act expired in 1767.
g 1764 g 1773 allowed british merchants to bypass colonial merchants and sell lower priced tea directly to colonists.
1767 reduced molasses tax and prosecuted smugglers colonists resented the tax and it was repealed in 1766.
colonists dumped tea into boston harbor in protest.
tea new taxes and british soldiers could search property to look for smuggled goods boycotts and protests acts repealed in 1770 o analyze charts in what way does the chart show a rising tide that would eventually lead to a conflict.
the revolutionary era 120 3 2 tensions with britain colonists to begin thinking more carefully about their political rights.
b check understanding why did john adams choose to defend the british soldiers.
assessment 1.
contrast the way the french had treated native americans in the ohio valley with the way the british did under jeffrey amherst.
cite evidence that shows daniel boone ignored the proclamation of 1763.
identify central issues what details about the colonial response to the stamp act tell you that it was a cause of the american revolution.
infer based on james otiss response to british writs of assistance what concerns did the colonists have about british searches.
interpret how did the boston massacre influence the colonists feelings towards britain.
jnhappyboston fee thy sens deplore rwhaftwawks wmeard with pdmef ow vtole fatthlefsp n and his fava gebands tflth nunthwu oxauc our ftretch lheirbl mx hancl5 rbe like time barbarians ghsmins oertheirfhey approve the carnage and enjoy the day iffpnechlefisorrow wring for a tongue ot ifawwpingwortdean ought appeals the plaintive ohoftr of victims foch esthete tt patriots copwttrieare for eschar food asloricustribute which embalm the dead ftrjpithemur jvrofw soul i should wnac t the foandal of the land.
snetthlherelentugvidein from her hand.
keen exeetatwnaon this rate inftrlfad.
shas reach aju doe who ntvtr canhehriisi.
this engraving of the boston massacre by paul revere helped spread anti british feeling among colonists.
the revolutionary era 121 3 2 tensions with britain on december 16 1773 a group of colonists emptied hundreds of tea chests into boston harbor to protest british taxation.
why might this act of civil disobedience mark a turning point.
f bjsm interactive flipped video the calm between the colonies and england did not last long.
economic and political disputes continued this time over a simple drink.
tea was tremendously popular in the colonies.
by 1770 at least one million americans brewed tea twice a day.
people would rather go without their dinners than without a dish of tea a visitor to the colonies noted.
1 a 4 a 4 b 4 c 10 a 20 c taking up arms objectives explain how a dispute over tea led to further tension between the colonists and great britain.
describe ways that the british parliament punished the colonists for the boston tea party.
explain how fighting broke out in massachusetts including battles in lexington and concord and bunker hill.
explain actions the first and second continental congress enacted to address the crisis with britain.
key terms olive branch petition green mountain boys continental army patriot loyalist battle of bunker hill blockade mercenary tea act thomas jefferson boston tea party civil disobedience intolerable acts quebec act first continental congress militia minutemen battles of lexington and concord the boston tea party mercantilist policies lead to the tea act since the 1720s parliament had given the british east india company exclusive rights to sell tea to the american colonies.
parliament protected this by mandating that tea sold to the colonies had to be shipped to england first so taxes could be paid.
then the tea was shipped to colonial tea merchants for sale in the american colonies.
this system met resistance due to the taxation of tea in the american colonies.
remember to maintain its authority over the colonies parliament had kept a tax on tea when repealing the townshend acts.
the tax was a small one but colonists resented it.
as a result many colonists refused to buy british tea.
also the colonists were able to get cheaper tea directly from dutch and french traders who smuggled it to american merchants.
in the 1770s the british east india company found itself in deep financial trouble due in part to dwindling tea sales in the american colonies.
as a result more than 15 million pounds of tea sat unsold in british warehouses.
parliament tried to help the british east india company by passing the tea act of 1773.
the act let the company bypass colonial tea merchants and sell directly to colonists.
the tea act also gave the british e ast india company a rebate on tea taxes.
although colonists would still have to pay the tea tax they would not have to pay the higher price charged by colonial tea merchants.
as a result the tea itself would cost less than ever before.
parliament hoped this would encourage americans to buy more british tea.
to the surprise of parliament colonists protested the tea act.
many colonists were opposed to british mercantilist policies that were supposed to generate wealth for england by taxing the colonies.
however american tea merchants were especially angry because they had been cut out of the tea trade.
they believed that allowing the government sponsored british east india company to sell tea to americans violated their right to conduct free enterprise.
even tea drinkers who would have benefited from the law scorned the tea act.
they believed that it was a british trick to make them accept parliaments right to tax the colonies.
a boycott against tea once again colonists responded to the new law with a boycott.
a philadelphia poet hannah griffitts urged american women to stand firmly resolved and bid grenville to see that rather than freedom we part with our tea and well as we love the dear drink when a dry as american patriots our taste we deny.
hannah griffitts in milcah martha moores daughters of liberty and women like griffitts led the boycott.
they served coffee or made liberty tea from raspberry leaves.
at some ports sons of liberty enforced the boycott by keeping the british east india company from unloading cargoes of tea.
an act of civil disobedience three ships loaded with tea reached boston harbor in late november 1773.
the colonial governor of massachusetts thomas hutchinson insisted that they unload their cargo as usual.
sam adams and the sons of liberty had other plans.
on the night of december 16 they met in old south meeting house.
they sent a message to the governor demanding that the ships leave the harbor.
when the governor rejected the demand adams stood up and declared this meeting can do nothing further to save the country pearson 1 realize access your digital lesson.
adamss words seemed to be a signal.
as if on cue a group of men in indian disguises burst into the meetinghouse.
from the gallery above voices cried boston harbor a teapot tonight.
the mohawks are come the disguised colonists left the meetinghouse and headed for the harbor.
others joined them along the way.
under a nearly full moon the men boarded the ships split open the tea chests and dumped the tea into the harbor.
by 10 p m the boston tea party as it was later called was over.
the contents of 342 chests of tea floated in boston harbor.
the next day john adams wrote about the event in his diary.
this destruction of the tea is so bold so daring so firm it must have such important and lasting results that i cant help considering it a turning point in history.
diary of john adams december 17 1773 the boston tea party was an important act of civil disobedience.
civil disobedience is the nonviolent refusal to obey laws that one considers unjust.
the colonists had many reasons for this act of civil the robinson tea chest is one of two known surviving tea chests from the boston tea party.
122 the revolutionary era 123 3 3 taking up arms disobedience.
they wanted to voice their discontent to the british without hurting anyone.
they also wanted to stop the tea from entering boston.
the impact of their civil disobedience was perhaps greater than they had expected.
harsh punishment would come from britain.
identify why were many colonists dissatisfied with the tea act.
king george iii strikes back at boston colonists had mixed reactions to the boston tea party.
some cheered it as a firm protest against unfair british laws.
others worried that it would encourage lawlessness in the colonies.
even those who condemned the boston tea party though were shocked at britains harsh response to it.
the unrest in boston and the british reaction to the tea party would be yet another cause of the revolution.
the intolerable acts anger massachusetts the british were outraged by what they saw as bostons following the boston tea party british warships closed the port of boston.
parliament demanded that colonists repay the damages from the loss of tea before they would reopen the port.
lawless behavior.
in 1774 parliament encouraged by king george iii acted to punish massachusetts.
colonists called the four laws they passed the intolerable acts because they were so harsh.
these acts pushed the colonists closer to revolution.
first parliament shut down the port of boston.
no ship could enter or leave the harbor not even a small boat.
the harbor would remain closed until the colonists paid for the tea they had destroyed in the boston tea party and repaid british officials such as thomas hutchinson for damage to personal property.
bostons harbor was central to the life of the city.
with the closing of the port merchants could not sell their goods and the colonys economy suffered.
second parliament forbade massachusetts colonists to hold town meetings more than once a year without the governors permission.
in the past colonists had called town meetings whenever they wished.
public officials would now be selected by the king s governor rather than be elected by citizens.
third parliament allowed customs officers and other officials who might be charged with major crimes to be tried in britain or canada instead of in massachusetts.
colonists protested.
they argued that a dishonest official could break the law in the colonies and avoid punishment by being tried before a sympathetic jury.
fourth parliament passed a new quartering act.
no longer would redcoats camp in tents on boston common.
instead colonists would have to house british soldiers in their homes when no other housing was available.
colonists viewed this act as yet another tax because they had to house and feed the soldiers.
many objected to having the british army stationed in the colonies at all.
the quebec act redraws north american borders about the same time parliament also passed the quebec act.
it set up a government for canada and gave complete religious freedom to french catholics.
the quebec act also extended the borders of quebec to include the land between the ohio and missouri rivers.
the act pleased french canadians.
the american colonists were angry however because some of the colonies claimed ownership of these lands.
the intolerable acts draw other colonies into the struggle the committees of correspondence spread news of the intolerable acts to other colonies.
they warned that the people of boston faced hunger while their port was closed.
people from other colonies responded quickly.
carts rolled into the city with rice from south carolina corn from virginia and flour from pennsylvania.
the revolutionary era 124 3 3 taking up arms in the virginia assembly thomas jefferson suggested that a day be set aside to mark the shame of the intolerable acts.
the royal governor of virginia rejected the idea.
the colonists went ahead anyway.
on june 1 1774 church bells tolled slowly.
merchants closed their shops.
many colonists prayed and fasted all day.
in september 1774 colonial leaders called a meeting in philadelphia.
delegates from 12 colonies gathered in what became known as the first continental congress.
only georgia did not send delegates.
after much debate the delegates passed a resolution backing massachusetts in its struggle.
they agreed to boycott all british goods and to stop exporting goods to britain until the intolerable acts were repealed.
the delegates also urged each colony to set up and train its own militia mih lish uh.
a militia is an army of citizens who serve as soldiers during an emergency.
before leaving philadelphia the delegates agreed to meet again in may 1775.
little did they suspect that before then an incident in massachusetts would change the fate of the colonies forever.
b identify main ideas how did other colonies respond to the intolerable acts.
eight colonists were killed in the skirmish between the minutemen and british soldiers at lexington massachusetts in 1775.
interactive chart the battles of lexington and concord in massachusetts colonists were already preparing to resist.
newspapers called on citizens to prevent what they called the massacre of american liberty volunteers known as minutemen trained regularly.
minutemen got their name because they kept their muskets at hand and were prepared to fight at a minutes notice.
in towns near boston minutemen collected weapons and gunpowder.
meanwhile britain built up its forces.
more troops arrived in boston bringing the total number of british soldiers in that city to 4 000.
early in 1775 general thomas gage the british commander sent scouts to towns near boston.
they reported that minutemen had a large store of arms in concord a village about 18 miles from boston.
gage planned a surprise march to concord to seize the arms.
the redcoats cross the charles river on april 18 about 700 british troops quietly left boston in the darkness.
their goal was to seize the colonial arms.
the sons of liberty were watching.
as soon as the british set out the americans hung two lamps from the old north church in boston.
this signal meant that the redcoats were crossing the charles river.
the british had decided to cross the river rather than take a much longer route toward concord by land.
colonists who were waiting across the charles river saw the signal.
messengers mounted their horses and galloped through the night toward concord.
one midnight rider was paul revere.
the redcoats are coming.
the redcoats are coming shouted revere as he passed through each sleepy village along the way.
fighting in lexington and concord at daybreak on april 19 the redcoats reached lexington a town near concord.
on the village green some 70 minutemen were waiting commanded by captain john parker.
the british ordered the minutemen to go home.
outnumbered the colonists began to leave.
suddenly a shot rang out through the chill morning air.
no one knows who fired it.
in the brief struggle that followed eight colonists were killed.
the british pushed on to concord.
finding no arms in the village they turned back to boston.
on a bridge outside concord they met approximately 300 minutemen.
again fighting broke out.
this time the british were forced to retreat because the minutemen used the geography of the region to their advantage.
as the redcoats withdrew colonial sharpshooters took deadly aim at them from the woods and fields and then took cover there making it difficult for the british the revolutionary era 125 3 3 taking up arms soldiers to fire back.
local women also fired at the british from the windows of their homes.
by the time they reached boston the redcoats had lost 73 men.
another 200 british soldiers were wounded or missing.
news of the battles of lexington and concord spread swiftly.
to many colonists the fighting ended all hope of a peaceful settlement.
only war would decide the future of the 13 colonies.
more than 60 years after the battles of lexington and concord a well known new england writer ralph waldo emerson wrote a poem honoring the minutemen.
emersons concord hymn created a vivid picture of the clash at concord.
it begins by the rude bridge that arched the flood their flag to aprils breeze unfurled here once the embattled farmers stood and fired the shot heard round the world.
ralph waldo emerson concord hymn 1837 the embattled farmers would have years of difficult fighting in front of them.
lexington and concord marked the beginning of the revolutionary war.
the war and disagreements between the american colonists and the british prior to the war represent the era called the american revolution the period of struggle to achieve independence from britain.
q check understanding how were the minutemen able to beat the british at concord.
the fighting continues just a few weeks after the battles at lexington and concord on may 10 1775 colonial delegates met at the second continental congress in philadelphia.
the delegates represented the 13 british colonies from new hampshire to georgia.
most of the delegates still hoped to avoid a final break with britain.
however while they were meeting the fighting spread.
king george iii rejects peace after much debate the delegates sent a petition to king george.
in the olive branch petition they declared their loyalty to the king and asked him to repeal the intolerable acts.
george iii was furious when he heard about the petition.
the colonists he raged were trying to begin a war for the purpose of establishing an independent empire the king vowed to bring the rebels to justice.
he ordered 20 000 more troops to the colonies to crush the revolt.
congress did not learn of the kings response until months later.
but even before the petition was sent first battles of the revolution key paul revere s route william dawes s route samuel prescott s ride to concord path of advancing british troops path of militia path of british retreat battle of concord battle of lexington battle during british retreat from concord n analyze maps why were colonial minutemen so prepared for the arrival of the redcoats near concord.
the revolutionary era 126 3 3 taking up arms leaders like john and sam adams were convinced that war could not be avoided.
vermont rebels gain a route to canada ethan allen a vermont blacksmith did not wait for congress to act.
allen decided to lead a band of vermonters known as the green mountain boys in a surprise attack on fort ticonderoga located at the southern tip of lake champlain.
allen knew that the fort held cannons that the colonists could use and its strategic location would help colonists control the region.
in early may the green mountain boys crept quietly through the morning mists to fort ticonderoga.
they quickly overpowered the guard on duty and entered the fort.
allen rushed to the room where the british commander slept.
come out you old rat he shouted.
the commander demanded to know by whose authority allen acted.
in the name of the great jehovah and the continental congress allen replied.
the british commander surrendered ticonderoga.
with the fort the green mountain boys won a valuable supply of cannons and gunpowder.
allens success also gave americans control of a key route into canada.
george washington takes command in the meantime the second continental congress had to decide what to do about the makeshift army gathering around boston.
in june delegates took the bold step of setting up the continental army.
they appointed george washington of virginia as commander.
washington knew that he would be fighting against one of the worlds toughest armies.
still he was willing to do his best.
he set off at once to take charge of the forces around boston.
fel identify supporting details why was fort ticonderoga important to the colonists.
opposing sides at war the colonists who favored war against britain called themselves patriots.
they thought british rule was harsh and unjust.
about one third of the colonists were patriots one third sided with the british and one third did not take sides.
washington leads the patriots the patriots entered the war with many disadvantages.
colonial forces were poorly organized and untrained.
they had few cannons little gunpowder and no navy.
also few colonists were willing to enlist in the continental army for long terms of service.
they preferred to fight near home as part of o local militia.
the second continental congress met in the summer of 1775 to discuss how to respond to the british aggression at lexington and concord and the failure to rescind the intolerable acts.
ethan allen and the green mountain boys from vermont stormed fort ticonderoga forcing the british commander there to surrender.
the revolutionary era 127 3 3 taking up arms yet the patriots also had advantages.
many patriots owned rifles and were good shots.
their leader george washington had experience and developed into an able commander.
furthermore patriots were determined to fight to defend their homes and property.
reuben stebbins of massachusetts was typical of many patriotic farmers.
when the british approached he rode off to battle.
we ll see whos going town this farm he cried.
british advantages and disadvantages the british were a powerful foe.
they had highly trained experienced troops.
their navy was the best in the world.
in addition many colonists supported the british.
still britain faced problems.
its armies were 3 000 miles from home.
news and supplies took months to travel from britain to north america.
also british soldiers risked attacks by colonists once they marched out of the cities into the countryside.
loyalists favor the king american colonists who remained loyal to britain were known as loyalists.
they included wealthy merchants and former officials of the royal government.
however some farmers and crafts workers were also loyalists.
there were more the battle of bunker hill was the first major conflict of the american revolution.
the british won the battle but suffered many more casualties than the americans.
loyalists in the middle colonies and the south than in new england.
loyalists faced hard times during the war.
patriots tarred and feathered people known to favor the british.
many loyalists fled to england or canada.
others found shelter in cities controlled by the british.
those who fled lost their homes stores and farms.
b identify what positions did colonists take in regards to the war as it began.
the war comes to boston during the first year of conflict much of the fighting centered around boston.
about 6 000 british troops were stationed there.
colonial militia surrounded the city and prevented the british from marching out.
war breaks out near boston harbor even before washington reached boston the patriots took action.
on june 16 1775 colonel william prescott led 1 200 minutemen up bunker hill across the charles river from boston.
from there they could fire on british ships in boston harbor.
prescott however noticed that nearby breeds hill was an even better place to use the local geography to his advantage.
a hilltop would be easier to defend so he ordered his men to move there.
at sunrise the british general william howe spotted the americans.
he ferried about 2 400 redcoats across the river to attack the rebels position.
as the british approached the patriots held their fire.
when the americans finally fired the british were forced to retreat.
a second british attack was also turned back.
on the third try the british pushed over the top.
they took both bunker hill and breeds hill but they paid a high price for their victory.
more than 1 000 redcoats lay dead or wounded.
american losses numbered only about 400.
the battle of bunker hill was the first major battle of the revolution.
it proved that the americans could fight bravely.
it also showed that the british would not be easy to defeat.
furthermore it hinted that one effect of the revolution would be continued bloodshed from a long and bitter war.
washington forces the british out of boston when washington reached boston a few weeks after the battle of bunker hill he found about 16 000 troops camped in huts and tents around the city.
general washington quickly began to turn raw recruits into a trained army.
his job was especially difficult because soldiers from different colonies mistrusted one another.
connecticut wants no the revolutionary era 128 3 3 taking up arms massachusetts men in her corps he wrote.
and massachusetts thinks there is no necessity for a rhode islander to be introduced into her ranks however washington won the loyalty of his troops.
they in turn learned to take orders and work together.
in january 1776 washington had a stroke of good fortune.
the cannons that the green mountain boys had captured at fort ticonderoga arrived in boston.
soldiers had dragged them across the mountains from fort ticonderoga.
washington had the cannons placed in a strategic location on dorchester heights overlooking the harbor.
once general howe saw the american cannons in place he knew that he could not hold boston.
in march 1776 he and his troops sailed from boston to halifax canada.
about 1 000 american loyalists went with them.
although the british left new england they did not give up.
king george iii ordered a blockade of all colonial ports.
a blockade is the shutting of a port to keep people or supplies from moving in or out.
the king also used mercenaries or troops for hire from germany to help fight the colonists.
b check understanding how did the colonists use the physical geography of the region to their advantage.
soldiers transported the cannons captured at fort ticonderoga to boston in order to force the british to leave new england.
assessment 3.
infer why ralph waldo emerson called the first shot fired in lexington the shot heard round the world 1.
summarize why did the colonists choose to throw british tea in boston harbor.
make predications what would forming militias allow the colonies to do.
analyze information why do you think approximately one third of the colonists were loyalists during the war.
summarize the importance of the battle of bunker hill.
the revolutionary era 129 3 3 taking up arms by 1776 many colonists had come to believe that parliament did not have the right to make laws for the 13 colonies.
after all they argued the colonists had their own elected legislatures.
some thought it was time for the colonies to become independent from britain.
at the same time however most colonists still felt a bond of loyalty to britain.
they especially felt that they owed allegiance to the king.
i i 1 a 1 c 4 b 4 c 15 c 19 a objectives describe the impact of thomas paines pamphlet common sense.
explain the steps congress took to declare independence.
summarize the main ideas of the declaration of independence.
key terms traitor declaration of independence preamble natural rights unalienable rights richard henry lee robert livingston roger sherman common sense thomas paine benjamin franklin access your digital lesson.
declaring independence thomas paine s common sense thomas paine was a british writer and editor who moved to philadelphia in 1774.
after lexington and concord paine wrote the pamphlet common sense in which he set out to change the colonists attitudes toward britain and the king.
colonists he said did not owe loyalty to george iii or any other monarch.
the very idea of having kings and queens was wrong he said.
in england a king hath little more to do than to make war and give away jobs which in plain terms is to impoverish the nation.
of more worth is one honest man to society and in the sight of god than all the crowned ruffians that ever lived.
thomas paine common sonoe 1776 the colonists did not owe anything to britain either paine went on.
if the british had helped the colonists they had done so for their own profit.
it could only hurt the colonists to remain under british 130 rule.
everything that is right or reasonable pleads for separation he concluded.
tis time to part common sense was a great success selling over 500 000 copies in six months.
paines writing played an important role in moving toward revolution.
identify central ideas what was the central idea of common sense.
choosing independence common sense caused many colonial leaders to move toward declaring independence from britain.
it also deeply impressed many members of the continental congress.
richard henry lee of virginia wrote to washington i am now convinced of the necessity for separation.
in june 1776 lee rose to his feet in congress to introduce a resolution in favor of independence resolved that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states that they are absolved from all allegiance to the british crown and that all political connection between them and the state of great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved.
richard henry lee resolution at the second continental congress june 7 1776 drafting the declaration of independence the delegates faced a difficult decision.
there could be no turning back once they declared independence.
if they fell into british hands they would be hanged as traitors.
a traitor is a person who betrays his or her country.
after long debate the congress took a fateful step.
they appointed a committee to draft a formal declaration of independence.
the committee included john adams benjamin franklin thomas jefferson robert livingston and roger sherman.
their job was to tell the world why the colonies were breaking away from britain.
the committee asked thomas jefferson to write the document.
jefferson was one of the youngest delegates.
he was a quiet man who spoke little at formal meetings.
among friends however he liked to sprawl in a chair with his long legs stretched out and talk for hours.
thomas paines criticism of british rule in common sense prompted many colonists to consider the option of declaring full independence from britain.
interactive gallery ofocttwrtea the declaration of independence signed by the delegates to the second continental congress served notice to king george iii that the 13 colonies had separated from great britain.
interactive gallery the revolutionary era 131 3 4 declaring independence his ability to write clearly and gracefully had earned him great respect.
adopting the declaration of independence in late june jefferson completed the declaration and it was read to the congress.
on july 2 the continental congress voted that the 13 colonies were free and independent states after polishing jeffersons language the delegates adopted the document on the night of july 4 1776.
they then ordered the declaration of independence to be printed.
john hancock president of the continental congress signed the declaration first.
he penned his signature boldly in large clear letters.
there he said i guess king george will be able to read that copies of the declaration were distributed throughout the colonies.
patriots greeted the news of independence with joyous and sometimes rowdy celebrations.
in new york colonists tore down a statue of king george iii.
in boston the sound of cannons could be heard for hours.
fid identify what were the potential consequences for the delegates who chose to declare independence.
the declaration of independence lists grievances against king george iii including the presence of british troops in the colonies during times of peace without the consent of colonial legislatures.
the declaration of independence the declaration of independence consists of a preamble or introduction followed by three main parts.
unalienable rights the first section of the declaration stresses the idea of natural rights or rights that belong to all people from birth.
in bold ringing words jefferson wrote we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
the declaration of independence according to the declaration of independence people form governments in order to protect their natural rights and liberties.
these unalienable rights including the rights to be free and to choose how to live cannot be taken away by governments for governments can exist only if they have the consent of the governed if a government fails to protect the rights of its citizens then it is the peoples right and duty to throw off such government and to provide new guards for their future security ideas such as unalienable rights adopted by the founding fathers men such as george washington john adams benjamin franklin and thomas jefferson are good examples of the civic virtues that have since become the cornerstone of american government.
these values continue to ensure that human rights are protected and human needs are met in our nation.
colonial grievances the second part of the declaration lists the wrongs or grievances that led the americans to break away from britain.
jefferson condemned king george iii for disbanding colonial legislatures and for sending troops to the colonies in peacetime.
he complained about limits on trade and about taxes imposed without the consent of the people.
jefferson listed many other grievances to show why the colonists had the right to rebel.
he also pointed out that the colonies had petitioned the king to correct these injustices.
yet the injustices remained.
a ruler who treated his subjects in this manner he boldly concluded is a tyrant and not fit to rule the revolutionary era 132 3 4 declaring independence in every state of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in the most humble terms our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated injury.
a prince whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a tyrant is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
the declaration of independence independence the last part of the declaration announces that the colonies are the united states of america.
all political ties with britain have been cut.
as a free and independent nation the united states has the full power to levy war conclude peace contract alliances establish commerce and to do all other acts and things which independent states may of right do the signers closed the declaration with a solemn pledge and for the support of this declaration with a firm reliance on the protection of divine providence we mutually pledge to each other our lives our fortunes and our sacred honor.
the declaration of independence fei list what are some of the grievances jefferson included in the declaration.
assessment 1.
identify central issues what was the main point of thomas paines common sense and how did he support this idea.
join or die.
benjamin franklin created this illustration encouraging colonists to band in 1754 during the french and indian war.
it was later used for the same purpose during the american revolution.
hypothesize how do you think the loyalists reacted when the declaration of independence was first distributed throughout the colonies.
make generalizations why to this day do many people refer to their signatures as their john hancocks.
cite evidence that the second continental congress was acting like a governmental body.
evaluate arguments what justifications for separation were included in the declaration of independence.
the revolutionary era 133 3 4 declaring independence on christmas night 1776 washington and his troops crossed the icy delaware river to attack british forces at trenton.
despite enduring the harshest conditions washingtons forces were victorious.
through an odd coincidence the british began landing troops in new york in the same month that the continental congress voted for independence july 1776.
general george washington expecting the attack had led his forces south from boston to new york city.
his army however was no match for the british under the command of general howe.
howe had about 34 000 troops and 10 000 sailors.
he also had ships to ferry them ashore.
washington had fewer than 20 000 poorly trained troops which he spread in various locations to defend new york.
worse he had no navy.
interactive flipped video j 4 b 4 c 10 a 22 b 23 d objectives describe the war in the middle states including how the battles at trenton and saratoga marked turning points.
describe the roles of women and african americans in the war.
explain how the war was fought on the western frontier and at sea.
describe the war in the south including the american victory at yorktown.
summarize the reasons why the americans won the war.
key terms battle of long island battle of trenton battle of saratoga ally cavalry valley forge battle of cowpens guerrilla siege battle of yorktown treaty of paris ratify nathan hale marquis de lafayette friedrich von steuben haym salomon wentworth cheswell james armistead bernardo de galvez john paul jones winning independence i early challenges for the continental army in august howes army landed on long island.
in the battle of long island more than 1 400 americans were killed wounded or captured.
the rest retreated to manhattan.
the british pursued.
to avoid capture washington hurried north.
1 throughout the autumn washington fought a series of battles with howes army.
in november he crossed the hudson river into new jersey.
chased by the british the americans retreated across the delaware river into pennsylvania.
during the campaign for new york washington needed information about howes forces.
nathan hale a young connecticut officer j volunteered to go behind british lines.
on his way back with the information hale was seized by the british and searched.
hidden in the soles of his shoes was information about british troop movements.
there was no trial.
howe ordered hale to be hanged the next morning.
as hale walked to the gallows he is said to have declared i only regret that i have but one life to lose for my country even as washingtons army retreated and the british took new york city many people there remained as loyal to the american cause as hale.
haym salomon hy urn sal uh mun a jewish immigrant from poland was arrested by the british in september of 1776 and thrown into prison.
salomon had supported the american cause from the start helping the new government get loans.
salomon even gave his own money to soldiers and military units for equipment.
he managed to escape to philadelphia and continued to aid the fight for independence.
a surprise attack leads to an american victory months of hard campaigning took a toll on the continental army.
in december 1776 washington described his troops as sick dirty and so thinly clad as to be unfit for service every day soldiers deserted.
washington wrote to his brother i am wearied to death.
i think the game is pretty near up washington decided on a bold move a surprise attack on trenton new jersey.
the delaware river separated the british in trenton and the americans and the soldiers guarding trenton would not expect american troops to cross it.
on christmas night washington secretly led his troops across the icy river.
soldiers shivered as spray from the river froze on their faces.
once ashore they marched through swirling snow.
some had no shoes.
they tied rags around their feet.
soldiers keep by your officers washington urged.
early on december 26 the americans surprised the hessian troops guarding trenton and took most of them prisoner.
the hessians were soldiers from germany.
an american summed up the battle of trenton hessian population of trenton at 8 a m 1 408 men and 39 officers hessian population at 9 a m 0 british general charles cornwallis set out at once to retake trenton and to capture washington.
late on january 2 1777 he saw the lights of washingtons campfires.
at last we have run down the old fox he said and we will bag him in the morning washington fooled cornwallis.
he left the fires burning and slipped behind british lines to attack a british force that was marching toward princeton.
there the continental army won another victory.
from princeton washington moved to morristown where the army would spend the winter.
the victories at trenton and princeton gave the americans new hope.
recall what advantages did the british have in the battle of long island.
the tide turns for the americans in london british officials were dismayed by the armys failure to crush the rebels.
early in 1777 general john burgoyne bur goin presented a new plan for victory.
if british troops cut off new england from the other colonies he argued the war would soon be over.
the new england strategy burgoyne wanted three british armies to march on albany new york from continental vs british forces british quality of forces motivation analyze charts which forces the continental or the british appear to be better prepared for battle.
access your digital lesson.
134 the revolutionary era 135 3 5 winning independence i s different directions.
they would crush american forces there.
once they controlled the hudson river the british could stop the flow of soldiers and supplies from new england to washingtons army.
burgoynes plan called for general howe to march on albany from new york city.
george iii however wanted howe to capture philadelphia first.
in july 1777 howe sailed from new york to the chesapeake bay where he began his march on philadelphia.
howe captured philadelphia defeating the americans at the battles of brandywine and germantown.
but instead of moving toward albany to meet burgoyne as planned he retired to comfortable quarters in philadelphia for the winter.
for his part washington retreated to valley forge pennsylvania.
meanwhile british armies under burgoyne and barry st leger lay zhair marched from canada toward albany.
st leger tried to take fort stanwix.
however a strong american army led by benedict arnold drove him back.
american troops prevail at saratoga only burgoyne was left to march on albany.
his army moved slowly because it had many heavy baggage carts to drag through the woods.
to slow burgoyne further patriots cut down trees and dammed up streams to block the route.
despite these obstacles burgoyne recaptured fort ticonderoga shocking americans.
however he delayed at the fort giving american forces time to regroup.
he also sent troops into vermont to find food and horses.
there patriots attacked the redcoats.
at the battle of bennington they wounded or captured nearly 1 000 british.
burgoynes troubles grew.
the green mountain boys hurried into new york to help american forces there.
at the village of saratoga the americans surrounded the british.
when burgoyne tried to break free the americans beat him back.
realizing that he was trapped burgoyne surrendered his entire army to the americans on october 17 1777.
the american victory at the battle of saratoga was a major turning point in the war.
it ended the british threat to new england.
it boosted american spirits at a time when washingtons army was suffering defeats.
most importantly it convinced france to become an ally of the united states.
nations that are allies work together to achieve a common goal.
europeans aid the american cause the continental congress had long hoped for french aid.
in 1776 the congress had sent benjamin franklin to paris to persuade louis xvi the french king to give the americans weapons and other badly needed supplies.
i n 0 300 km albers conic equal area projection key battles of the revolutionary war key american victories british victories long island august 1776 trenton december 1776 camden august 1780 may 1780 savannah december 1778 analyze maps what were the results of the battles in 1777 that were part of general burgoynes plan.
va 7 orktown october 1781 a greensboro march 1781 atlanta ocean the revolutionary era a 136 3 5 winning independence v lexington and concord april 1775 bunker hill june 1775 in addition the congress wanted france to declare war on britain.
the french were eager to defeat britain but they were also cautious.
france was still angry about its defeat at british hands in the french and indian war.
however louis xvi did not want to help the americans openly unless he was sure that they could win.
the american victory at saratoga convinced france that the united states could stand up to britain.
in february 1778 france became the first nation to sign a treaty with the united states.
it recognized the new nation and agreed to provide military aid.
later the netherlands and spain also joined in the war against britain.
france the netherlands and spain all provided loans to the united states.
even before european nations agreed to help the united states individual volunteers had been coming from europe to join the american cause.
some became leading officers in the american army.
the marquis de lafayette mar kee dah lah fay et a young french noble convinced france to send several thousand trained soldiers to help the patriot cause.
lafayette who fought at brandywine became one of washingtons most trusted friends.
from the german state of prussia came friedrich von steuben stoo bun who helped train washingtons troops to march and drill.
von steuben had served in the prussian army which was considered the best in europe.
two polish officers also joined the americans.
thaddeus kosciusko kahs ee s koh an engineer helped build forts and other defenses.
casimir pulaski trained cavalry or troops on horseback.
b describe in what ways did europeans help the american war effort.
winter at valley forge the victory at saratoga and the promise of help from europe boosted american morale.
washingtons continental army began preparing for the winter of 1777 1778 by building a makeshift camp at valley forge.
conditions at valley forge were difficult but the soldiers endured.
about 2 000 huts were built as shelter.
several soldiers were improperly dressed although many did have proper uniforms.
as the winter wore on soldiers also suffered from disease a common problem in military camps.
an army surgeon from connecticut wrote about his hardships general john burgoyne surrenders to general horatio gates after the british defeat at the battle of saratoga.
this american victory ended the british threat to new england.
the marquis de lafayette right shown here with george washington left at valley forge commanded soldiers in support of the american cause.
interactive timeline the revolutionary era 137 3 5 winning independence this illustration first appeared in the 1780s.
it is an appeal to people to recognize enslaved people as human beings.
at the battle of wyoming in 1778 loyalists and native americans allied to the british killed 360 colonial settlers in the wyoming valley of pennsylvania.
the revolutionary era hampshire schoolmaster cheswell was an educated and free black man who was regularly elected to local and town positions.
like paul revere he rode all night from boston to warn his community that the british were on the march.
he later enlisted in the army to help fight at saratoga.
enslaved african americans faced more difficult choices.
if they joined the american army or continued to work on patriot plantations the british might capture and sell them.
if they tried to flee to the british army to gain freedom they risked being hanged by angry patriots.
belief in freedom yet many slaves did flee their masters especially those who lived near the coast where the british navy patrolled.
one british captain reported that near 500 runaway slaves offered their services to him.
toward the end of the war several thousand slaves sought freedom by following british troops through the carolinas.
black patriots hoped that the revolution would bring an end to slavery.
after all the declaration of independence proclaimed that all men are created equal some white leaders also hoped the war would end slavery.
james otis wrote that the colonists are by the law of nature free born as indeed all men are white or black quakers in particular spoke out strongly against slavery.
by the 1770s slavery was declining in the north where a number of free african americans lived.
during the american revolution several states moved to make slavery illegal including massachusetts new hampshire and pennsylvania.
other states also began to debate the slavery issue.
fei identify main ideas what difficult consequences did many slaves face when choosing sides in the american revolution.
native americans and the spanish choose sides as the war spread to indian lands in the west the americans and british both tried to win the support of indian tribes.
in the end the british were more successful.
they convinced many native americans that a patriot victory would mean more white settlers crossing the appalachians and taking indian lands.
loyalist allies in the south the british gained the j support of the cherokees creeks choctaws and 140.
the war in the west 0 100 km lambert azimuthal equal area projection analyze maps the text calls the attack at fort vincennes a surprise what do you see on the map that supports the conclusion that the attack surprised the british.
z key american forces british forces american victories n forts chickasaws.
the british encouraged the cherokees to attack dozens of settlements on the southern frontier.
only after hard fighting were patriot militia able to drive the cherokees back into the mountains.
fighting was equally fierce on the northern frontier.
in 1778 iroquois forces led by the mohawk leader joseph brant joined with loyalists in raiding settlements in pennsylvania and new york.
the next year patriots struck back by destroying dozens of iroquois villages.
other tribes choose to help the patriots farther west in 1778 george rogers clark led virginia frontier fighters against the british in the ohio valley.
with help from miami indians clark captured the british forts at kaskaskia and cahokia near the mississippi river.
clark then plotted a surprise attack on the british fort at vincennes.
when clarks small force reached the fort they spread out through the woods to make their numbers appear greater than they really were.
the british commander thought it was useless to fight so many americans.
he surrendered vincennes in february 1779.
spanish assistance on the southwestern frontier americans received help from new spain.
in the early years of the war spain was neutral.
however bernardo de galvez bayr nardo day goll vess governor of spanish louisiana favored the patriots.
he secretly supplied medicine cloth muskets and gunpowder to the americans.
when spain entered the war against britain in 1779 galvez took a more active role.
he seized british forts along the mississippi river and the gulf of mexico.
he also drove the british out of west florida.
the city of galveston in texas is named after this courageous leader.
recall why were the british generally more successful at becoming allies with different indian tribes.
fighting for independence in the southern colonies and at sea at sea the americans could do little against the powerful british navy.
british ships blockaded american ports which were oftentimes important supply routes for patriot troops and towns.
from time to time however a bold american captain captured a british ship.
the greatest american sea victory took place in september 1779 in britains backyard on the north 3 5 winning independence l the revolutionary era 141 3 5 winning independence ja captain john paul jones shouts orders to his crew during battle aboard his ship bonhomme bichard.
jones and his crew captured the british warship serapis.
after a hard fought battle captain john paul jones captured the powerful british warship serapis.
jones was one of many important military leaders who contributed to the american cause during the war.
raids on the high seas and along the frontiers kept many americans on the alert.
however the war between the americans and great britain would be settled by battles in the south.
battles in the south the south became the main battleground of the war in 1778.
sir henry clinton the new british commander in chief knew that many loyalists lived in the southern backcountry.
he hoped that if british troops marched through the south loyalists would join them.
at first clintons plan seemed to work.
in short order beginning in december 1778 the british seized savannah in georgia and charleston and camden in south carolina.
i have almost ceased to hope wrote washington when he learned of the defeats.
analyze political cartoons in this political cartoon titled the horse america what do the horse and rider symbolize.
this cartoon was published in 1779.
what was the cartoonist trying to convey about the revolution.
patriots and loyalists clash in the carolina backcountry patriots and loyalists launched violent raids against one another.
both sides burned farms killed civilians and sometimes even tortured prisoners.
after 1780 attacks by british troops and loyalist militia became especially cruel.
as a result more settlers began to side with the patriots.
as one loyalist admitted great britain has now a hundred enemies where it had one before momentum shifts toward the patriots after the victory at kings mountain two able american generals helped turn the tide against the main british army led by general charles cornwallis.
they were nathanael greene of rhode island and daniel morgan of virginia.
general greenes ability as a military leader was perhaps second only to washingtons.
in 1780 greene took command of the continental army in the south.
using his knowledge of local geography greene engaged the british only on ground that put them at a disadvantage.
general cornwallis wore out his soldiers trying to catch greenes army.
in january 1781 general morgan won an important victory at cowpens south carolina.
morgan used a clever tactic to defeat the british.
he divided his soldiers into a front line and a rear line.
he ordered the front line to retreat after firing just two volleys.
the british thinking the americans were retreating charged forward straight into the fire of morgans second rank.
in this way the americans won the battle of cowpens.
greene and morgan combined their armies when they fought cornwallis at guilford courthouse near present day greensboro north carolina.
the battle was one of the bloodiest of the war.
although the americans retreated the british sustained great losses.
adapting tactics to geography known as the swamp fox francis marion of south carolina added to british frustrations.
he led a small band of militia who often slept by day and traveled by night.
his soldiers used guerrilla or hit and run tactics to harass the british.
marions band took advantage of the regions environment appearing suddenly out of the swamps attacking quickly and retreating swiftly back into the swamps.
b describe what did a superior navy allow the british to do.
a decisive win brings the war to a close cornwallis abandoned his plan to take the carolinas.
in the spring of 1781 he moved his troops north into virginia.
he planned to conquer virginia and cut off the americans supply routes to the south.
benedict arnolds betrayal the british had achieved some success in virginia even before the arrival of cornwallis.
benedict arnold formerly one of the americans best generals was now leading british troops.
arnold captured and burned the capital city of richmond.
his forces also raided and burned other towns.
arnold had turned traitor to the american cause in september 1780 while commanding west point a key fort in new york.
the ambitious general was angry because he felt that he had not received enough credit for his victories.
he also needed money.
arnold secretly agreed to turn over west point to the british.
the plot was uncovered by a patriot patrol but arnold escaped to join the british arnolds treason and his raids on towns in connecticut and virginia enraged the patriots.
thomas jefferson governor of virginia offered a sizable reward for his capture.
washington ordered arnold to be hanged.
however he was never captured.
the british are trapped at yorktown cornwallis hoped to meet with the same kind of success in virginia that arnold had achieved.
at first things went well.
cornwallis sent loyalist troops to attack charlottesville where the virginia legislature was 4 1 v v s.
benedict arnolds treason left the continental army without one of its most able generals.
it also provided the british with someone familiar with the terrain and plans of the continental army.
governor thomas jefferson and other officials had to flee.
american troops under lafayette fought back by staging raids against the british.
lafayette did not have enough troops to fight a major battle.
still his strategy kept cornwallis at bay.
then cornwallis made a mistake.
he disregarded an order from sir henry clinton to send part of his army to new york.
instead he retreated to yorktown peninsula a strip of land jutting into the chesapeake bay.
he felt confident that british ships could supply his army from the sea.
washington saw an opportunity to trap cornwallis on the yorktown peninsula.
he marched his continental troops south from new york.
with the americans were french soldiers under the comte de rochambeau roh shahm boh.
the combined army rushed to join lafayette in virginia.
meanwhile a french fleet under admiral de grasse was also heading toward virginia.
once in chesapeake bay de grasses fleet closed the trap.
cornwallis was cut off.
he could not get supplies.
he could not escape by land or by sea.
the revolutionary era 143 3 5 winning independence the war is won by the end of september more than 16 000 american and french troops laid siege to cornwalliss army of fewer than 8 000.
a siege occurs when an army surrounds and blockades an enemy position in an attempt to capture it.
day after day american and french artillery pounded the british.
for several weeks cornwallis held out.
finally with casualties mounting and his supplies running low the general decided that the situation was hopeless.
the british had lost the battle of yorktown.
on october 19 1781 the british surrendered their weapons.
the french and the americans lined up in two facing columns.
as the defeated redcoats marched between the victorious troops a british army band played the tune the world turned upside down the talks began in paris in 1782.
congress sent benjamin franklin and john adams along with john jay of new york and henry laurens of south carolina to work out a treaty.
because britain was eager to end the war the americans got most of what they wanted.
under the treaty of paris the british recognized the united states as an independent nation.
it extended from the atlantic ocean to the mississippi river.
the northern border of the united states stopped at the great lakes.
the southern border stopped at florida which was returned to spain.
american soldiers hoist the 13 star flag a proud symbol of everything they fought for during the war for independence.
for their part the americans agreed to ask the state legislatures to pay loyalists for property they had lost in the war.
in the end however most states ignored loyalist claims.
on april 15 1783 congress ratified or approved the treaty of paris.
it was almost eight years to the day since the battles of lexington and concord.
b identify supporting details what were the results of the treaty of paris.
explaining the american victory geography played an important role in the american victory.
the british had to send soldiers and supplies to a war that was several thousand miles from home.
they also had to fight an enemy that was spread over a wide area.
for their part the americans were familiar with the local geography.
they chose geographic features like hilltops that would provide an advantage in battle.
assistance from allies help from other nations was crucial to the american cause.
spanish forces attacked the british along the gulf of mexico and in the mississippi valley.
french money helped pay for supplies and french military aid provided vital support to american troops.
without french soldiers and warships for example the americans might not have won the battle of yorktown.
a growing national identity and patriotism throughout their struggles with britain the colonists benefited from their ability to unify for a shared american cause.
the american revolution inspired people of many different racial and minority groups as well as social classes to fight for the same american ideals of freedom and rights.
debates about equality would continue long after independence was earned but the ideals from the revolution would further define a developing american identity.
patriotism was another important factor in the american victory.
soldiers were fighting for their homes and their beliefs.
despite early setbacks the patriots continued to fight for their cause.
gradually washingtons inexperienced troops learned how to drill how to march and how to fight the british.
perhaps most important was washington himself.
by the end of the war the generals leadership and military skills were respected by americans and british alike.
the revolutionary era 144 3 5 winning independence washington leaves the army in december 1783 general washington before resigning bid farewell to his officers at fraunces tavern in new york city.
colonel benjamin tallmadge recalled the event such a scene of sorrow and weeping i had never before witnessed.
we were then about to part from the man who had conducted us through a long and bloody war and under whose conduct the glory and independence of our country had been achieved.
benjamin tallmadge memoir all along washingtons route home to virginia crowds cheered for their hero.
the new nation faced difficult days ahead.
in time americans would call on washington to lead them once again.
b recall what were the main reasons for the american victory.
assessment by wars end americans respected washington s leadership and military skills.
here washington rides in triumph through the streets of boston.
identify central issues why was the american victory at saratoga significant to the patriots.
hypothesize how surviving a long winter at valley forge with their commander affected the continental army.
draw conclusions why did many people believe that the declaration of independence justified an end to slavery in the colonies.
generate explanations how was general cornwallis defeated at the battle of yorktown.
summarize why did benedict arnolds name become synonymous with being a traitor.
the revolutionary era 145 3 5 winning independence i teks assessment north america in 1753 pacific ocean key cl claimed by britain lil claimed by spain j i claimed by france n french fort 0 1 000 km lambert conformal conk projection all a nc ocean 1 000 mi 1.
locate places of importance interpret information from a map to locate places of importance in the united states during the eighteenth century related to french land claims.
use the map above to locate and describe french land claims in north america in 1753.
first use the key to locate french lands and forts and the lands claimed by britain and spain.
second locate the major rivers and lakes in the french territory.
write a paragraph describing the french territory.
describe the location in relation to lands claimed by britain and spain list the major rivers and lakes in the region describe what you can infer about the location of french settlements from the location of the forts and explain why controlling the ohio river would be important to the french.
see map above.
10 a 29 c 2.
analyze effect of human geographic factors analyze the effects of human geographic factors on major historical events in the united states related to the french and indian war by contrasting the reasons for native american alliances.
write a paragraph analyzing why some native american groups chose to form alliances with the french and others chose to form alliances with the british during the french and indian war.
consider why the algonquins and the hurons sided with the french and why the iroquois nations sided with the british.
10 c 29 b 3.
analyze effects of physical geographic factors analyze the effects of physical geographic factors on major historical events in the united states related to the attack on quebec during the french and indian war.
write a paragraph analyzing how the physical geography of the area affected the british attack on quebec.
describe what the physical geography was like and why the french felt protected analyze how the british used the physical geography to their advantage and describe the consequences for the french.
analyze causes of the american revolution analyze causes of the american revolution including peaceful opposition to the stamp act.
write a paragraph analyzing how peaceful colonial j protests against the stamp act led toward revolution.
consider the stamp act congress boycotts calls for free enterprise and parliaments actions.
create written presentation describing townshend acts describe the townshend acts as a cause of the american revolution by creating a written presentation of social studies information using standard grammar spelling sentence structure punctuation i and proper citation of sources.
describe what the townshend acts were as well as the role of boycotts the sons of liberty and the daughters of liberty in protesting the acts use standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation and properly cite the sources used in your presentation.
1 a 30 b 30 d the revolutionary era 146 1 6.
organize and interpret information from reports analyze the impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in u s history by organizing and interpreting information from reports.
analyze the excerpt below from a report about the boston massacre.
then write a paragraph organizing and interpreting the information in the report by explaining whether the report is a primary or secondary source and interpreting the report to determine whether it shows bias.
20 c 29 c on the night of march 5 1770 a crowd of colonial troublemakers gathered outside the boston customs house in a massive display of civil disobedience.
the angry mob shouted insults at the british troops guarding the building even though the soldiers were showing no aggression toward the mob.
soon the shouting turned to violence as the crowd began to throw snowballs oyster shells and chunks of ice at the soldiers.
as the mob grew larger and more menacing the outnumbered british soldiers panicked and fired into the crowd.
when the smoke from the musket volley cleared five of the troublemakers lay dead or dying.
dieoi iedic nce in the american revolution 7.
explain roles of crispus attucks samuel adams and john adams in boston massacre explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including crispus attucks samuel adams and john adams.
write a paragraph describing the roles played by crispus attucks samuel adams and john adams in the boston massacre.
describe what led to the boston massacre who crispus attucks was and what happened to him who samuel adams was and how he reacted to the boston massacre and who john adams was what he did after the boston massacre and why.
analyze reasons for and impact of civil disobedience analyze reasons for and impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in u s history such as the boston tea party.
write a paragraph analyzing the reasons for the boston tea party and the consequences of this act of civil disobedience.
define the term civil disobedience analyze why sam adams and the sons of liberty staged the boston tea party describe what the actual act of civil disobedience was and analyze the impact of this act of civil disobedience.
describe contributions of military leaders describe the contributions of significant military leaders of the united states such as ethan allen.
write a paragraph describing how ethan allen contributed to colonial war efforts in 1775 as the leader of the green mountain boys.
describe who ethan allen was what allen and the green mountain boys did in may 1775 and why the contribution was significant.
use decision making process describe the effects of revolution by using a decision making process to identify a situation that requires a decision gather information identify options predict consequences and take action to implement a decision related to choosing sides during the american revolution.
write a paragraph describing the decision making process a colonist might have used to decide whether to support the patriots the british or remain neutral in the war.
identify the situation that requires a decision indicate what information the colonists would need to gather identify the colonists options predict the consequences of the different options and indicate what you would have done if the decision was yours to make.
1 a 31 b 11.
identify major events including drafting the declaration of independence identify the major events in u s history through 1877 including drafting of the declaration of independence describe the causes and effects of the declaration and explain the role thomas jefferson played in drafting the document and the significance of july 4 1776.
write a paragraph describing the drafting and adoption of the declaration of independence.
explain why congress drafted a formal declaration of independence explain the role thomas jefferson played in the process identify the date when the continental congress adopted the declaration and explain the effects of adopting the declaration.
1 c 1 a 4 b 12.
define and give examples of unalienable rights use social studies terminology correctly by defining and giving examples of unalienable rights and evaluating how the adoption of the idea of unalienable rights is an example of the contributions of the founding fathers as models of civic virtue.
write a paragraph defining the term unalienable rights and giving examples of those rights.
define the term give examples and evaluate how the idea of unalienable rights adopted by the founding fathers represents good civic virtues.
19 a 20 b 30 a the revolutionary era 147 13.
identify colonial grievances in the declaration of independence identify colonial grievances listed in the declaration of independence and describe how the grievances caused the colonists to declare independence.
write a paragraph identifying the grievances that thomas jefferson outlined in the declaration of independence and describing his reasons for listing the grievances.
explain what is meant by colonial grievances identify some of the grievances jefferson listed tell why jefferson listed so many grievances and pointed out that the colonies had petitioned the king unsuccessfully to correct these injustices and explain why the grievances caused the colonists to declare independence.
1 a 15 c 14.
explain issues surrounding declaring independence explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including declaring independence.
write a paragraph about the issues surrounding the decision to declare independence from britain.
using the quotation below and other sources explain what richard henry lee risked by making the resolution above and what other delegates risked in supporting the resolution.
identify what lee suggested in the resolution and explain why this course of action was risky.
contributions of women identify the political and economic contributions of women to american society during the american revolution.
write a paragraph identifying the contributions of women to the war effort.
indicate how women helped economically how women helped on the battlefield and how their experiences in the revolution encouraged women to campaign for equal treatment in later years.
contributions of african americans use appropriate mathematical skills to interpret social studies information in a graph about african americans in the revolution and analyze the contributions of people of various racial groups to our national identity by describing the contributions of african americans to the war effort.
use the graph below to write a paragraph analyzing the contributions of african americans to the war effort.
use your mathematical skills to determine approximately what percentage of the african american population in the colonies was made up of free men and what percentage of those free men fought in the patriot army.
identify approximately how many african americans served in the navy and what the enlistment policy was and analyze how and why colonial views on african americans serving in the army changed.
see graph below.
23 d 29 h resolved that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states that they are absolved from all allegiance to the british crown and that all political connection between them and the state of great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved.
richard henry lee resolution at the second continental congress june 7 1776 15.
identify colonial grievance in the declaration of independence identify a colonial grievance listed in the declaration of independence that helps explain why a free enterprise system of economics developed in the new nation including minimal government intrusion.
write a paragraph drawing a connection between the declarations grievance that king george iii had put limits on trade and the colonists support for free enterprise over mercantilism.
consider how the navigation acts limited trade and how a free enterprise system would benefit trade.
14 a 15 c african americans and the revolution the revolutionary era 148 t 18.
identify the american revolution identify the major eras in u s history through 1877 including revolution.
write a paragraph identifying the factors that contributed to the americans winning the revolutionary war and achieving independence during the revolutionary era.
identify the role played by geography how the assistance from allies helped and the effects of a growing national identity and patriotism during the revolutionary era.
reflect on the essential question write an essay on the essential question when is war justified.
use evidence from your study of this topic to support your answer.
the revolutionary era 149 i access additional practice questions 1 you and the french are like the two edges of a pair of shears.
and we are the cloth which is to be cut to pieces between them.
native american to british trader the native american who said this most likely a welcomed british settlers but not french settlers b welcomed french settlers but not british settlers c thought british and french settlers were dangerous to native american ways of life d thought british and french settlers would improve trade relationships in the ohio river valley 3 the act of civil disobedience illustrated in this image prompted britain to a raise the tax on tea b pass the intolerable acts c grant the colonists limited independence d send troops to arrest and punish native americans 2 which of the following revolutionary war figures was good at organizing people and arranging protests.
f patrick henry g abigail adams h samuel adams j crispus attucks 4 what role did thomas jefferson play in declaring independence.
f he wrote the declaration of independence.
g he distributed copies of the declaration of independence.
h he voted against adopting the declaration of independence.
j he was the first person to sign the declaration of independence.
if you have trouble with.
question i 1 i 2 see lesson 3 1 i 3 2 teks 10 c 4 b the revolutionary era 151 3 3 3 20 c 4 3 3 4 b the revolutionary era 150 colonists helped soldiers at valley forge by a sending food b providing horses c building brick homes d finding them a new leader 6 continental vs british forces i continental british total forces about 90 000 as a peak estimate more than 70 000 composition continental army state militias army navy hired mercenaries of forces allies france spain native americans loyalists quality of forces untrained unconventional trained disciplined motivation freedom from british control regain british control supplies very limited weapons.
better availability of weapons food and clothing food and clothing but moving supplies was difficult based on the chart above which statement best explains why the united states defeated the british at yorktown.
f the british had a better trained fighting force but not enough troops.
g american forces had easier access to necessary supplies than the british.
h american forces used unconventional methods with the help of strong allies.
j britain made use of hired mercenaries whom they could not trust completely.
the revolutionary era 152 7 access aciaitional practice questions i founded by a quaker who respected native americans intended to be a model of religious freedom welcomed protestants catholics and jews initially this list best describes the colony of a new york b maryland c new jersey d pennsylvania 8 harvard the first college in massachusetts opened in order to f make massachusetts attractive to current and future immigrants g train highly educated physicians public servants lawyers and teachers h offer apprenticeships in papermaking printing carriage building and tanning j educate future ministers and promote higher learning as a way to create and sustain wealth i if you have trouble with question see lesson teks 5 3 4 4 c 6 3 5 4 c 7 2 4 25 a 8 2 6 3 a the revolutionary era 153 a constitution for the united states in this topic you will learn about the united states constitution.
you know the teks are very important and this course will make it fun to learn about the things that will help you master them.
keep reading to see how.
your study will help you master these teks teks 1 a 1 c 3 b 4 c 4 d 4 e 6 a 14 a 15 a 15 b 15 c 15 d 16 a 17 a 18 a 19 b 19 c 19 d 19 e 19 f 20 a 20 b 21 a 21 b 21 c 25 a 25 c 29 e lesson outline a weak confederation 1 a 4 c 6 a 15 b 4 2 drafting a constitution 1 a 1 c 4 d 4 3 ideas that influenced the constitution 3 b 14 a 15 a 15 c 20 a 4 4 federalists antifederalists and the bill of rights 1 a 4 e 15 a 15 c 17 a 4 5 understanding the constitution 15 d 18 a 21 a 4 6 amending the constitution 16 a 19 b 21 b 25 a 25 c 4 7 citizens rights and responsibilities 19 c 19 d 19 f 20 b connect you will start by connecting with the topic through a video that tells a personal story about the times.
you will start to think about how the topic connects with your own experience or to what you already know.
and youll get a chance to think about a really big question or essential question how much power should the government have.
begin your study by trying the following learn watch my story video james madison the federalist papers launch your civic discussion senate representation 154 investigate then you will investigate the topic through a group of lessons.
the story of the united states constitution will come to life as you read and interact with key content you will get a chance to read about what happened and why.
and youll be able to interact with a lot of fascinating online materials.
youll also keep working on your civic discussion as you build further mastery of the topic teks.
the u s congress digital interactivity from the online course o synthesize next you will pull it all together by reflecting on the essential questron.
this will give you a chance to be the storyteller to show how you topic review and assessment questions teks in topic 4 topic review and assessment questions would answer the big question.
a 18 1 c 3 19 b 20 3 b 5 19 c 26 4 c i 1 19 d 27 demonstrate finally you can show what you know.
you can write an essay hold a discussion or make a presentation to the class.
you can 4 d 4 14 19 e 23 4 e 11 19 f 8 6 a 9 20 a 7 14.
a 10 20 b 25 15.
a 12 13 21 a 19 15 b 2 21 b 22 answer questions about every teks on the topic review and assessment pages.
or you can take part in the civic discussion on 15 c 6 21 c 4 14 15 d 17 20 25 a 21 16.
a 24 25 c 21 17 a 15 29 e 13 19 i i 155 essential question how much power should the government have.
a constitution for the united states 1776 apresent texas essential knowledge and skills 1 a 1 c 3 b 4 c 4 d 4 e 6 a 14 a 15 a 15 b 15 c 15 d 16 a 17 a 18 a 19 b 19 c 19 d 19 e 19 f 20 a 20 b 21 a 21 b 21 c 25 a 25 c 29 e independence hall in philadelphia pennsylvania enduring understandings weaknesses of the articles of confederation caused problems after the american revolution.
enlightenment and roman principles of government influenced the constitution.
after debate and ratification the constitution became the foundation of american government.
the bill of rights the first ten amendments ensures protection of basic human rights.
the constitution established the executive legislative and judicial branches of government with a system of checks and balances to limit the power of each.
people must meet criteria to be american citizens and with citizenship comes rights and responsibilities.
pearson 1 realize access your digital lessons including topic inquiry interactive reading notepad interactivities assessments 157 i state governments vary from state to state.
in forming a government most states wrote constitutions.
a constitutionis a document that sets out the basic laws principles organization and processes of a government.
states wrote constitutions for two reasons.
first a written constitution would spell out the rights of all citizens.
second it would limit the power of government.
i 1 a 4 c 6 a 15 b objectives explain why state governments wrote constitutions.
identify the strengths and weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
describe the process the articles created for admitting new states.
explain why many americans called for changes to the articles.
summarize shays rebellion and how it influenced leaders to change the articles of confederation.
key terms constitution bill of rights articles of confederation cede currency land ordinance of 1785 a weak confederation i each state creates a constitution people valued the rights that state governments protected.
virginia s constitution included a bill of rights or list of freedoms that the government promises to protect.
virginia s bill of rights guaranteed trial by jury freedom of religion and freedom of the press.
several other states followed virginias lead.
for example the massachusetts j state constitution guaranteed people.
the right of enjoying and defending their lives and liberties that of acquiring possessing and protecting property in short that of seeking and obtaining their safety and happiness.
i massachusetts constitution of 1780 northwest ordinance den however the articles of confederation had weaknesses as well.
compared to the states congress had very limited powers.
congress could pass laws but nine states had to approve a law before it could go into effect.
even then it was up to the states to enforce the laws passed by congress.
the articles included no president to execute laws.
congress could not regulate trade between states or between states and foreign countries.
nor did it have the power to tax.
to raise money congress had to ask the states for funds or borrow them.
no state could be forced to contribute funds.
there was also no system of courts to settle conflicts between states.
debates over western lands one major dispute arose before the articles of confederation went into effect.
maryland refused to ratify the articles unless virginia and other states ceded or gave up their claims to lands west of the appalachian mountains.
like other small states maryland feared that landed states would become too powerful.
one by one the states agreed to cede their western claims to congress.
finally only virginia held out.
however thomas jefferson and other leading virginians recognized the great need to form a central government.
they persuaded state lawmakers to give up virginias claims in the west.
the new state governments were somewhat similar to the colonial governments in structure.
the states divided power between an executive and a legislature.
the legislature was elected by the voters to pass laws.
every state but pennsylvania had a governor to execute or carry out the laws.
under the state constitutions more people had the right to vote than in colonial times.
to vote a citizen had to be white male and over age 21.
he had to own a certain amount of property or pay a certain amount of taxes.
for a time some women in hew jersey could vote.
in a few states free african american men who owned property could vote.
ej identify what sort of freedoms did many states agree to protect.
the articles of confederation as citizens formed state governments the continental congress was drafting a plan for the nation as a whole.
delegates believed that the colonies needed to be united by a national government in order to win independence.
it was hard to write a constitution that all states would approve.
they were reluctant to give up power to a central government.
few americans saw themselves as citizens of one nation.
instead they felt loyal to their own states.
also people feared replacing the tyranny of british rule with another strong government.
after much debate the continental congress approved the first american constitution in 1777.
the articles of confederation created a very loose alliance of 13 independent states.
strengths and weaknesses under the articles of confederation the united states became a union of states with a weak central government.
in a sense the articles simply put into law the existing reality of government in the colonies a congress with delegates acting on behalf of states that retained most of the power.
the new nation was still at war its revolution not yet won.
it was not the time to discuss the political relationship between the states and congress.
the articles of confederation represented an effective compromise during a difficult time.
as apian of government the articles of confederation had strengths.
it left states free to make decisions for themselves.
it prevented the federal government from gaming too much power.
under the articles each state sent one delegate to congress.
thus each state no matter its size or population had one vote.
congress did have the power to declare war.
it could appoint military officers coin money and operate post offices.
it was also responsible for foreign affairs and could sign treaties.
the second continental congress adopted the articles of confederation in 1777.
the articles spelled out the first constitution of american government.
158 qtnfpg 159 4 1 a weak confederation restitution for the united btates elps with its demands met maryland ratified the articles of confederation in 1781.
the new american government could at last go into effect.
e3 identify supporting details what functions was congress able to perform under the articles of confederation.
elps reading 4 c 1 before you read this text make a list of the words that you recognize by sight as directed by your teacher.
then read the text and list new words that you have learned and will be able to recognize by sight.
weaknesses of the confederation by 1783 the united states had won its independence.
yet the end of the american revolution did not solve the confederations troubles.
americans had reason to doubt whether these united states could survive.
many states have disagreements disputes continued to arise among states.
for example both new hampshire and new york claimed vermont.
the no 45t4z six.
tms biu entulekk bearer to receive six spanish milled dollars ot txe value thereof fftvrold or silver uceotd intf t o a resolution of cov gress mjat phi.
lujelphia nov 2 1 six dollars the currency issued by the continental congress lost value throughout the war.
after the war the united states owed millions of dollars to individuals and foreign nations.
articles did not give the central government power to resolve such conflicts.
noah webster a teacher from new england saw the problem clearly so long as any individual state has power to defeat the measures of the other twelve our pretended union is but a name and our confederation a cobweb.
noah webster sketches of ainericen policy concerns over debt and currency after the revolution the united states owed millions of dollars to individuals and foreign nations.
without the power to tax congress had no way to repay these debts.
it asked the states for money but the states often refused.
during the revolution the continental congress had solved the problem of raising funds by printing paper currency or money.
however the continental dollar had little value because it was not backed by gold or silver.
before long americans began to describe any useless thing as not worth a continental as continental dollars became nearly worthless states printed their own currency.
this caused confusion.
how much was a north carolina dollar worth.
was a virginia dollar as valuable as a maryland dollar.
most states refused to accept the money of others.
as a result trade became very difficult.
foreign countries promote their own interests foreign countries took advantage of the confederation s weakness.
ignoring the treaty of paris britain refused to withdraw its troops from american territory on the great lakes.
spain closed its port in new orleans to american shipping.
this was a serious blow to western farmers who depended on the port to ship their products to the east.
ti check understanding why did trade between states become increasingly difficult.
an orderly expansion despite its troubles congress did pass important laws about how to govern the northwest territory.
this was the u s territory west of pennsylvania north of the ohio river south of the great lakes and east of the mississippi.
the laws established how territories would be governed and how they could become states.
the land ordinance of 1785 set up a system for settling the northwest territory.
the law called for the territory to be surveyed and divided into townships.
a weak confederation a constitution for the united states settling the upper midwest the land survey 5 000 4 500 s 4 000 1 3 500 x yd.
3 000 x d 33 2 500 2 2 000 1 1 500 1 000 500 x wise.
5 tx 36 square miles 0 1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1 square mile with 5 000 free white male residents with 60 000 residents could write 1 640th of a square mile territories could elect a state assembly and a state constitution and apply for average size of farm was 40 acres send non voting representatives to congress.
analyze information how did the northwest ordinance help to reduce conflict between the states as settlement expanded westward beyond traditional state boundaries.
jbbsbseeeh each township would then be further divided into 36 sections of one square mile each 640 acres.
congress planned to sell sections to settlers for a minimum of 640 apiece.
one section in every township was set aside to support public schools.
selling the land provided income for the government which was significant because congress did not have the power to tax under the articles of confederation yet the nation was in debt.
in 1787 congress passed the northwest ordinance.
it set up a government for the northwest territory guaranteed basic rights to settlers and outlawed slavery there.
it also provided for the vast region to be divided into separate territories in the future.
the northwest ordinance established the principle that new territories should not become part of existing states but should be admitted as new states.
it provided a procedure or process to admit new states to the nation.
once a territory had a population of 60 000 free settlers it could ask congress to be admitted as a new state.
each new state would be on an equal footing with the original states in all respects whatsoever.
in time the states of ohio indiana illinois michigan and wisconsin were created from the northwest territory.
despite the drawbacks of the articles of confederation the laws congress created relating to the northwest territory proved to be a major success.
these laws established principles defining the basic rights of settlers and served as a model for the rights citizens would expect to be protected.
trial by jury freedom of religion free use of waterways fair treatment in the courts and other rights were guaranteed.
by providing that money from each townships land sales be used for schools these laws also established federal support for education.
fed recall what was the purpose of the northwest ordinance.
economic problems lead to change the northwest ordinance was the finest achievement of the national government under the articles.
still the government was unable to solve its economic problems.
after the revolution the nation suffered an economic depression.
a depression is a period when business activity slows prices and wages fall and unemployment rises.
farmers demand fair treatment the depression hit farmers hard.
the war had created a high demand a constitution for the united states a weak confederation for farm products.
farmers borrowed money for land seed animals and tools.
however when the revolution ended demand for farm goods went down.
as prices fell many farmers could not repay their loans.
in massachusetts matters worsened when the state raised taxes.
the courts seized the farms of those who could not pay their taxes or loans.
angry farmers felt they were being treated unfairly.
daniel shays a massachusetts farmer who had fought at bunker hill and saratoga organized an uprising in 1786.
more than 1 000 farmers took part in shays rebellion.
they attacked courthouses and prevented the state from seizing farms when farmers could not pay their debts.
finally the massachusetts legislature sent the militia to drive them off.
a call for revision many americans saw shays rebellion as a sign that the articles of confederation did not work.
warned george washington i predict the worst consequences from a half starved limping government always moving upon crutches and tottering at every step to avert a crisis leaders from several states called for a convention to revise the articles of confederation.
they met in philadelphia in may 1787.
in the end however this convention would create an entirely new framework of government.
b check understanding what did shays rebellion show to many people.
assessment 1.
summarize the voting rights in most states in the early 1780s.
identify central issues what were three weaknesses of the central government under the articles of confederation.
generate explanations why did people describe something without value as not worth a continental 4.
hypothesize about why slavery was outlawed in the northwest territories.
predict consequences how do you think the convention will improve upon the articles of confederation.
i the constitutional convention opened on may 25 1787 in philadelphia pennsylvania.
its goal was to revise the articles of confederation.
every state except rhode island sent representatives.
the convention would prove historic because it did not revise the articles of confederation.
instead it produced a new united states constitution.
james madison standing helped solve some of the most pressing problems delegates faced at the constitutional convention.
why might madison be considered a model of civic virtue.
drafting a constitution a historic convention american leaders come together the conventions 55 delegates were a remarkable group.
eight of them had signed the declaration of independence including the oldest benjamin franklin.
at age 81 franklin was wise in the ways of government and human nature.
george washington was a representative from virginia.
washington was so well respected that the delegates at once elected him president of the convention.
still most of the delegates represented a new generation of american leaders.
nearly half were young men in their thirties including alexander hamilton of new york.
during the revolution hamilton had served for a time as washington s private secretary.
hamilton despised the articles of confederation.
the nation he wrote is sick and wants powerful remedies the powerful remedy he prescribed was a strong central government.
interactive flipped video 1 a 1 c 4 d objectives identify the leaders of the constitutional convention.
compare the main differences between the two rival plans for the new constitution.
summarize compromises the delegates had to reach before the constitution could be signed.
key terms constitutional convention virginia plan legislative branch executive branch judicial branch new jersey plan compromise great compromise three fifths compromise a student of history and politics perhaps the best prepared delegate was 36 year old james madison of virginia.
for months i he had been reading books on history politics and commerce.
pearson 1 realize access your digital lesson.
a constitution for the united states 162 a weak confederation 163 madison set a model of civic virtue when he arrived in philadelphia with a case bulging with volumes of research.
madison was quiet and rather shy.
still his keen intelligence and his ideas about how to structure a democratic government strongly influenced the other delegates.
today madison is often called the father of the constitution secret conversations when the convention began the delegates decided to keep their talks secret.
they wanted to speak their minds freely and be able to explore issues without pressures from outside.
the closed windows helped keep the debates secret but they made the room very hot.
new englanders in their woolen suits suffered terribly in the summer heat.
southerners with clothing more suited to warm temperatures were less bothered.
recall why was james madison considered the best prepared delegate at the convention.
roger sherman right mastermind of the great compromise and fellow connecticut delegate oliver ellsworth left draft a solution to the issue of representation in 1787.
disagreements over a new government soon after the meeting began the delegates realized they would have to do more than simply revise the articles of confederation.
they chose instead to write an entirely new constitution for the nation.
they disagreed however about what form the new national government should take.
virginia proposes a plan edmund randolph and james madison both from virginia proposed a plan for the new government.
this virginia plan called for a strong national government with three branches.
the legislative branch would pass the laws.
the executive branch would carry out the laws.
the judicial branch or system of courts would decide whether laws or the constitution were violated.
according to the virginia plan the legislature would consist of two houses.
seats would be awarded on the basis of population.
thus in both houses larger states would have more representatives than smaller ones.
under the articles of confederation each state regardless of population only had one vote in congress.
new jersey disagrees small states opposed the virginia plan.
they feared that the large states could easily outvote them in congress.
supporters of the virginia plan replied that it was only fair for a state with more people to have more representatives.
after two weeks of debate william paterson of new jersey presented a plan that had the support of the small states.
like the virginia plan the new jersey plan called for three branches of government.
however it provided for a legislature that had only one house.
each state regardless of its population would have one vote in the legislature.
identify main ideas what was the essential difference between the virginia plan and the new jersey plan.
the great compromise for a while no agreement could be reached.
with tempers flaring it seemed that the convention would fall apart without adopting any plan.
finally roger sherman of connecticut worked out a compromise that he hoped would satisfy both the large and small states.
a compromise is a settlement or peaceful solution in which each side gives up some of its demands in order to reach an agreement.
164 4 2 drafting a constitution a constitution for the united states virginia and new jersey plans virginia plan population as basis for house representation two houses with seats based on population one house is elected by the people the other house by state legislators chief executive is chosen by the legislature judicial branch is chosen by the legislature three branches of government to prevent abuse of power legislative branch consists of elected representatives new jersey plan drafted in response to virginia plan one house with one seat and one vote regardless of population as in the articles of confederation executive branch consists of several executives judicial branch is chosen by the executive branch analyze information how did the new jersey plan and virginia plan differ in their approach to the executive branch of government.
r interactive chart shermans compromise called for the creation of a two house legislature.
members of the lower house known as the house of representatives would be elected by popular vote.
as the larger states wished seats in the lower house would be awarded to each state according to its population.
members of the upper house called the senate would be chosen by state legislatures.
each state no matter what its size would have two senators.
this part of shermans compromise appealed to the smaller states.
on july 16 the delegates narrowly approved sherman s plan.
it became known as the great compromise.
each side in an admirable show of civic virtue gave up some demands to achieve unity.
with a margin of just one vote the delegates had found a peaceful resolution to a problem that had threatened to bring the convention to a halt.
identify supporting details how did the great compromise address the concerns of small and large states.
the three fifths compromise just as there were disagreements between large states and small states there were also disagreements between northern states and southern states.
the most serious disagreements concerned the issue of slavery.
would enslaved people be counted as part of a states population.
would the slave trade continue to bring enslaved africans into the united states.
the states reach an agreement southerners wanted to include enslaved african americans in the population count even though they would not let those people vote.
if enslaved african americans were counted southern states would have more representatives in the house of representatives.
northerners objected.
they argued that since enslaved african americans could not vote they should not be counted when assigning representatives.
once again the delegates compromised.
they agreed that three fifths of the enslaved people in any state would be counted.
in other words if a state had 5 000 enslaved residents 3 000 of them would be included in the states population count.
this agreement became known as the three fifths compromise.
the fraction in the three fifths compromise had come from a rule in the articles of confederation.
that a constitution for the united states 165 4 2 drafting a constitution rule tied taxes to population and counted only three fifths of enslaved residents when a state was being taxed.
the new compromise balanced the concerns of northerners and southerners by using the three fifths rule which had already been agreed upon as an acceptable way to assign both representatives and taxes to each state.
further disagreement over slavery there was another disagreement over slavery.
by 1787 some northern states had banned the slave trade within their borders.
delegates from these states urged that the slave trade be banned in the entire nation.
southerners argued that such a ban would ruin their economy.
in the end northern and southern states compromised once more.
northerners agreed that congress could not outlaw the slave trade for at least 20 years.
after that congress could regulate the slave trade if it wished.
northerners also agreed that no state could stop a person fleeing slavery from being returned to an owner.
b identify central ideas why did many of the northern states object to including enslaved people in population counts.
despite the fact some delegates from northern states urged that slavery be banned throughout the nation the constitutional convention did not succeed in ending the slave trade.
the convention comes to a conclusion as the long hot summer drew to a close the weary delegates struggled with one difficult question after another.
how many years should the president head of the executive branch serve.
how should the system of federal courts be organized.
would members of congress be paid.
finally on september 17 1787 the constitution was ready to be signed.
its opening lines or preamble expressed the goals of the framers we the people of the united states in order to form a more perfect union gathering for the last time delegates listened quietly as benjamin franklin rose to speak.
he pleaded that the document be accepted i doubt.
whether any other convention.
may be able to make a better constitution.
i cannot help expressing a wish that every member of the convention who may still have objections to it would with me on this occasion doubt a little of his own infallibility and.
put his name to this instrument.
benjamin franklin iduvidu t tit.
u 1 i d fmv of.
v7s7 one by one delegates came forward to sign the document.
all but three of the delegates remaining in philadelphia did so.
edmund randolph and george mason of virginia along with elbridge gerry of massachusetts refused to sign.
they feared that the new constitution gave too much power to the national government.
the main effect of the constitution s creation was to set in motion a process in which states had to decide whether to approve the constitution.
the constitution called upon each state to hold a convention to approve or reject the plan for the new government.
once nine states endorsed it the constitution would become the law of the land.
b identify supporting details why did some delegates choose not to sign the constitution.
constitution for the united states 166 4 2 drafting a constitution assessment contrast the ideas of alexander hamilton with those of george mason.
which one was more pleased with the final constitution.
hypothesize why did new jersey propose the plan that it did.
evaluate arguments the great compromise is so named because it was considered vital to the success of the convention.
what proof is there that it was a great compromise.
draw conclusions how did the agreement that no state could stop a fugitive slave from being returned to his or her owner affect slaves.
determine relevance what is so significant about the preambles opening words we the people of the united states.
x xu ttifod states 167 4 2 drafting a constitution a constitution for the united states xo w.
1 1 j 1 t vw 4 3 long before the revolution john adams called on americans to investigate how governments worked.
the tradition of representative government in colonial history dates back to the mayflower compact written and signed at sea in 1620 to provide rules for settling plymouth.
interactive flipped video j 3 b 14 a 15 a 15 c 20 a objectives identify what american leaders learned about government from studying ancient rome.
summarize the traditions of freedom that americans inherited from england and from their own colonial past.
describe how the enlightenment ideas shaped the development of the constitution.
ideas that influenced the constitution principles from the roman republic key terms founding fathers republic dictatorship magna carta english bill of rights habeas corpus separation of powers digital lesson.
search into the spirit of the british constitution read the histories of ancient ages contemplate the great examples of greece and rome and set before us the conduct of our own british ancestors.
john adams.
the delegates to the constitutional convention followed this advice.
they wanted to create a republic a government in which citizens rule themselves through elected representatives.
few republics in the history of the world survived very long.
in order to create one that would last american leaders looked first to the ancient examples of greece and especially rome.
168 the virtues of a republic americans greatly admired the roman republic.
general charles lee one of george washingtons commanders commented i used to regret not being thrown into the world in the glorious era of the romans independence and public service were virtues that the founding fathers saw in the citizens of rome.
roman citizens were willing to serve in public office not for money but because they were devoted to their republic.
the founders wrote the constitution with these same civic virtues in mind and hoped americans would live by the same principles.
many american colonists admired rome so much that when they debated politics in the newspapers they often signed their opinions with roman names such as cincinnatus or cicero.
a belief in independent citizens at the same time the founding fathers saw the collapse of romes republic as a warning to the united states.
no republic could survive unless its citizens remained independent and devoted to public service without the desire for personal or financial gains.
under the ruler caesar augustus rome eventually became a dictatorship a government in which one person or a small group holds complete authority.
the leaders of the american revolution believed that romans stumbled once they allowed corruption to take over.
historians today admit that the founding fathers somewhat exaggerated the virtues of romes republic.
yet the lessons they learned still have force.
republics do not always die because they are invaded from outside.
without educated and dedicated citizens who put the nations needs above their own republics can decay from within due to corruption.
el list what qualities of citizens in the roman republic did many early colonists admire.
english influences greece and rome were not the only examples of democratic government.
despite their quarrel with britain leaders of the revolution valued british traditions of freedom.
the magna carta king john of england signed the magna carta in 1215.
the magna carta contained two basic ideas that helped to shape both british and american government.
first it made it clear that english monarchs themselves had to obey the law.
king john agreed not to raise taxes without first consulting the great council of nobles and church the founders including thomas jefferson shown here looked to the roman republic for inspiration as they drafted the constitution.
this illustration shows king john of england signing the magna carta in 1215.
infer how might the magna carta have influenced the ideas of the writers of the united states constitution.
351 interactive timeline a constitution for the united states 169 4 3 ideas that influenced the constitution officials.
eventually the great council grew into the british parliament.
just as important the magna carta stated that english nobles had certain rights rights that were later extended to other classes of people as well.
these included rights to trial by jury and the right to private property.
the idea of private property rights strongly influenced the beliefs of early americans which partly explains the development of a free enterprise system throughout the nation.
the english bill of rights in 1689 the english bill of rights went further in protecting the rights of citizens.
the document said that parliamentary elections should be held regularly.
it upheld the right to a trial by jury and allowed citizens to bear arms.
it also affirmed the right of habeas corpus the idea that no person could be held in prison without first being charged with a specific crime.
b identify central issues what are some of the essential ideas found in the magna carta.
in this engraving william and mary of england receive the english bill of rights.
cite evidence how did the english bill of rights expand the rights given to citizens in the magna carta.
elps elps reading 4 c 3 read the first two of the text.
use words such as examples in paragraphs sentences.
america draws on its own traditions americans enjoyed a long tradition of representative government.
the virginia colonists set up the house of burgesses.
eventually each colony elected its own legislature.
self government americans were also used to relying on written documents that clearly identified the powers and limits of government.
the mayflower compact written in 1620 was the first document of self government in north america.
each of the 13 colonies had a written charter granted by the monarch or by parliament.
answerable to the people the framers of the constitution also drew on their own experiences.
the founding fathers bitterly remembered their grievances against the english king.
in writing the constitution they sought to prevent such abuses.
for example the declaration of independence accused the king of placing military power above civilian authority.
the constitution made the elected president commander in chief of the army and navy.
and of the militia of the several states the declaration protested that the king had made judges dependent on his will alone the constitution set up a court system independent of the president and legislature.
the framers were very familiar with the workings of the second continental congress the articles of confederation and their own state governments.
much that went into the constitution came either from the articles or from the state constitutions.
the influence of the enlightenment the constitution was also based on the ideas of the european enlightenment.
enlightenment thinkers believed that people could improve society through the use of reason.
many of the constitution s framers had read the works of enlightenment thinkers.
john locke the english writer john locke published wo treatises of government in 1690.
in it he stated two important ideas.
first locke declared that all people had natural rights to life liberty and property.
second he suggested that government is an agreement between the ruler and the ruled.
the ruler a constitution for the united states 170 4 3 ideas that influenced the constitution must enforce the laws and protect the people.
if a ruler violates the peoples natural rights the people have a right to rebel.
lockes ideas were popular among americans.
the framers of the constitution wanted to protect peoples natural rights and limit the power of government.
they saw the constitution as a contract between the people and their government.
lockes principle of a natural right to property was established in the constitution.
certain guarantees in the constitution protect the rights of people to own private property enforce contracts and engage freely in business activities.
these freedoms are essential to free enterprise.
article i of the constitution also gave congress the power to regulate commerce and encourage the free flow of goods between states creating an environment in which business could thrive.
baron de montesquieu the french enlightenment thinker baron de montesquieu mahn tus kyoo influenced american ideas of how a government should be constructed.
in his 1748 book the spirit of the laws montesquieu stressed the importance of the rule of law.
the powers of government he said should be clearly defined and divided up.
he suggested that three separate branches be created the legislative executive and judicial.
this idea known as the separation of powers was designed to keep any person or group from gaining too much power.
a new tradition emerges from others the founding fathers drew on many traditions.
in the end though the new system of government was not quite like anything that came before it.
when john adams received the news from philadelphia while serving as an ambassador to great britain he wrote as we say at sea huzza for the new world and farewell to the old one he called the constitution the greatest single effort of national deliberation that the world has ever seen recall what idea from baron de montesquieu influenced american government.
two treatises of government in the former the falfe principles and foundation sixrobert filmer and his foilow ers are 2 etectrt and the latter is an e s s a y concerning the true original extent and end o f civil government.
sije oceano gg iaonco ggea 0npojv printed 1 jtovjhatit and jtkncbtrckm at the slack in pttrnwkr htv 1694.
john lockes writings suggested the idea that governments exist to secure and protect the rights of their citizens.
interactive gallery assessment 1.
support ideas with examples the text says that the founders admired the romans because they had successfully built a republic.
what are some examples of the roman ideas that the founders admired.
make predications what do you think the americans attitude toward the english bill of rights would lead to.
draw conclusions why is the right of habeas corpus so important in the u s criminal justice system.
draw conclusions why do you think the founders learned to value written documents around the time they wrote the constitution.
summarize the influences of enlightenment thinkers on the united states constitution.
a constitution for the united states 171 4 3 ideas that influenced the constitution interactive flipped video the framers of the constitution sent the document to congress along with a letter from george washington.
washington warmly approved the document predicting that the constitution would promote the lasting welfare of that country so dear to us all 1 a 4 e 15 a 15 c 17 a objectives identify the key issues in the constitutional debate.
explain how the constitution was finally ratified.
describe how the bill of rights was added to the constitution.
key terms federalist antifederalist federalist papers amend bill of rights ratify access your digital lesson.
besides they said the constitution protected citizens well enough as it was.
antifederalists responded that a bill of rights was needed to protect such basic liberties as freedom of speech and religion.
unless these rights were spelled out they could be too easily ignored or denied by the government.
americans after all had just fought a revolution to protect their freedoms against a too powerful government.
violations of those freedoms were the main grievances cited in the declaration of independence.
antifederalists argued that a bill of rights was needed to address those grievances.
under the new constitution the president would have veto power over congress the peoples representatives.
surely placing so much power in one mans hands the antifederalists argued likewise demanded the protection of a bill of rights.
one of the strongest supporters of a bill of rights was george mason of virginia.
in 1776 mason had written the bill of rights for virginias constitution.
after the constitutional convention refused to include a bill of rights mason joined the antifederalists.
mason wrote a pamphlet opposing the ratification of the constitution.
the pamphlet was titled simply objections to this federalists antifederalists and the bill of rights the federalists and the antifederalists the framers had set up a process for the states to approve or ratify j the new government.
the constitution would go into effect when at least 9 of the 13 states had ratified it.
in 1787 and 1788 voters in each state elected delegates to special state conventions.
these delegates would decide whether or not to ratify the constitution.
for ratification the arguments of the federalists in every state heated debates took place.
supporters of the constitution called themselves federalists because they favored a strong federal or national government.
they called people who opposed the constitution antifederalists.
federalists argued that the articles of confederation left too much power with the individual states.
this imbalance produced a dangerously weak central government.
disputes among the states federalists said made it too difficult for the government to function.
federalists believed that the constitution gave the national government the authority it needed to function effectively.
at the same time they said the constitution still protected the rights and powers of the individual states.
federalists james madison alexander hamilton and john jay wrote a series of essays known today as the federalist papers.
their purpose was to explain and defend the constitution.
they used pen names but most people knew who they were.
today the federalist fapersremain among the best discussions of the political theory behind the american system of government.
courts still refer to the federalist papers in making decisions about the principles and role of government.
in this way they have had a lasting influence on the u s system of government.
against ratification the arguments of the antifederalists antifederalists felt that the constitution made the national government too strong and left the states too weak.
they also thought that the constitution gave the president too much power.
patrick henry of virginia protested this constitution is said to have beautiful features but.
they appear to me horribly frightful.
your president may become king.
if your american chief be a man of ambition and abilities how easy is it for him to render himself absolute.
patrick henry speech to the virginia convention june 1788 most people expected george washington to be elected president.
antifederalists admired washington but they warned that future presidents might lack washingtons honor and skill.
for this reason they said the office should not be too powerful.
identify main ideas what was the antifederalists primary objection to the constitution.
a bill of rights the chief objection of antifederalists was that the constitution had no bill or list of rights.
federalists held that it was impossible to list all the natural rights federalist alexander hamilton shown here with his arms outstretched outside of kings college in new york city favored ratification of the constitution.
interactive chart 172 a constitution for the united states 173 4 4 federalists antifederalists and the bill of rights constitution of government its opening words were equally direct there is no declaration of rights check understanding what was the purpose of george masons pamphlet.
the ratification process one by one the states voted.
delaware led the way ratifying on december 7 1787.
pennsylvania and new jersey soon followed.
in these states as in the states that ratified later the main cause behind ratification was that federalists were able to convince a majority of delegates that the constitution would bring an improved system of government.
the debate in new england massachusetts was the first key battleground.
there the old patriots sam adams and john hancock held back their support.
the delay seemed very ominous wrote madison.
finally adams and hancock convinced the state convention to recommend adding a bill of rights to the constitution.
still the debate continued.
some gentlemen say dont be in a hurry.
dont take a leap in the dark a federalist farmer told his fellow delegates.
gather fruit when it is ripe in february 1788 massachusetts became the sixth state to ratify.
in june new hampshire joined ranks as the ninth state.
the new government could now go into effect.
still the nations unity remained in doubt.
new york and virginia two of the largest states had not yet ratified the plan.
in both states federalists and antifederalists were closely matched.
a vote to ratify after long debates in virginia patrick henry george mason and governor edmund randolph led the opposition.
still a spellbinding speaker henry at one point spoke for seven hours.
soft spoken james madison could not match henrys dramatic style.
yet his arguments in favor of the constitution were always clear patient and to the point.
the tide finally turned when governor randolph changed his mind.
he gave his support only when the federalists promised to support a bill of rights.
virginia voted to ratify in late june.
in new york the struggle went on for another month.
in july 1788 the state convention voted to ratify.
north carolina followed in november 1789.
only rhode island which had refused to send delegates to the constitutional convention remained.
on may 29 1790 rhode island became the last state to ratify the constitution.
the effect of ratification was to create a new system of government for the united states the same basic system that remains in effect today.
celebration of a new constitution throughout the land americans celebrated the news that the constitution was ratified.
the city of philadelphia set its festival for july 4 1788.
a festive parade filed along market street led by soldiers who had fought in the revolution.
thousands a constitution for the united states 174 4 4federalists antifederalists and the bill of rights cheered as six colorfully outfitted horses pulled a blue carriage shaped like an eagle.
thirteen stars and stripes were painted on the front and the constitution was raised proudly above it.
benjamin rush a philadelphia doctor and strong supporter of the constitution wrote to a friend tis done.
we have become a nation recall what factor encouraged many states to vote for ratification.
new amendments americans voted in the first election under the constitution in january 1789.
as expected george washington was elected president while john adams was chosen as vice president.
the first congress met in new york city which was chosen as the nation s first capital.
congress quickly turned its attention to adding a bill of rights to the constitution.
several states had agreed to ratify the constitution only on the condition that a bill of rights be added.
amending the constitution the framers had establisheda way to amend or change the constitution to modify the rules for the national government.
they did not want people to make changes lightly however.
thus they made the process of amending the constitution fairly difficult.
in 1789 the first congress proposed a set of 12 amendments written by james madison.
as required by the constitution the amendments then went for ratification by the states three fourths of which had to ratify an amendment for it to take effect.
by december 1791 three fourths of the states had ratified 10 of the 12 amendments.
these 10 amendments became known as the bill of rights.
the bill of rights james madison insisted that the bill of rights does not give americans any rights.
the rights listed he said are natural rights that belong to all human beings.
the bill of rights simply prevents the government from taking these rights away.
some of the first 10 amendments were intended to prevent the kind of abuse americans had suffered under english rule.
for example the declaration of independence had condemned the king for forcing colonists to quarter troops in their homes and for suspending trial by jury.
the third amendment forbids the government to quarter troops in citizens homes without their consent.
the sixth and seventh amendments guarantee the right to trial by jury.
other amendments protected individual rights as uiany states had already done.
in 1786 the virginia george washington was inaugurated as the first president of the united states on april 30 1789.
statute of religious freedom stated that no man shall be compelled to frequent or support any religious worship or otherwise suffer on account of his religious opinions or belief religious freedom became the very first right listed in the first amendment.
the first amendment also emphasized a key element of the republic freedom of speech or the ability to express different points of view.
at first individual state governments were not considered subject to the bill of rights.
it was only after the ratification of the fourteenth amendment in 1868 and subsequent supreme court decisions that the bill of rights was applied to the states.
still with the bill of rights in place the new framework of government was complete.
over time the constitution would grow and change along with the nation.
id identify what amendments make up the bill of rights in the constitution.
ex323 elps reading 4 c 4 read aloud the text with a partner.
pay attention to the numbers used in the text and how they are related to the words that follow them.
a constitution for the united states 175 4 4federalists antifederalists andthebillofrights assessment 4.
summarize the ratification procedure for the constitution.
hypothesize the reasons that the anti federalists feared too much power resting with the central government.
support ideas with examples what examples can you think of that support the idea that a bill of rights is a good idea.
draw conclusions what do you think is the most likely reason that rhode island was the last state to ratify the constitution.
generate explanations why do you suppose james madison a federalist was the person responsible for writing amendments to the constitution which became the bill of rights.
the constitution is divided into three main parts the preamble or opening statement the articles and the amendments.
the original u s constitution is on display at the national archives in washington d c interactive flipped video understanding the constitution 15 d 18 a 21 a the preamble the articles and the amendments the preamble identifies six goals of the constitution we the people of the united states in order to form a more perfect union establish justice insure domestic tranquility provide for the common defense promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity do ordain and establish this constitution for the united states of america.
preamble to the constitution objectives explain the basic goals of the constitution as defined by the preamble.
identify the framework of government that the constitution established.
summarize the seven basic principles of american government.
identify the powers and duties of the legislative branch executive branch and judicial branch of the american government.
to form a more perfect union when the constitution was written the states saw themselves almost as separate nations.
the framers wanted to work together as a unified nation.
fortunately for us they achieved this goal.
think of what it would be like if you had to key terms preamble domestic tranquillity civilian general welfare liberty article popular sovereignty limited government checks and balances federalism house of representatives senate bill electoral college supreme court appeal unconstitutional veto override impeach constitutional initiative local government judicial review infrastructure 177 access your digital lesson.
a constitution for the united states 176 4 4federalists antifederalists and the bill of rigws in order to ensure domestic tranquillity the national guard helps provide assistance during local and national crises.
exchange your money every time you visited another state.
to establish justice the framers knew the nation needed a uniform system to settle legal disputes 1 today the american justice system requires that the law be applied fairly to every american regardless of race religion gender or country of origin.
to insure domestic tranquillity under the constitution the national government has the power to insure domestic tranquillity or peace and order at home.
have you seen reports of the national guard providing assistance in a disaster area.
by such actions the government works to insure domestic tranquillity.
to provide for the common defense every country has a duty to protect its citizens against foreign attack.
the framers of the constitution gave the national government the power to raise armies and navies.
at the same time they placed the military under civilian f or nonmilitary control.
separation of powers legislative branch congress passes laws can override president s veto approves treaties and presidential appointments can impeach and remove president and other high officials creates lower federal courts appropriates money prints and coins money raises and supports armed forces can declare war regulates foreign and interstate trade executive branch judicial branch president f carries out laws proposes laws can veto laws negotiates foreign treaties serves as commander in chief of the armed forces appoints federal judges ambassadors and other high officials can grant pardons to federal offenders supreme court and other federal courts interprets laws can declare laws unconstitutional can declare executive actions unconstitutional analyze charts how is the power to make and enforce laws divided among the three branches of government.
interactive chart as one of the three branches of the u s government the u s congress meets regularly to revise existing laws and make new ones.
to promote the general welfare the constitution set out to give the national government the means to promote the general welfare or the well being of all its citizens.
for example today the national institutes of health leads the fight against many diseases.
to secure the blessings of liberty during the revolution the colonists fought and died for liberty or freedom.
it is no surprise that the framers made.
liberty a major goal of the constitution.
over the years amendments to the constitution have extended the blessings of liberty to all americans.
the articles and the amendments the main body of the constitution is a short document divided into seven sections called articles.
together they establish the framework for our government.
seven articles the first three articles describe the three branches of the national government legislative executive and judicial.
article i establishes the powers of and limits on congress.
articles ii and iii do the same for the president and the courts.
article iv deals with relations among the states.
it requires states to honor one anothers laws and legal decisions.
it also sets out a system for admitting new states.
article v provides a process to amend the constitution.
article vi states that the constitution is the supreme law of the land this means that states may not make laws that violate the constitution.
if a state law conflicts with a federal law the federal law prevails.
the final article article vii sets up a procedure for the states to ratify the constitution.
twenty seven amendments in more than 200 years only 27 formal changes have been made to the constitution.
the first 10 amendments known as the bill of rights were added in 1791.
h define what is each section of the constitution called.
elps reading 4 d 1 read the texts title and subheadings.
create a graphic organizer and then fill it in while reading this text.
elps seven basic principles the constitution reflects seven basic principles.
they are popular sovereignty limited government separation of powers checks and balances federalism republicanism and individual rights.
popular sovereignty the framers of the constitution lived at a time when monarchs claimed that their power came from god.
the preamble with its phrase we the people reflects a revolutionary new idea that a government gets its authority from the people.
this principle known as popular sovereignty states that the people have the right to alter or abolish their government.
limited government the colonists had lived under a british government with nearly unlimited powers.
to avoid giving too much power to their new government the framers made limited government a principle of the constitution.
in a limited government the government has only the powers that the constitution gives it.
just as important everyone from you to the president must obey the law.
separation of powers to further limit government power the framers provided for separation of powers.
the constitution separates the government into three branches.
congress or the legislative branch makes the laws.
the executive branch headed by the president carries out the laws.
the judicial branch composed of the courts judges whether actions violate laws and whether laws violate the constitution.
checks and balances a system of checks and balances safeguards against abuse of power.
each branch of government has the power to check or limit the actions of the other two.
the separation of powers allows for this system of checks and balances.
ution for the united states 178 4 5 understanding the constitution a constitution for the united states 179 4 5 understanding the constitution in a republican form of government people elect representatives to carry out their will rather than taking part directly.
draw conclusions why is it important for people to vote in elections.
congress meets at the u s capitol in washington d c.
the building is home to the senate the house of representatives and many congressional offices.
interactive gallery institution for the united states 4 5 understanding federalism the constitution also reflects the principle of federalism or the division of power between the federal government and the states.
among the powers the constitution gives the federal government are the power to coin money declare war and regulate trade between the states.
states regulate trade within their own borders make rules for state elections and establish schools.
some powers are shared between the federal government and the states.
powers not clearly given to the federal government belong to the states.
republicanism the constitution provides for a republican form of government.
instead of taking part directly in government citizens elect representatives to carry out their will.
once in office representatives vote according to their own judgment.
however they must remain open to the opinions of the people they represent.
for that reason members of congress maintain websites and offices in their home districts.
individual rights the final principle the u s constitution reflects is individual rights such as freedom of speech freedom of religion and the right to trial by jury.
you will read more about the rights protected by the constitution later.
b identify supporting details what is the principle of federalism.
elps elps listening 2 c 3 read the text.
then listen to words presented in class and to sentences you and your classmates will create using those words.
the legislative branch congress the first and longest article of the constitution deals with the legislative or lawmaking branch.
article i sets up the congress to make the nations laws.
congress is made up of two bodies the house of representatives and the senate.
the house of representatives the larger of the two bodies is the house of representatives which currently has 435 members.
representation in the house is based on population with larger states having more representatives than smaller states.
every state has at least one representative.
representatives are elected by the people of their district for two year terms.
as a result the entire house is up for election every other year.
representatives may run for reelection as many times as they want.
the constitution the leader of the house is called the speaker.
the speaker of the house is one of the most powerful people in the federal government.
the speaker regulates debates and controls the agenda.
if the president dies or leaves office the speaker of the house is next in line after the vice president to become president.
the senate unlike the house the senate is based on equal representation of the states with two senators for each state.
senators are elected to six year terms.
their terms overlap however so that one third of the members come up for election every two years.
this way there is always a majority of experienced senators.
not all of the founders trusted the judgment of the common people.
as a result they called for senators to be chosen by state legislatures.
over the years the nation slowly became more democratic.
the seventeenth amendment ratified in 1913 provided that senators be directly elected by the people of each state like members of the house.
the vice president of the united states is president of the senate.
the vice president presides over the senate and casts a vote when there is a tie.
the vice president cannot however take part in senate debates.
when the vice president is absent the senates president pro tempore or temporary president presides.
powers of congress the most important power of congress is the power to make the nations laws.
all laws start as proposals called bills.
a new bill may be introduced in either the house or the senate.
however an appropriations bill which is a bill that sets aside money for government programs or operations must be introduced in the house.
after a bill is introduced it is debated.
if both houses vote to approve the bill it is then sent to the president.
if the president signs the bill it becomes a law.
the constitution gives congress many other powers besides lawmaking.
article i section 8 lists most of the powers of congress.
they include the power to levy or require people to pay taxes and to borrow money.
congress also has the power to coin money to establish post offices to fix standard weights and measures and to declare war.
the elastic clause not all the powers of congress are specifically listed.
article i section 8 clause 18 states that congress can make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying out its specific duties.
this clause is known as the elastic clause because it enables congress to stretch its powers to deal with the changing needs of the nation.
united states senators sit for a formal portrait in the senate chamber of the capitol.
americans have long debated the true meaning of the elastic clause.
what did the framers mean by the words necessaryand proper for example early leaders debated whether the elastic clause gave congress the right to set up a national bank even though the constitution does not specifically give congress that power.
today political parties still have different points of view on how the elastic clause should be used.
some americans continue to worry that congress might use the elastic clause to abuse its powers.
sometimes the terms strict constructionists and loose constructionists are used to refer to people with different views of the clause.
strict constructionists think that congress and the courts that interpret laws should strictly construe or narrowly interpret the elastic clause.
they believe the elastic clause should be used to stretch the powers of government rarely and only to a small degree.
partly because many members of the republican party today are strict constructionists that party particularly believes in reducing or eliminating some government programs.
in contrast loose constructionists think that congress and the courts that interpret laws should loosely construe or broadly interpret the elastic clause.
they think the elastic clause should be used to stretch a constitution for the united states 181 4 5 understanding the constitution the powers of government as often as needed and to a greater degree.
many members of the democratic party today are loose constructionists.
because they believe that the role of the federal government can and should expand as needed they may support government programs opposed by members of the republican party.
the committee system the first congress meeting from 1789 to 1791 considered a total of 31 new bills.
today more than 10 000 bills are introduced in congress each year.
clearly it would be impossible for every member of congress to give each new bill careful study.
to deal with this problem congress relies on committees.
both the house and the senate have permanent or standing committees.
each committee deals with a specific topic such as agriculture banking business defense education science or transportation.
members who have served in congress the longest are usually appointed to the most important committees.
congress may sometimes create joint committees made up of both senate and house members.
one of the most important kinds of joint committees is the one presidential duty is to honor american soldiers.
here president barack obama awards a medal of honor to a member of the u s armed forces in the white house.
conference committee.
its task is to settle differences between house and senate versions of the same bill.
q identify supporting details how does a bill become a law.
the executive branch the president article ii of the constitution sets up an executive branch to carry out the laws and run the affairs of the national government.
the president is the head of the executive branch.
other members include the vice president and the executive departments.
the heads of the executive departments who advise the president are called the cabinet.
the many roles of the president you are probably more familiar with the president than with any other government leader.
you see him on television climbing in and out of airplanes greeting foreign leaders or making speeches.
yet many americans do not know exactly what the president does.
the framers thought that congress would be the most important branch of government.
thus while the constitution is very specific about the role of the legislature it offers fewer details about the powers of the president.
beginning with george washington presidents have often taken those actions they thought necessary to carry out the job.
in this way they have shaped the job of president to meet the nations changing needs.
s the president is our highest elected official and along with the vice president the only one who represents all americans.
as head of the executive branch the president has the duty to carry out the nations laws.
the president directs foreign policy and has the power to make treaties with other nations and to appoint ambassadors.
the president is commander in chief of the armed forces.
only congress however has the power to declare war.
as the nations chief legislator the president suggests new laws and works for their passage.
the president can grant pardons and call special sessions of congress.
the president is also the living symbol of the nation.
presidents welcome foreign leaders make speeches to commemorate national holidays and give medals to national heroes.
the electoral college the president is elected for a four year term.
as a result of the twenty second j ititution for the united states 182 4 5 understanding the constitution electoral college votes 2012 2020 new hampshire 4 vermont 3.
rhode island 4 connecticut 7 new jersey 14 delaware 3 400 km albers conic equal area projection key 9 indicates the number of electoral votes for the state the number of electors each state has is based on the combined total of the states senators and representatives.
analyze maps why might the number of a states electors change.
massachusetts 11 i 2 2 indiana 9ftl.
illinois i 11 1 wesr 20 k virginia 1 g virginia j kmaryland 10 13 d district of columbia 3 north carolina 15 souths carolina atlantic ocean 400 mi amendment adopted in 1951 no president may be elected to more than two complete terms.
the framers set up a complex system for electing the president known as the electoral college.
when americans vote for president they do not vote directly for the candidate of their choice.
rather they vote for a group of electors who are pledged to the candidate.
the number of a states electors equals the number of its senators and representatives.
no state has fewer than three electors.
a few weeks after election day the electors meet in each state to cast their votes for president.
in most states the candidate with the majority of the popular vote in that state receives all that state s electoral votes.
the candidate who receives a majority of the electoral votes nationwide becomes president.
because of the winner take ah nature of the electoral college a candidate can lose the popular vote nationwide but still be elected president.
this has happened four times.
today some people favor replacing the electoral college with a system that directly elects the president by popular vote.
others oppose any change pointing out that the electoral college has served the nation well for more than 200 years.
recall how many terms is the president allowed to serve.
the judicial branch the supreme court article iii of the constitution establishes a supreme court and authorizes congress to establish any other courts that are needed.
under the judiciary act of 1789 congress set up the system of federal courts that is still in place today.
lower courts most federal cases begin in district courts.
evidence is presented during trials and a jury or a judge decides the facts of the case.
a party that disagrees with the decision of the judge or jury may appeal it that is ask that the decision be reviewed by a higher court.
the next level of courts is the appellate courts or courts of appeal.
appellate court judges review decisions of district courts to decide whether the lower court judges interpreted and applied the law correctly.
a constitution for the united states 183 4 5 understanding the constitution supreme court at the top of the american judicial system is the supreme court.
the court is made up of a chief justice and eight associate justices.
the president appoints the justices but congress must approve the appointments.
justices serve for life.
the main job of the supreme court is to serve as the nation s final court of appeals.
it hears cases that have been tried and appealed in lower courts.
because its decisions are final the supreme court is called the court of last resort the supreme court hears and decides fewer than 100 cases each year.
most of the cases are appeals from lower courts that involve federal laws.
after hearing oral arguments the justices vote.
decisions require a majority vote of at least five justices.
early on the court asserted the right to declare whether acts of the president or laws passed by congress are unconstitutional that is not allowed under the constitution.
this power is called judicial review.
the need for judicial review was first discussed in the federalist papers and the supreme court has argued that the power is implicit in the constitution but it was not established until the 1803 case marbury v madison which gave the supreme court the power of judicial review.
although powerful the supreme court is limited by the system of checks and balances.
one check on its power is that congress can in certain circumstances remove supreme court justices from office.
also the supreme court does not have the power to pass or enforce laws it can only provide judicial review of laws.
h check understanding what was the significant about the supreme court decision in the case marbury v madison 1803.
preventing abuse of power the framers hoped that the separation of powers among three branches would prevent the rise of an all powerful leader who would rob the people of their liberty.
but how could the framers prevent one of the branches from abusing its power.
to answer this problem they set up a system of checks and balances.
the system of checks and balances allows each of the three branches of government to check or limit the power of the other two.
the president for example can check the actions of congress by vetoing or rejecting bills that congress has passed.
congress can check the president by overriding or overruling the veto with a two thirds vote in both houses.
congress must also approve presidential appointments and ratify treaties made by the president.
the supreme court can check both the president and congress by declaring laws unconstitutional through its power of judicial review.
congress s most extreme check on the president is its power to remove the president from office.
to do this the house of representatives must impeach or bring reviews more than 7 000 petitions a year and selects 100 150 cases based on national importance of the case need to eliminate conflicting court opinions related to a case opportunity to set a precedent agreement among 4 of 9 justices to accept a case disputes between states or between a state and citizens of another state actions involving ambassadors or vice consuls of foreign nations actions between the u s and a state state supreme court appeals of appellate court cases appellate court appeals of trial court cases trial court civil and criminal cases juries render verdicts judges enforce procedures court of appeals appeals of cases originating in u s district courts reviews decisions by federal agencies district court civil and criminal cases juries render verdicts judges ensure fair trial a case can reach the supreme court through several paths.
draw conclusions why do you think so few cases reach the supreme court.
a constitution for the united states 184 4 5 understanding the constitution charges of serious wrongdoing against the president.
the senate then conducts a trial.
if two thirds of the senators vote to convict the president must leave office.
throughout our history only two presidents andrew johnson and bill clinton have been impeached by the house.
neither was convicted by the senate.
the principle of checks and balances is based on the principle of separation of powers.
because the powers of government are separated into three branches each branch can check the power of the other two.
like many principles in the constitution separation of powers and the system of checks and balances came from european philosophers of the enlightenment.
one of these philosophers was baron de montesquieu who wrote the spirit of laws.
montesquieu argued that the powers of government should be split among three equal branches legislative executive and judicial.
this would prevent any branch of government from becoming too powerful and protect individuals rights.
we can see many of montesquieus ideas reflected in the constitution today.
b identify supporting details what checks does congress have over the president.
the members of both houses of the texas state legislature as well as the governor carry out their duties at the state capitol building in austin.
state government one principle of the constitution is federalism or the division of powers between the federal and state governments.
the federal government deals with national issues.
the states have the power to meet more local needs.
there are also some powers that are shared.
but state governments provide many basic services that americans use each day.
the question of states rights many americans originally opposed the constitution because they thought it gave too much power to the federal government at the expense of the state governments.
the tenth amendment was written to help ensure that the states keep powers not granted the federal government the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution nor prohibited by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people.
tenth amendment to the constitution some americans point to the tenth amendment as support for what is often called states rights or the idea that the federal government should not infringe if a constitution for the united states 1 on states powers.
a similar idea is that of state sovereignty or the idea that within a state the state government is supreme.
the federal government has used the elastic clause to assume powers that some believe belong to the states.
thus the debate over how power should be shared between the federal and state governments has been a matter of controversy through most of american history.
state constitutions each of the 50 states has a constitution that sets forth the principles and framework of its government.
although constitutions vary from state to state they must all conform to the constitution of the united states.
if a conflict arises the national constitution the supreme law of the land prevails.
most state constitutions resemble the national constitution in form.
they start with a preamble stating their goals and include a bill of rights guaranteeing individual liberties.
state constitutions tend to be longer and more detailed than the national constitution.
many include provisions on finance education and other matters.
state constitutions set up a government with three branches.
the powers of the legislative executive and judicial branches on the state level are similar to those of the national government.
i 4 5 understanding the constitution the california state government established the golden gate state park in the 1870s and ordered the construction of the golden gate bridge which opened to the public in 1937.
locally supported public education is important not only to the states but also to the nation.
institution for the united states changing state constitutions state constitutions can be changed in several ways.
in the most common method amendments are proposed by the state legislature and approved by the people in an election.
in almost one half of the states citizens can act directly to change the constitution.
in a process known as the constitutional initiative sponsors of an amendment gather signatures on a petition.
when the required number of signatures is attained the petition goes to the legislature or to the voters for approval.
finally a state can rewrite its constitution.
with the approval of the legislature or the people the state may call a constitutional convention.
the new constitution is then submitted to the people for official approval.
the states obligations to citizens state governments provide a wide range of services.
they maintain law and order enforce criminal law protect property and regulate business.
they also supervise public education provide public health and welfare programs build and maintain highways operate state parks and forests and regulate use of state owned land.
the states not the federal government have the main responsibility for public education in the united states.
most students attend schools paid for and overseen by the state.
the state sets general standards for schools and establishes a recommended course of study.
it also sets requirements for promotion and graduation.
each state must build and maintain its own infrastructure or system of transit lines roads bridges and tunnels.
state departments or agencies manage more than 6 000 state parks and recreation areas.
to help maintain high standards state governments license the professionals who serve you such as doctors lawyers and teachers.
when you are old enough to drive the state will test you and if you pass give you a license.
state police keep highways safe and protect us against criminal acts.
m identify what are some examples of services that states provide to their citizens.
the responsibilities of local government the constitution defines the powers of the federal and state governments.
but it does not mention local government that is government on the county parish city town village or district level.
local governments are created entirely by the states and 186 4 5 understanding the constitution have only those powers and functions that states give them.
local governments have perhaps the greatest impact on our daily lives.
at the same time it is on the local level that citizens have the greatest opportunity to influence government.
public education the service that local governments spend the most money on is education.
while state governments set standards for schools it is the cities towns or school districts that actually run them.
local school boards build schools and hire teachers and staff.
they also have a strong say in which courses will be taught.
however school officials must make all decisions within the guidelines set by state law.
education is one area of local government where citizens exert a great deal of control.
local residents may give up part of their time to serve on local school boards.
in most communities voters have the right to approve or turn down the annual school budget.
many other services local governments provide a variety of other services.
they hire or support firefighters police and garbage collectors.
local governments provide sewers and water maintain local roads and hospitals and conduct safety inspections of buildings and restaurants.
in many cases water and sewage treatment plants are owned and run by local governments.
other communities hire private companies to supply local needs.
over the years americans have looked to local government for more than basic services.
today most local governments provide libraries and parks and other cultural and recreational facilities.
in larger cities citizens expect their local governments to support airports sports arenas and civic centers.
public funding for such facilities is often the subject of debate in major cities.
fei identify on what service for citizens do local governments spend the most money.
assessment 1 determine relevance what is the significance of the preambles opening words we the people of the united states.
a constitution for the united states 187 local governments take responsibility for providing citizens with public services such as firefighters and police.
generate explanations why is article vi which declares that the constitution is the supreme law of the land so important.
analyze information what is meant by the statement that representatives must remain open to the opinions of the people they represent 4.
compare and contrast the viewpoints of strict constructionists and loose constructionists.
support ideas with evidence how would you use the tenth amendment of the constitution to support the idea that the federal government should not assume more power than it already has.
4 5 understanding the constitution the first amendment protects freedom of speech and freedom of the press or media.
the media provide the public with a variety of perspectives on local state and national issues.
the framers foresaw that americans might need to change the constitution to address flaws or changed circumstances however they did not want to make it too easy to change the constitution.
as a result they created a complex amendment process.
the process may take months or even years to complete.
interactive flipped video 16 a 19 b 21 b 25 a 25 c objectives explain how the constitution can be amended.
identify the rights that the bill of rights protects.
summarize how later amendments expanded democratic rights.
key terms bill of rights first amendment second amendment incriminate civil war amendments nineteenth amendment twenty sixth amendment civil amending the constitution constitutional amendment article v outlines two ways to propose an amendment.
an amendment may be proposed by two thirds of both the house and the senate or by i a national convention called by congress at the request of two thirds of the state legislatures.
the second method has never been used.
an amendment may also be ratified in one of two ways.
an amendment may be approved by the legislatures of three fourths of the states.
every amendment but the twenty first was ratified using this method.
in the second method an amendment may be approved by special conventions in three fourths of the states.
not all amendments proposed by congress have been ratified.
in fact congress has proposed six amendments that the states refused to ratify.
id identify which article of the constitution outlines the amendment process.
the bill of rights as one of its first acts the new congress drafted a series of amendments in 1789 and sent them to the states for approval.
in 1791 the bill of rights the first ten amendments became part of the constitution.
free speech press and religious freedom the first amendment safeguards basic individual liberties.
it protects freedom of religion speech and the press.
it also guarantees the right to assemble peacefully and to petition the government to change its policies.
because of the first amendment you cannot be arrested for criticizing a government official.
you can attend the house of worship of your choice or none at all.
you can read newspapers that do not represent the views of an official political party.
these freedoms are important in a constitutional republic because they allow citizens to make informed decisions and take part freely in political life.
still there are limits on the first amendment.
for example the government can limit free speech if there is a clear and present danger such as in time of war.
the first amendment s guarantee of freedom of religion has a long history.
many colonists came to america to escape religious persecution.
they wanted to be able to pray and worship freely.
today americans are allowed to practice religion as they please without fear of government interference.
the guarantee of freedom of religion has allowed the religious diversity that is part of the american way of life.
protection against abuse of power the second amendment states a well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed other amendments reflect the colonists experiences under british rule.
the third amendment says that congress may not force citizens to put up troops in their homes.
the fourth amendment protects americans from unlawful searches of home or property.
since early times americans have debated the exact meaning of the second amendment.
some believe that it guarantees individuals a basic right to bear arms.
others argue that it simply guarantees the individual states the right to maintain militias.
the question of limits to gun ownership is one of the most complex and controversial constitutional issues facing americans today.
protecting the rights of the accused the fifth through eighth amendments deal with the rights of people accused of crimes.
the fifth amendment states methods of amending the constitution proposed es access your digital lesson.
ojr by national convention called by congress at request of of state legislature y ratified i by legislature in of states si by state convention in of states elps listening 2 c 4 read the text.
then learn new academic vocabulary through interaction with a partner as directed by your teacher.
analyze information after an amendment to the constitution has been proposed by both the senate and the house of representatives what two options exist for the states to ratify the amendment.
7 w1 188 a constitution for the united states 189 4 6 amending the constitution that people cannot be forced to incriminate or give evidence against themselves.
the sixth amendment guarantees the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial or fair jury.
it also states that people accused of crimes have the right to know the charges against them as well as the right to confront the person making the charges.
the seventh amendment provides for juries for civil or noncriminal trials.
the eighth amendment forbids judges from ordering excessive bail or fines or cruel and unusual punishments upholding individual rights some americans had opposed adding a bill of rights.
they argued that if specific rights were listed in the constitution americans might lose other rights that were not listed.
the ninth amendment solved that problem.
it makes clear that a citizens individual rights are not limited to those listed in the constitution.
the tenth amendment reaffirmed the framers plan to create a limited federal government.
it states that all powers not given to the national government or denied to the states are reserved for the states or for the people.
bt recall which amendments protect the rights of those accused of a crime.
elps elps reading 4 c 2 move around the classroom as directed by your teacher.
note the meanings of labels and other kinds of writing on objects around the classroom.
additional amendments since the addition of the bill of rights the constitution has been amended only 17 times.
many later amendments reflect changing attitudes about equality and the expansion of democracy.
the thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth amendments are known as the civil war amendments.
the thirteenth amendment abolished slavery.
the fourteenth amendment guaranteed citizenship to former slaves.
the fifteenth amendment declared that states may not deny the vote to any citizen on the basis of race color or previous condition of servitude this guaranteed african american men the right to vote.
other amendments further expanded voting rights.
the nineteenth amendment ratified in 1920 gave women the right to vote.
women achieved this victory after more than 70 years of struggle.
in 1971 changing attitudes toward the rights and responsibilities of young people gave choosing amendments bill of rights another of the original 12 amendments was ratified in 1992.
w finally 10 amendments were ratified by the states in 1791 as the bill of rights.
analyze information approximately what percentage of the more than 200 amendments proposed by the states ratifying conventions finally made it into the bill of rights.
a constitution for the united states 190 4 6 amending the constitution birth to the twenty sixth amendment.
it lowered the minimum voting age from 21 to 18.
itldentlfy which amendment gave women the right to vote.
assessment 1.
hypothesize why the framers of the constitution did not want to make it easy to amend the constitution.
support ideas with examples give and explain an example of something that supports the idea that in order to self govern people must be able to access information and make their own decisions.
summarize what fear did the ninth amendment address and how did it do so.
hypothesize why the framers of the constitution thought it was important to be able to change it with amendments although they made it difficult to do so.
draw conclusions why do you think the constitution has been amended seventeen times in addition to the amendments called the bill of rights.
4 6 amending the constitution a constitution for the united states 1 j interactive flipped video a citizen is a person who owes loyalty to a particular nation and is entitled to all its rights and protections.
19 c 19 d 19 f 20 b objectives summarize what makes a person a citizen of the united states.
identify how americans can develop democratic values.
describe the responsibilities of citizenship.
key terms citizen naturalize immigrant resident alien civic virtue patriotism jury duty access your digital lesson.
citizens rights and responsibilities american citizenship to be a citizen of the united states you must have fulfilled one of three requirements you were born in the united states or at least one parent is a citizen of the united states.
you were naturalized that is you have completed the official legal process for becoming a citizen if you were born outside the united states.
you were 18 or younger when your parents were naturalized.
becoming a citizen throughout american history many millions of immigrants have become naturalized citizens.
an immigrant is a person who enters another country in order to settle there.
to illustrate the naturalization process we will look at one immigrants story.
at age 15 carla rojas came to the united states from argentina.
her mother returned home two years later but rojas decided to remain.
after submitting numerous documents and photographs and attending several interviews she received permission to remain in the country as a resident alien or noncitizen living in the country.
192 after a required five year waiting period carla submitted an application for citizenship.
she had to take a test to show that she was comfortable with the english language and that she was familiar with american history and government.
she also had to show that she was of good moral character then a naturalization examiner interviewed her about her reasons for becoming a citizen.
at last rojas stood before a judge and took the oath that confirmed her as an american citizen i hereby declare on oath that.
i will support and defend the constitution and laws of the united states against all enemies.
that i will bear true faith and allegiance to the same so help me god.
oath of allegiance to the united states a naturalized citizen enjoys every right of a natural born citizen except one.
only natural born citizens may serve as president or vice president.
the rights and responsibilities of citizens all american citizens have equal rights under the law.
americans have the right to speak freely to worship as they choose to vote and to serve on juries.
these rights are not based on inherited wealth or family connections.
they are the rights of american citizens.
still nothing is free.
as you will see if we want to enjoy the rights of citizenship we must also accept its responsibilities.
these rights and responsibilities reflect americas national identity the common set of values that unites americans.
for example citizens have both the right and the responsibility to vote.
this reflects the principles of independence liberty and self governance upheld in the constitution and valued by the american people.
0 define what is a citizen.
the importance of civic virtue the founding fathers admired civic virtue that is the willingness to work for the good of the nation or community even at great sacrifice.
they looked to toman models such as cincinnatus who it was said gave up a peaceful life on his farm when called upon to load rome.
again and again leaders such as george l washington thomas jefferson and john adams put the common good ahead of their own wishes.
these three presidents maintained that democracy requires virtuous behavior by citizens.
citizens must put the greater good ahead of their own desires when they follow the law serve on juries and make informed decisions about voting.
the leaders feared that without this responsible behavior american liberty would be at risk.
how can a democracy run if individuals do not think about what is best for society and not just for themselves.
you do not have to go to great lengths to be a good citizen.
at home at school and in the community you can work to develop the values that are the foundation of our democratic system.
among these basic values are honesty and compassion.
others include patriotism respect responsibility and courage.
a key democratic value is patriotism or a feeling of love and devotion toward ones country.
a sense of patriotism inspires americans to serve their nation.
it also encourages us to fulfill the ideals set forth in the declaration of independence the constitution and the bill of rights.
as citizens we must respect ourselves our families our neighbors and the other members of our community.
respect may also involve objects or ideas.
participating in community projects such as this clean up activity strengthens the ties between community members and helps to ensure that public spaces remain usable.
interactive chart a constitution for the united states 193 4 7 citizens rights and responsibilities for example a good citizen respects the property of others and the laws of the nation.
responsibility may be both personal and public.
we must accept responsibility for ourselves and the consequences of our actions and behaviors.
in a democracy individuals are expected to look out for themselves and for one another.
for example parents have a duty to support their families and teach their children.
this is important because children depend on parents and families depend on one another.
as a student you have a responsibility to learn.
courage may be either physical or moral.
soldiers police or firefighters display physical courage when they risk their lives for the good of others.
moral courage enables us to do the right thing even when it is unpopular difficult or dangerous.
americans such as george washington abraham lincoln susan b anthony and martin luther king jr faced risks in order to defend democratic values.
define what is civic virtue.
elps elps reading 4 f 1 with a partner look at the two photographs and describe them.
then use that information and information from the text surrounding key words to help you understand the text as you read it.
responsible citizenship as citizens we must accept our own civic responsibilities.
only if government and citizens work together can we meet our needs as a democratic society.
responsible citizens vote as citizens of a republic we have the right to select the people who will represent us in government.
but if that right is to have any meaning then we must fulfill our responsibility to vote.
a good citizen studies the candidates and the issues in order to make responsible choices.
responsible citizens obey laws and rules in the constitution we the people give the government the power to make laws for us.
thus we have a duty to obey the nations laws.
we have thousands of laws that keep us from hurting one another regulate contracts and protect citizens rights.
no one can know them all but you must know and obey the laws that affect your life and actions.
you also have a responsibility to obey rules.
you already have rules at home and rules at school even rules to games you play.
these rules are not enforced by the government as laws are.
like laws however they keep us safe help us live together and teach us to be accountable for our behavior.
by learning to obey rules such as not to hit or cheat when we are young we learn about responsible citizenship.
voter turnout 1900 2012 100 c 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2012 year sources u s census bureau historical statistics of the united states statistical abstracts of the united states and the federal election commision analyze data based on the information in the chart what trend can you identify in the percentage of the population actually voting from 1960 to 2000.
11 interactive chart v 4 7 citizens rights and responsibilities a constitution for the united states 19z responsible citizens defend the nation americans have the duty to help defend the nation against threats to its peace or security.
at age 18 all men must register for the draft.
in time of war the government may call them to serve in the armed forces.
many young citizens feel the duty to enlist in the military without being called.
responsible citizens serve on juries the bill of rights guarantees the right to trial by jury.
in turn every citizen has the responsibility to serve on a jury when called.
jury duty is a serious matter.
jurors must take time out from their work and personal lives to decide the fate of others.
responsible citizens participate in their communities many americans use their time and skills to improve their communities or to help others.
as you read david levitt was in middle school when he started a program to help the needy in his florida community.
many young people participate in walk a thons or bike a thons for charity.
others volunteer in hospitals or fire departments.
when serious natural disasters damage cities and regions millions of citizens aid in rescue efforts donate blood or contribute money and supplies.
responsible citizens stay informed on public issues thomas jefferson observed if a nation expects to be ignorant and free it expects what never was and never will be you cannot protect your rights as a citizen unless you know what they are.
you cannot choose elected officials who will make good decisions unless you know where they stand on the issues.
it is your responsibility to be informed.
you can watch television news programs and read newspapers magazines or government pamphlets.
your work in school will help you become educated about our history our government and the workings of our society.
identify supporting details what are some ways a citizen can stay informed about public issues.
waiting to cross the street until the light is green illustrates one way that citizens observe their responsibility to obey the law.
assessment 1.
hypothesize why someone who wants to become a citizen must take an oath of allegiance to the united states.
generate explanations why is bullying an example of being an irresponsible citizen.
draw conclusions why do you think the text says that to be a good citizen you have a responsibility to learn.
apply concepts why do you think george washington was a good role model for citizenship.
summarize what you as a student should do to be a good citizen.
a constitution for the united states 195 4 7 citizens rights and responsibilities 1.
explain articles of confederation explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including writing the articles of confederation.
write a paragraph explaining why the continental congress drafted the articles of confederation.
consider what the articles of confederation were why the continental congress believed that it needed the articles of confederation and what made the process of writing the articles of confederation difficult.
summarize weaknesses of articles of confederation summarize the weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
write a paragraph summarizing the weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
consider the limits placed on congress and what the articles of confederation lacked.
explain significance of 1787 explain the significance of 1787 the year the u s constitution was written.
write a paragraph explaining the significance of the constitutional convention.
answer the following questions when and where did the constitutional convention open.
what was the original goal of the convention.
what did the delegates to the convention decide to do instead.
analyze the great compromise summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution by analyzing the issues of the constitutional convention of 1787 including the great compromise.
write a paragraph analyzing how the great compromise peacefully settled the debate over the virginia and new jersey plans.
define the term compromise describe the great compromise and explain why it was a compromise.
4 d 21 c 5.
analyze importance of virginia house of burgesses analyze the importance of the virginia house of burgesses to the growth of representative government.
write a paragraph analyzing how virginias house of burgesses contributed to the growth of representative government.
identify what the virginia house of burgesses was and what tradition it established.
explain grievances addressed in u s constitution explain how the grievances listed in the declaration of independence were addressed in the u s constitution.
write a paragraph explaining how the founding fathers sought to prevent the abuses that the declaration of independence accused king george of committing.
explain how the constitution handled the grievances that the king placed military power above civilian authority and made judges dependent on his will alone 15 c 7.
explain role of john locke explain the role of significant individuals such as john locke in the development of self government in colonial america.
use the quotation above and the information from the lessons in this topic and other sources to write a paragraph explaining how john locke influenced the development of self government embodied in the u s constitution.
identify john locke use the quotation below to identify the two important ideas about government locke contributed and explain how these ideas influenced the framers of the u s constitution.
20 a the reason why men enter into society is the preservation of their property and the end while they choose and authorize a legislative is that there may be laws made and rules set as guards and fences to the properties of all the society.
whensoever therefore the legislative power shall transgress go beyond break this fundamental rule of society and either by ambition fear folly or corruption endeavor to grasp themselves or put into the hands of any other an absolute power over the lives liberties and estates of the people by this breach of trust they forfeit give up the power the people had put into their hands.
john locke two treatises cd government.
explain how rights and responsibilities reflect national identity explain how the rights and responsibilities of u s citizens reflect our national identity.
write a paragraph explaining how rights and responsibilities of citizens reflect our national identity.
explain how rights and responsibilities are tied together define the term national identity and provide an example of how the right to vote reflects our national identity.
19 f a constitution for the united states 196 5 000 4 500 4 000 3 500 3 000 2 500 2 000 1 500 1 000 500 1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 i860 1870 1880 1890 1900 with 5 000 free white male residents territories could elect a state assembly and send non voting representatives to congress with 60 000 residents could write a state constitution and apply for statehood.
9 explain northwest ordinance explain how the northwest ordinance established principles and procedures for orderly expansion of the united states.
use the graph above and other sources to write a paragraph explaining the principles and procedures the northwest ordinance established for how the northwest territory would be governed and how its territories could become states.
explain what the ordinance set up for the northwest territory what the ordinance protected and banned what could happen once a territory had 5 000 free white residents and what could happen once a territory had 60 000 free residents.
see graph above.
6 a explain development of property rights explain why a free enterprise system of economics including property rights developed in the new nation.
write a paragraph explaining how john lockes principle of a natural right to property was established in the u s constitution.
explain the rights related to property guaranteed by the constitution and how these rights contribute to free enterprise.
analyze arguments for ratification analyze the arguments for ratification of the constitution.
write a paragraph analyzing the arguments the federalists put forward for ratifying the constitution.
identify who the federalists were analyze why the federalists thought the articles of confederation needed to be replaced and analyze why the federalists believed the constitution should be ratified.
identify influence of the federalist papers identify the influence of ideas from historic documents including the federalist papers on the u s system of government.
write a paragraph identifying the role the federalist papers played in ratifying the constitution and the influence of this document on the u s system of government.
identify the purpose of the federalist papers identify who wrote the federalist papers and identify the influence of the federalist papers.
15 a a constitution for the united states tst imating 1 hl ephct op compromise population j free whites ho 442 177 free hz3 counting only the free population tt 13.
identify influence of antifederalist writings identify the influence of ideas from historic documents including selected antifederalist writings on the u s system of government and support a point of view on a social studies issue.
using antifederalist primary sources and other sources write a paragraph explaining the antifederalists point of view that the constitution needed a bill of rights.
identify how the antifederalists ideas influenced the u s system of government and use details to explain whether or not you agree with the antifederalists position that a bill of rights was necessary to the constitution.
15 a 29 e 14.
analyze three fifths compromise summarize a historical event in which a compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution by analyzing the issues of the constitutional convention of 1787 including the three fifths compromise.
using the chart above and other sources to write a paragraph analyzing how the three fifths compromise peacefully settled disagreements between northern states and southern states.
describe the issue and the compromise and use the chart to analyze the effect of the compromise on virginias representation in congress.
see graphic above.
4 d 21 c 15.
analyze arguments of george mason analyze the arguments of the anti federalists including those of george mason.
use the information from the lessons in this topic and other sources to write a paragraph analyzing george masons argument against the constitution.
identify george mason and analyze his reasons for joining the antifederalists in opposing the constitution.
describe effects of u s constitution describe the effects of creation and ratification of the u s constitution.
using the quotation below and other sources write a paragraph about the six goals of the u s constitution listed in the preamble.
identify the goals and describe why the framers thought these goals were important.
1 a we the people of the united states in order to form a more perfect union establish justice insure domestic tranquility provide for the common defense promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity do ordain and establish this constitution for the united states of america preamble to the u s constitution 17.
analyze principle of checks and balances analyze how the u s constitution reflects the principle of checks and balances.
write a paragraph analyzing the principle of checks and balances.
identify what is meant by the term checks and balances analyze why the framers made checks and balances a principle of the constitution and provide examples of how the different branches can check each other.
identify origin of judicial review identify the origin of judicial review.
write a paragraph identifying what judicial review is and when it was established.
identify what is meant by judicial review and which supreme court case established judicial review.
identify and support different points of view of political parties identify different points of view of political parties on important contemporary issues and support a point of view on a social studies issue or event.
identify the republican and democratic points of view on the elastic clause of the constitution and write a paragraph supporting either the republican or democratic point of view.
identify what the elastic clause is and each partys view of it and use evidence to support your point of view.
21 a 29 e 20.
analyze the principle of individual rights analyze how the u s constitution reflects the principle of individual rights by summarizing the rights guaranteed in the bill of rights.
write a paragraph summarizing how the bill of rights protects individual rights.
address each amendment in your paragraph.
15 d 19 b 21.
analyze impact of first amendment on religious freedom trace the development of religious freedom in the united states by analyzing the impact of the first amendment guarantees of religious freedom on the american way of life.
write a paragraph describing how the first amendment protects religious freedom.
indicate how the first amendment protects religious freedom and how protecting religious freedom is important to the american way of life both in colonial times and today.
25 a 25 c 22.
describe importance of free speech and free press describe the importance of free speech and free press in a constitutional republic.
write a paragraph describing why free speech and a free press are important in a constitutional republic.
summarize and explain becoming a naturalized citizen write a paragraph about becoming a naturalized u s citizen.
summarize the criteria and explain the process.
summarize amending u s constitution summarize the purposes and processes for amending the u s constitution.
use the chart above and other sources to write a paragraph summarizing the amendment process.
describe the purpose of the amendment process and explain why the framers created a complex system for amending the constitution.
describe the process for proposing and ratifying amendments.
see graphic above.
16 a a constitution for the united states 198 a constitution for the united states 199 teks assessment 25.
evaluate founding fathers as models of civic virtue evaluate the contributions of the founding fathers as models of civic virtue.
write a paragraph evaluating the founding fathers as models of civic virtue.
define the term civic virtue and give examples of how the founding fathers showed this trait.
explain importance of personal responsibilities explain the importance of personal responsibilities including accepting responsibility for ones behavior and supporting ones family.
write a paragraph explaining the importance of personal responsibility.
explain the importance of taking responsibility for ones own behavior and supporting ones family.
identify responsible citizenship identify examples of responsible citizenship including staying informed on public issues.
using the quotation below and other sources write a paragraph identifying why responsible citizens stay informed on public issues.
answer the following questions what did jefferson mean by his statement.
why is it important to be informed.
how can people stay informed.
19 d if a nation expects to be ignorant and free it expects what never was and never will be.
t horn a s jeffers o n 28.
reflect on the essential question write an essay on the essential question how much power should the government have.
use evidence from your study of this topic to support your answer.
i a constitution for the united states 200 texas essential knowledge and skills practice iwki r fffi i.
a constitution for the united states 201 1 a major strength of the articles of confederation was that they a prevented congress from declaring war b gave states freedom to make decisions c created a very powerful federal government d prevented congress from levying taxes on individual states 2 after the revolutionary war ended demand for farm goods went down leading to f an economic boom g an economic depression h a period of agricultural reform j the government printing more money a constitution for the united states 202 access additional practice questions regular parliamentary elections right to bear arms right of habeas corpus which historical document gave the founding fathers the ideas for these rights.
a the magna carta b the english bill of rights c the mayflower compact d the articles of confederation federalist a collection essays k l w c o n s t t v t i o k iion v o l i.
the authors of the papers pictured argued that the f states should not ratify the constitution because they wanted george washington to be president g states should not ratify the constitution because more power should be granted to individual states h states should ratify the constitution because power should be taken away from the federal government j states should ratify the constitution because the articles of the confederation left too much power with the states if you have trouble with.
question 1 see lesson 4 1 teks.
15 b 2 l 3 i 4 4 1 j 4 3 i 4 4 i 4 e a constitution for the united states 5 how does the constitution reflect the principle of checks and balances.
a it gives states the power to establish schools.
b it separates the government into three branches.
c it gives the federal government the power to coin money.
d it states that each branch of government can limit power of the other two.
i hereby declare on oath that.
i will support and defend the constitution and laws of the united states against all enemies that i will bear true faith and allegiance to the same so help me god.
oath of allegiance to the united states this oath is made when a person f becomes a resident alien g takes the citizenship examination h becomes a naturalized american citizen j is interviewed by a naturalization examiner a constitution for the united states 204 access additional practice questions 7 pacific ocean key claimed by britain claimed by spain claimed by france claimed by russia 13 colonies territory boundary from the proclamation of 1763 north america in 1763 based on the map above the proclamation of 1763 angered colonists because a it made no effort to claim lands west of the mississippi river b it provoked indians in lands west of the appalachian mountains c it allowed spanish traders and trappers access to the ohio river d it banned settlement on british lands west of the appalachian mountains 8 minutemen were able to make british forces retreat at the battle of concord because f they outnumbered them g they were well trained soldiers h they knew the geography of the region j they surrounded them on the village green jf you have trouble with.
question 5 6 7 8 see lesson 4 5 4 7 3 2 3 3 teks 15 d 19 e 4 a 4 c a constitution for the united states topic 5 teks master the early republic in this topic you will learn about the years of the early republic in the united states.
you will also find lots of interesting ways to master the teks associated with this topic.
your study will help you master these teks lesson outline 5 1 washingtons presidency 1 a 5 a 5 b 5 e 14 a 22 a 22 b 5 2 the origin of political parties 5 c 5 3 john adamss presidency 5 e 22 a 5 4 jeffersons presidency 1 c 5 e 6 e 14 a 18 a 18 b 21 a 22 a 5 5 madison and the war of 1812 5 a 5 d 5 e 5 6 monroes presidency 5 e 7 a 18 b 22 b teks 1 a 1 c 5 a 5 b 5 c 5 d 5 e 6 e 7 a 7 d 10 a 10 c 12 a 13 a 14 a 18 a 18 b 21 a 22 a 22 b 23 c 31 a connect connect with this topic by watching a video about a fascinating person or situation related to this topic.
you can think about how this topic connects to your own life.
and youll encounter an intriguing essential question what should governments do.
begin your study by trying the following nbc learn watch my story video william clark mapping the american frontier launch your project hold a mock cabinet meeting r 206 i investigate the lesson outline lists all the lessons you will investigate in this topic.
as you read and interact with key content the story of the early republic will come to life.
read the texts try the interactivities.
investigate the fascinating story of the early years of the u s republic.
and keep working on your project to help build your i mastery of the topic teks.
digital interactivity from the online course synthesize you will get a chance to pull together everything you have learned by thinking again about the essential question.
consider how you would you answer the question now what should governments do.
demonstrate now you will get to show what you know.
you will get a chance to complete the teks review and assessment pages answering questions about every teks for this topic.
or you can write an essay take part in a discussion or share your project.
no matter which you do it will be a real world demonstration of the things you now understand about the topic teks in topic 5 topic review and assessment questions teks in topic 5 topic review and assessment questions 1 a 9 20 10 c 12 13 15 1 c 11 12.
a 19 5 a 14 13.
a 18 5 b 2 6 14.
a 4 5 c 3 18.
a 5 5 d 16 17 18 18 b 6 5 e 8 16 21 a 21 6 e 10 22 a 1 7 a 19 22 b 11 17 7 d 20 23 c 15 10.
a 7 10 31 a 13 i i i 207 essential question what should governments do.
5 the early republic 1789 1825 texas essential knowledge and skills 1 a 1 c 5 a 5 b 5 c 5 d 5 e 6 e 7 a 7 d 10 a 10 c 12 a 13 a 14 a 18 a 18 b 21 a 22 a 22 b 23 c 31 a enduring understandings washingtons presidency created the cabinet court system and other government institutions that continue today.
under washington political parties developed over disagreements about policies.
washington adams and jefferson all worked to keep the early republic neutral in the face of war between britain and france.
the louisiana purchase greatly expanded the territory of the united states.
the war of 1812 against britain defended american interests but made little change in relations with britain.
the united states backed newly independent latin american countries with the monroe doctrine.
pearson nbc learn washingtons inauguration as resident of the united states to learn more about william clark an explorer of the american west.
pearson 1 realize access your digital lessons including topic inquiry interactive reading notepad interactivities assessments 209 george washington took the presidential oath of office on april 30 1789.
as the new nations first president washington shaped the presidency for those who took office after him.
george washington was inaugurated in new york city on april 30 1789.
a presidential inauguration is the ceremony in which the president officially takes the oath of office.
a witness reported that the new president looked grave almost to sadness washington no doubt felt a great burden.
he knew that americans were looking to him to make the new government work.
lol interactive flipped video 1 a 5 a 5 b 5 e 14 a 22 a 22 b objectives describe the steps washington took to set up the government of the new republic.
explain how hamilton aimed to create a stable economic system.
describe arguments around hamiltons tax plan and the causes and effects of the whiskey rebellion.
explain washingtons foreign policy including the goal of neutrality and the impact of his farewell address.
key terms inauguration precedent cabinet judiciary act of 1789 national debt bond peculator st bank of the jnited states iff key rebellion revolution foreign policy neutral neutrality proclamation jays treaty farewell address early republic george washington thomas jefferson alexander hamilton washingtons presidency the first american presidency washingtons presidency marked the beginning of what historians call the early republic.
this period between 1789 and about 1825 began when the first u s government was formed under the constitution.
decisions made during the early republic had a lasting impact on the institutions and culture of the united states.
as the first president washington showed his leadership qualities and set an example for future generations.
although the constitution provided a framework for the new government it did not explain how the president should govern from day to day.
there is scarcely any part of my conduct he said which may not hereafter be drawn into precedent a precedent pres uh dent is an act or a decision that sets an example for others to follow.
washington set an important precedent at the end of his second term.
in 1796 he decided not to run for a third term.
not until 1940 did any president seek a third term.
washingtons cabinet the constitution said little about how the executive branch should be organized.
it was clear however that the president needed talented people to help him carry out his duties.
ze access your digital lesson.
210 in 1789 the first congress created five executive departments.
they were the departments of state treasury and war and the offices of attorney general and postmaster general.
the heads of these departments made up the presidents cabinet.
members of the cabinet gave washington advice and were responsible for directing their departments.
as a proven leader himself washington knew he needed to appoint others with similar qualities to his cabinet.
he needed effective leaders who had the ability to persuade others to adopt new proposals and ideas.
washington set a precedent by choosing well known leaders to serve in his cabinet.
the two most influential were the secretary of state thomas jefferson and the secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton.
setting up the court system the constitution called for a supreme court.
congress however had to set up the federal court system.
as one of its first actions congress passed the judiciary act of 1789.
it called for the supreme court to consist of one chief justice and five associate justices.
today the supreme court has eight associate justices because congress later amended the judiciary act.
washington named john jay the first chief justice of the united states.
the judiciary act also set up a system of district courts and circuit courts across the nation.
decisions made in these lower courts could be appealed to the supreme court the highest court in the land.
list what positions were included in the first presidential cabinet.
alexander hamilton and the national debt as secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton faced many problems.
among the most pressing was the large national debt.
the national debt is the total amount of money that a government owes to others.
during the revolution both the national government and individual states had desperately needed money.
they had borrowed heavily from foreign countries and ordinary citizens to pay soldiers and buy supplies.
then as now governments borrowed money by issuing bonds.
a bond is a certificate that promises to repay the money loaned plus interest on a certain date.
for example if a person pays 100 for a bond the government agrees to pay back 100 plus interest an additional sum of money by a certain time.
a plan to reduce the debt hamilton wanted to pay off the governments debts and create a stable economic system for the united states.
the plan analyze data based on the information in the chart at can rou conchide tout the economic situation of the federal government when washington took the early republic 211 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 6 did the washington administration and the first congress neutralize or exacerbate anti federalist fears.
the new republic hamiltons ambitious program p 160 an age of political passion 1789 1800 what were the main features of hamiltons economic program.
partisanship without parties p 166 how did the press encourage partisanship.
conflicts at home and abroad p 168 how did the french revolution influence american politics.
cultural politics in a passionate age p 175 why did reading novels seem so threatening in the 1790s.
the stormy presidency of john adams p 179 why did federalists enact the sedition act and was it constitutional.
the adoption of the constitution did little to lessen the divisions in america that had arisen during ratification.
the federalist supporters of the constitution splintered into two opposing groups.
one side rallied around alexander hamilton who became the chief theorist and driving force for an ambitious federalist agenda.
for hamilton and his allies the adoption of the constitution was simply the first step in creating a powerful central government.
these federalists envisioned america as a great commercial empire that would inspired by britains lead develop a strong military and pursue economic development aggressively.
opposing this bold agenda was a group that coalesced around thomas jefferson who with his friend james madison a former ally of hamilton helped define the core of the republican opposition.
this movement although lacking the coherence and formal organization of a modern political party battled its federalist opponents over political economic and constitutional issues.
republicans sought to limit the powers of the new federal government and opposed the creation of a powerful financial and military state.
the radicalism of the french revolution further polarized american political life and political passions intensified during the turbulent 1790s.
federalists denounced the excesses of revolutionary france even as republicans affirmed their support for france.
by the end of the 1790s the partisan animosities had grown intense as reflected in this pro federalist political cartoon the times a political portrait.
a group of american volunteers rides out to confront an invading french army.
as they march forward they trample a republican printer while a dog urinates on his newspaper.
the artist shows republican james madison attempting to block the progress of americas troops with a giant pen while republicans albert gallatin and thomas jefferson work from behind to achieve the same goal.
the text at the bottom announces the triumph of american government and warns traitors that they will receive their just punishments.
after a decade of federalist domination americans in 1800 turned to thomas jefferson head of the republican opposition as their leader.
in a close election power was peacefully transferred from the federalists to their opponents and jefferson became the nations third president.
party spirit is the fashion of the times.
party spirit makes the worst of everything that opposes her folly newark centinel of freedom 1799 chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 launching the new government although intense partisanship had characterized american politics during the colonial and revolutionary eras the republican ideas championed during the revolution stressed the need for a virtuous citizenry.
the constitution created a system designed to check the dangers of factionalism.
leaders were expected to put the good of the nation above any factional interest.
fortunately for america the nations first president george washington was such a figure a leader who tried to remain above partisanship.
appointing alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson to his cabinet demonstrated his commitment to this ideal.
these were men whose views on government were almost at opposite extremes and from them washington sought policy alternatives to deal with the pressing issues facing the new nation.
choosing the first president 6 1 triumphal arch near trenton new jersey at trenton women erected a 20 foot 20 foot arch made of evergreens and laurels.
on the right washington w ashing ash ington ton rides rides toward the arch.
the constitution had created an electoral college a group of electors appointed by the states who had the responsibility of picking the president.
on february 4 1789 electors from all the states that had ratified the constitution met in their state capitals and unanimously selected george washington to be the nations first president.
john adams another prominent revolutionary leader received half that number of votes becoming the first vice president.
the remaining votes were split among ten other candidates.
the nation celebrated washingtons election in a grand style.
he traveled from his home at mount vernon in virginia to the site of his inaugural in new york city feted along the way.
many towns erected triumphal arches such as this one near trenton 6 1.
although leading men in the community typically greeted washington giving him a military salute in trenton he met the local women who had erected the arch and who serenaded him.
a placard on the arch proudly proclaimed that the defender of the mothers will also defend the daughters the first federal elections completing the constitution although there had been little doubt that washington would be americas first president the divisions why did madison shift his views on the need for a bill of rights.
between federalists and anti federalists influenced the first congressional elections.
the issue of constitutional amendments was among the most contentious issues debated in the first federal elections.
federalists were eager to have james madison run for congress.
madison agreed to run but he balked at actively campaigning for a seat believing that behaving in such a partisan fashion was inconsistent with republican ideals.
fortunately madisons supporters persuaded him that if he did not take his case directly to the people virginia would send an anti federalist dominated delegation to congress.
madison set aside his reluctance to appeal for votes and won election to congress.
one group critical to madisons success were the baptists who were eager to obtain explicit protection for freedom of religion in the constitution.
the task of shaping a set of amendments thus fell to federalist james madison.
madison recognized that if properly framed amendments might go a long way to eliminating lingering anti federalist suspicions of the new federal government.
thus although he had originally opposed anti federalist calls for amendments during the struggle over ratification madison now recognized their political necessity.
he accepted what he described as the nauseous project of amendments knowing that the process would be deeply politicized and that the few ardent anti federalists in congress would agitate for weakening the federal government.
still madison pared down the view the image george washingtons arrival in new york city 1789 launching the new government dozens of amendments proposed by the state ratification conventions to seventeen.
the senate then whittled these down to twelve provisions and sent them to the states to ratify.
the states did not adopt the first two proposed amendments which dealt with legislative apportionment and congressional salaries.
more than 200 years later the states finally adopted what became the twenty seventh amendment which prohibits raises for congress from taking effect until a new house of representatives has taken office a restraint that makes it more difficult for congress to vote itself frequent salary increases.
the first ten of the original twelve amendments to the constitution eventually became known as the bill of rights and included protections for both basic individual liberties and for the states.
the first amendment protected freedom of the press and religion.
the second amendment guaranteed that the people would have a right to keep and bear arms in a well regulated militia.
this right has since been expanded to include private arms used for individual self defense within the home.
the third amendment forbade the government to quarter troops in the homes of private citizens.
several amendments protected the procedural rights associated with jury trial.
the ninth amendment declared that enumeration of some rights did not mean the denial of others retained by the people.
finally lest the new government try to expand its powers by exploiting the vague clauses of the constitution the tenth amendment stated that those powers not delegated to the federal government were reserved to the states and the people.
these amendments assuaged the concerns of most moderate anti federalists even if they did not placate the most ardent opponents of federal power who wished to restrict the powers of the new central government to those expressly delegated by the text of the new constitution.
their adoption resolved the most important issue remaining from the struggle between federalists and anti federalists clearing the way for new issues to come to the fore.
filling out the branches of government the constitution created a blueprint for the new federal government but congress and the president still had to work out important details including the structure of the executive and the judiciary departments.
congress took almost six months to work out a structure for the new federal courts.
lingering fears about the power of the federal government complicated drafting legislation to set up the federal courts.
senator william maclay of pennsylvania warned for example that the federal courts would swallow all the state constitutions by degree eventually congress created a three tier system of district courts circuit courts and the supreme court.
each state would have at least one district court.
circuit courts composed of a district court judge and two members of the supreme court were supposed to ride circuit travel to hear appeals from the district courts and to have primary jurisdiction in certain types of cases such as those between citizens of different states.
for the executive branch congress created new cabinet positions for a secretary of state to advise the president on foreign affairs a secretary of the treasury for economic policy a secretary of war to oversee the army and an attorney general to be the chief legal advisor to government.
for his cabinet washington assembled an impressive group of leaders who had distinguished themselves in american public life.
henry knox the secretary of war was a leading general edmund randolph the new attorney general had introduced the virginia plan in the constitutional convention thomas jefferson the secretary of state had been the primary author of the declaration of independence and the first american minister to france the first secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton had been one of the co authors of the federalist along with john jay who became the first chief justice of the supreme court.
although none of these men had been anti federalists washingtons choices cut across a wide section of the political spectrum with hamilton representing the extreme nationalist position and jefferson far more sympathetic to state power.
during ratification anti federalists had expressed fear that the constitution would create a large expensive government with a vast bureaucracy.
in reality the federal government was far less imposing.
scattered among buildings near new york citys wall street the temporary home of the new government the government offices bore slight resemblance to the nightmare that anti federalists had predicted.
the scale of the new government was modest and its bureaucracy small about 350 officers.
jeffersons state department employed two clerks two assistants and a part time translator.
the modern state department employs 8 000 people in washington d c and 11 000 overseas.
the largest department was hamiltons treasury.
within a year of its creation it boasted nearly ten times the number of employees of the department of state.
its budget was more than triple the combined budgets of the state and war departments.
apart from his close relationship to washington his role as secretary of the treasury ensured that hamilton was a figure to be reckoned with in the new government.
why were some ardent anti federalists not satisfied with the madisons proposed amendments.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 hamiltons ambitious program in 1789 congress requested that secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton issue a report on the new nations economy.
between 1790 and 1791 hamilton responded with a series of reports each corresponding to a major part of his overall plan to bolster americas economy.
these included reports on public credit a national bank the establishment of a mint to coin money and manufactures.
hamilton saw a strong national government as a necessity to promote american prosperity and protect the young nations economic interests against foreign threats.
in his view the constitution had created a central government with considerable power over the economy.
in his reports he urged congress and the president to use this authority to encourage economic growth.
to accomplish this hamilton looked to britain as a model.
with a robust manufacturing and financial section and the powerful bank of england to energize its economy britain had the most diverse and sophisticated economy in europe.
hamiltons vision for the new republic alexander hamilton envisioned america as a powerful nation with a strong government and a vigorous commercial economy.
before he could implement his ambitious program to realize this vision however hamilton would have to overcome opponents at nearly every turn.
hamiltons bold program not only frightened former antifederalists but also alarmed strong supporters of the constitution notably james madison who did in place of that noble love of liberty and republican government which carried us triumphantly through the war a pro british monarchical aristocratical party has sprung up whose avowed object is to draw over us the substance as they have already done the forms of the british government thomas jefferson 1796 why did hamilton believe that america needed to create a national bank.
not wish to see the new government become a powerful state modeled on that of britain.
hamiltons economic vision also clashed with thomas jeffersons vision of a nation of small farmers.
the new opposition to federalist efforts to create a powerful centralized government who called themselves republicans united former anti federalists and those federalists who shared the concerns of madison and jefferson.
republicans believed that liberty could flourish only if the states remained powerful enough to protect their citizens from the new federal government.
the leader who conceived this audacious federalist agenda a vision that would transform america was a self made man who lacked the aristocratic upbringing of his chief opponents virginians jefferson and madison.
hamilton came from a modest background.
born in the west indies the illegitimate son of a scottish merchant and a planters daughter hamilton was orphaned at an early age but became an apprentice clerk in a merchant firm.
at age 14 he wrote my ambition is so prevalent that he loathed the grovling condition of a clerk or the like to which my fortune etc.
condemns me and would willingly risk my life tho not my character to exalt my station hamilton was talented ambitious and hard working.
the proprietor of the merchant firm recognized his talent and helped him finance his education.
hamilton attended kings college now columbia university in new york city.
during the american revolution he rose rapidly through the ranks of the continental army to become read the document alexander hamilton opposing visions for the new nation hamiltons ambitious program in almost all the questions great and small which have arisen since the first session of congress mr jefferson and mr madison have been found among those who are disposed to narrow the federal authority.
alexander hamilton 1792 washingtons personal aide.
marrying into a prominent new york family he became an important political figure in that state.
a successful lawyer he had many friends and allies within new yorks merchant community.
new york merchants commissioned this portrait 6 2 of alexander hamilton to honor his contribution to their prosperity.
it provides one measure of his power and influence particularly within the new nations financial world.
yet the painting is as notable for what the artist omitted as for what he included.
hamilton insisted that no references to his important political accomplishments be included something that commissioners of the portrait had requested.
realizing that his political life was controversial hamilton directed the artist to avoid such references.
rather than depicting the complex often contentious quality of his life the painting presents the image of a disinterested republican statesman and writer.
hamilton was an unabashed american nationalist and an elitist who viewed democracy with suspicion.
he believed that there would always be class divisions.
to survive and prosper the new nation had to win the allegiance of the rich and powerful binding their interests to those of the new federal government.
the assumption of state debts hamiltons report on public credit addressed the war debt of the states and the federal government.
the new nation and the states had incurred 6 2 alexander hamilton new york citys merchants commissioned a portrait of hamilton in 1792.
hamilton decided against having the painting represent his political career which was steeped in controversy he chose instead to have himself painted in a plain brown suit standing beside a table with an inkwell and quill.
considerable debt financing the american revolution.
this debt consisted of many different types of paper currency and securities that the confederation government and the individual states had issued.
the new nation owed 75 million a figure that alarmed some but not hamilton who saw the debt as a means of bringing america into the modern era in which debt was an essential tool of state finance.
how does hamiltons own life help explain his vision for americas future.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 hamilton proposed consolidating the debt of the individual states and the federal government.
his scheme called for the assumption of the state debts by which the federal government would fund any outstanding debts that the states owed.
creditors who held state paper would exchange it for a new type of paper that promised to pay interest until the bearer redeemed the original value of the note.
hamiltons second report on public credit focused on financing this scheme and included a plan for taxing whiskey.
he envisioned a permanently funded national debt in which income from taxes would service the interest allowing the federal government to pay its other expenses.
the most controversial feature of hamiltons plan dealt with the problem posed by speculation in these paper notes.
the value of state and would become a potential source of corruption.
republicans favored paying the full value of the debt to the original holders but not to the speculators.
the republicans would have given speculators a reasonable return on their investment but not a huge profit.
hamilton argued that this policy would violate the sanctity of contracts and undermine the credit of the new government.
eventually he defeated his opponents and state debt certificates would be exchanged for federal ones at full face value.
madisons opposition hamilton was shocked to find his former ally james madison leading the opposition to his policies.
during ratification madison had sided with hamilton and together with john jay wrote in an agricultural country like this therefore to erect and concentrate and perpetuate a large moneyed interest.
produce one or other of two evils the prostration of agriculture at the feet of commerce or a change in the present form of federal government fatal to the existence of american liberty virginias remonstrance against the assumption of state debts 16 december 1790 confederation issued paper had declined steadily by the 1790s as the hard pressed states and the fledgling national government simply printed more paper to pay their debts.
after the adoption of the constitution a few financial speculators had purchased large amounts of this devalued paper hoping that the new government would redeem it at face value and net them a huge profit.
believing it was vital for the new nation to maintain excellent credit with investors hamilton insisted that government had an obligation to honor the debt at full face value.
republicans feared that hamiltons funding scheme would give a windfall to speculators.
besides being unjust they argued such a plan would create a powerful financial interest that why did virginians including madison and jefferson oppose hamiltons economic program.
the federalist.
madison had also supported hamiltons efforts to create an effective treasury department under the articles of confederation.
why did madison change his position and oppose hamilton in 1789.
madison was motivated by his desire to preserve the constitutional system he had labored so hard to create.
the speculative frenzy caused by hamiltons policy of assumption shocked madison who came to believe that hamiltons program would undermine the republican values that the constitution was designed to protect.
although hamilton dreamed of a powerful state that might rival britain madison was more interested in preserving his constitutional vision.
in madisons view hamiltons system would create vast hamiltons ambitious program inequalities of wealth encourage corruption and undermine republican government.
hamilton believed that madison had been unduly influenced by jefferson indeed madison had always shared with his fellow virginian a similar republican vision of an agrarian republic.
hamilton by contrast the product of new yorks commercial ethos believed that americas future depended on creating a powerful fiscal military state.
the split between hamilton and madison reflected a profound shift in american political life.
a few years before madison had decried faction in federalist no.
now faced with the rise of hamiltons federalist agenda madison revised his thinking about factions and politics.
in an essay in the national gazette a candid state of parties he conceded that america had become divided into a republican party and an anti republican party the federalists.
opposition to his plan of assumption took a personal toll on hamilton.
indeed jefferson described him as somb er haggard and dejected beyond comparison jefferson invited hamilton to dinner with madison where the three worked out a deal to break the impasse over assumption.
in exchange for support for his economic program hamilton agreed to move the new capital of the united states from new york city to a site on the potomac river.
southerners such as jefferson and madison feared that keeping the nations capital in new york city invited domination by commercial and financial interests.
although hamilton might gain in the short run madison and jefferson believed that the bargain they struck would lessen the influence of financial interests over the government.
meanwhile the government temporarily relocated to philadelphia.
this cartoon 6 3 which shows congress embarked on the ship constitution as it sails to its eventual home on the potomac captures the republicans association of urban commercial centers with corruption.
the devil lures the ship to its clear doom on the rocky falls leading to philadelphia.
6 3 congress embarked on the ship constitution jefferson and madison hoped that by relocating the capital to the potomac they would reduce the dangers of federal corruption.
in this cartoon the devil lures congress to its temporary home in philadelphia.
what did madison and jefferson gain by moving the location of the new capital to what is now washington d c.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 the bank the mint and the report on manufactures in his report on a national bank hamilton recommended that the federal government charter a national bank.
the bank of the united states would serve as a depository for government funds bolster confidence in government securities make loans and provide the nation with a stable national currency.
the government would own part of the stock in the new bank but would allow private investors to buy the majority of stock.
at the time of his proposal there were only three private banks in the united states.
a national bank would help stabilize the economy of the new nation and link the interests of the wealthy to the prosperity of the new nation.
again madison opposed hamiltons plan.
much of the debate on this proposal focused on its constitutionality.
madison wanted to see the constitution interpreted according to the original understanding of the states that ratified it in 1788.
arguing for the narrow interpretation of congressional power he denied that the constitution authorized congress to charter a national bank.
ultimately however hamiltons ideas prevailed and the federalist controlled congress chartered the bank of the united states.
republicans then hoped for a presidential veto.
washington sought advice from his cabinet about the constitutionality of the bank.
attorney general edmund randolph and thomas jefferson both agreed with madison.
jefferson took advantage of the occasion to articulate his own views on how to interpret the new constitution.
he acknowledged that the constitution empowered congress to enact laws that were necessary and proper however although the creation of a bank was convenient and useful it was not in his view necessary for congress to fulfill its obligations to raise revenues.
this theory of strict construction approached the text of the constitution in an almost literal manner.
if the constitution did not grant a power then according to the theory of strict construction the tenth amendment reserved that power to the states and the people.
madison and jefferson designed their slightly different theories of constitutional interpretation to protect the rights of the people and the powers of the states against encroachment by the federal government.
with the weight of randolph madison and jeffersons opinions weighing heavily in favor of a veto hamilton set out to refute his critics and how did hamilton and jefferson differ in their interpretations of the phrase necessary and proper in the process frame his own alternative theory of how to interpret the constitution.
hamiltons theory of loose construction interpreted the language of the constitution broadly.
hamilton believed the federal government enjoyed enormous latitude in determining the appropriate means for accomplishing any legitimate constitutional end.
even if a specific power was not listed such as the power to charter a bank hamilton believed the constitution implied such a power.
hamilton argued that jeffersons reasoning would restrict the powers of congress to enact only those laws that were absolutely necessary and proper in response to madison and jeffersons suggestion of consulting the original intent of the state ratification conventions hamilton argued that the intention is to be sought in the instrument itself interpreters of the constitution should follow well established legal rules for understanding statutes and apply them to the constitution.
in other words the actual text of the constitution not the arguments of federalists anti federalists or state ratification conventions ought to be given primary consideration in constitutional interpretation.
the struggle over the proper way of interpreting the constitution had emerged as a major political battlefield in the new republic.
indeed the proper interpretation of the constitution is still controversial and arguments over its original meaning are as contentious today as they were more than 200 years ago.
as he would throughout his first term in office washington sided with hamilton against madison and jefferson.
the chartering of the bank of the united states was hamiltons second major victory in the struggle to define the character of the new republic.
hamiltons report on the necessity of a federal mint was the one part of his program that jefferson enthusiastically endorsed.
hamilton proposed a currency that would include a variety of coins in different denominations emblazoned with patriotic symbols.
jefferson not only recognized the need for a federal currency but as a part time inventor he was also fascinated by the mechanics of minting money.
hamiltons report on manufactures detailed the remaining part of his plan to reshape the american economy.
he called for a comprehensive program to encourage domestic industry by providing incentives for industrial development and tariffs to help american industry compete against imported foreign goods which were cheaper.
congress refused hamiltons ambitious program 6 4 political views hamilton versus jefferson hamilton jefferson commercial republic agrarian republic broad construction strict construction standing army militia pro british pro french to follow hamiltons recommendation to raise these tariffs sharply.
hamiltons more grandiose scheme to encourage industrial development generated little interest in congress.
congress did enact new taxes including one on whiskey.
in the struggle to shape the new nations economy hamiltons federalists had defeated jefferson madison and the republican opposition at nearly every turn.
hamilton was largely successful at implementing his visionary economic program.
jefferson and hamilton contrasting visions of the republic jefferson and hamilton were a study in contrasts.
their backgrounds varied greatly jefferson was a southern slave owner hamilton a northerner with abolitionist sympathies.
jefferson grew up a virginia aristocrat with every advantage hamilton was a self made man who confessed that he was determined to escape his humble origins at almost any cost.
over several of the most important issues facing the new american nation the two men found themselves in separate camps as summarized in the table 6 4.
in general hamilton sought to endow the national government with additional powers jefferson sought to limit the powers of the federal government and protect state authority.
the two men also approached the economy from radically different philosophies.
hamiltons idea of a thriving commercial republic was diametrically opposed to jeffersons vision of a nation of independent yeoman farmers.
while we have land to labour jefferson wrote let us never wish to see our citizens occupied at a work bench hamilton believed that america needed to emulate the powerful diversified economy of britain and foster commerce and manufacture.
a gulf separated the two men over constitutional law as well.
hamilton believed in a broad or loose construction of the constitution the federal government had to have wide latitude to choose whatever means was best suited to accomplish its legitimate objects.
jefferson by contrast believed in a strict construction of the constitution so that the powers of the new government would be limited to those clearly established by the constitution.
in foreign affairs the two men also opposed one another.
hamilton was an anglophile who believed that britains path to economic power ought to guide america.
jefferson savored all things french from wine to pastry.
he thought americas interests were better served by supporting france.
read the document thomas jefferson notes on virginia what were the most important points of disagreement between hamilton and jefferson.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 partisanship without parties the idea of political parties was inimical to the republican values of the post revolutionary era.
in the struggle over ratification in 1788 madison had written in federalist no.
10 that the public good is disregarded in the conflicts of rival parties the partisan struggles that dominated american politics after ratification forced madison to rethink his view of parties.
in 1792 madison conceded that in every political society parties are unavoidable although americans increasingly used terms like party to describe the bitter conflicts of the 1790s the partisan alignments they described had not yet achieved the organized structure of modern political parties.
political conflict in the 1790s was a transitional phase in the evolution of a modern two party system.
some historians describe this period as that of the first party system but many characterize it as a proto party system that set the stage for the later developments of modern parties.
indeed although americans were deeply divided politically neither federalists nor republicans functioned as disciplined modern political parties.
neither group organized loyal supporters around well defined messages at a national level.
nor did either side create permanent political structures that brought local and state politics under the umbrella of a coherent national organization.
the partisan conflicts of this era produced two proto parties the federalists and the republicans.
a new type of politician although the aristocratic thomas jefferson and james madison dominated the republican movement its success owed much to a new type of politician whose expertise lay in mobilizing voters and creating effective political organizations.
the most influential of these new politicians was virginias john beckley.
in contrast to jefferson and madison who were connected to the gentry elite that dominated political life in virginia beckley rose from the status of an indentured servant to become the clerk of the u s house of representatives.
he became indispensable in advancing the republican cause.
indeed although aristocratic politicians such as jefferson and madison continued to view themselves as members of a virtuous elite who were not motivated by party spite beckley and others of this new class of professional politicians immersed themselves in the sometimes sordid task of coordinating campaigns and attacking their opponents.
beckley and other republicans who did much of the grassroots organizing were more at home in taverns and coffee houses than they were in the elegant dinner parties that jefferson and madison attended.
having worked as a clerk beckley felt a kindred spirit with the artisans and merchants of new york what role did the partisan press play in the politics of the 1790s.
city and philadelphia.
he felt a particular kinship with other self made men many of whom joined the republican movement.
beckleys life more closely resembled hamiltons than jeffersons.
yet beckley threw himself into promoting jeffersons fortunes and attacking hamilton.
gossip became one means of political warfare that beckley developed to a fine art.
he leaked information about an adulterous affair hamilton was having with the wife of a shady financier.
when the press reported rumors that hamilton had provided sensitive financial information to his lovers husband republican politicians pounced on hamilton who was forced to admit the affair but denied any financial improprieties.
beckleys efforts weakened hamilton but did not destroy the new yorkers influence among federalists.
the growth of the partisan press the expansion of the press facilitated the rise of partisan politics.
the number of newspapers increased from around 100 in 1788 to well over 200 in 1800.
while eastern ports still supported the majority of papers many interior market towns also boasted papers by the 1790s.
many of these papers aligned partisanship without parties themselves with one or the other main political movements in the country.
john fennos gazette of the united states which he established to endear the general government to the people articulated the federalist point of view.
to combat fennos influence jefferson and madison persuaded the poet philip freneau to found the national gazette which rallied opposition to hamilton and the federalists.
the resulting battle of words between the two publications intensified the already charged political atmosphere.
federalists and republicans recognized that political success meant managing public opinion.
all power madison noted has been traced to public opinion a free government therefore calls for a circulation of newspapers through the entire body of the people partisan rancor in the press grew during the 1790s.
no person was sharper in his attacks than federalist william cobbett who often wrote under the pen name peter porcupine a choice that reflected his prickly personality and barbed writing.
jefferson lamented that a single sentence got hold of by the porcupines will suffice to abuse and persecute me in their papers for months cobbett lambasted the republicans as atheists and radical democrats who sought to destroy government.
he compared the leading republican newspaper the aurora to a lewd and common strumpet whose illegitimate offspring were falsehood and slander.
the republicans replied with their own stinging attacks.
this republican political cartoon 6 5 casts cobbett literally represented as peter porcupine doing the devils work as he is encouraged by great britain represented as a lion.
society asserted that public opinion is the foundation of all our liberties and constitutes the only solid groundwork for all our rights in addition to publishing their sentiments about political issues the societies staged celebrations gave festive dinners and sponsored public orations.
republicans viewed the societies as a way to improve understanding of political issues and refine public opinion.
federalists denounced these self created societies for sowing the seeds of jealousy and distrust of the government for federalists the societies not only sapped the peoples confidence in their government but also fomented radical ideas.
federalists viewed the role of elected representatives differently from republicans.
federalists supported a more traditional republican ideal of virtue in which citizens deferred to the wisdom of their leaders once they had been placed in office.
republicans embraced a more democratic ideal in which the voice of the people could be brought to bear on public questions through organizations such as the democratic republican societies.
6 5 peter porcupine liberty sits forlorn while federalist william cobbett peter porcupine scribbles attacks and insults.
the devil and the british lion wearing a monarchs crown urge on the porcupine.
a jay bird symbolic of jays treaty perches on the lion.
the democraticrepublican societies the emergence of a new type of political organization helped transform the political life of the new nation.
between 1793 and 1794 35 democratic republican societies sprouted up across america.
although not official organs of the republican movement most of the societies had close ties to local republican organizations.
their goal was to influence public opinion.
the new york democratic republican why did the federalists oppose the democratic republican societies.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 conflicts at home and abroad the french revolution the bloody toppling of the monarchy followed by the rise of a radical republican government shocked europe and profoundly affected american politics.
republicans supported the revolution.
federalists quickly came to see it as the embodiment of evil and denounced its excesses.
revolutionary france soon became embroiled in conflict with britain and the two nations went to war with one another in 1793.
although republicans and federalists continued to support washington the contest over the vice presidency in 1792 demonstrated how divided america had become.
federalist john adams defeated his republican rival the former anti federalist george clinton but the republicans carried the entire south.
the line separating foreign affairs and domestic matters in the new republic was often thin.
america still needed to secure its borders against potentially hostile european powers.
the british continued to occupy forts in the old northwest the modern states of ohio indiana and michigan and engaged in trade with indians including the sale of firearms.
the spanish presence in florida and louisiana gave them control of the mississippi a vital artery for western trade.
american shipping no longer enjoyed the protection of the british navy.
in the mediterranean pirates based in north africa harassed american ships and captured american sailors and cargoes.
resistance to hamiltons economic program erupted into violence in western pennsylvania and kentucky.
angry over the tax on whiskey farmers turned to violence to vent their frustration.
washington felt compelled to call out the militia to quell the rebellion.
the new federal government had survived its most serious test but the repression of the rebellion did little to heal the divisions in american political life.
6 6 revolutionary plate.
this gruesome plate captures the excesses of the french revolution.
the guillotine pictured at the center became a symbol of the violence of the revolution.
the plate also shows the head of king louis xvi which is proudly displayed by one of his executioners as a trophy.
mankind republican james madison added that events in france were so glorious to this country because it has grown as it were out of the american revolution pro french republicans began addressing each other as citizen a custom borrowed from revolutionary france.
republican women followed suit some using the term citizen and others citizeness or citess among themselves.
when the french revolution turned more radical and violent however many americans began to re examine their support for it.
the execution of king louis xvi and queen marie antoinette in 1793 outraged federalists.
this commemorative plate 6 6 showing the execution of the king captures the zeal of the french the french revolution in america in 1789 a financial crisis in france precipitated a revolution that transformed a powerful european monarchy into a republic.
at first american support for the french revolution cut across partisan allegiances.
even the arch federalist gazette of the united states described the revolution as one of the most glorious objects that can arrest the attention of did the french revolution fullfill or betray the ideals of the american revolution.
view the closer look competing visions jefferson and hamiltons reactions to the french revolution conflicts at home and abroad revolution.
the hand painted plate prominently features the guillotine a new device for executions developed in revolutionary france that used a heavy blade to decapitate its victims.
the executioner proudly displays the kings lifeless head as a trophy a chilling reminder of the french revolutions radicalism.
the french revolution became a symbol for both republicans and federalists.
the former championed the democratic ideals of the revolution and excused its violence as a small price to pay for liberty.
the latter decried its violence and radicalism.
frances new minister to the united states edmund gent arrived two days after word of the execution of louis xvi reached the u s in the spring of 1793.
philadelphias republican women turned out in red white and blue to welcome him.
although republican men wore the tricolor red white and blue cockade a small rosette like decoration on their hats women attached tricolor pins to their chests to affirm support for france.
one sarcastic federalist commentator described these fiery frenchified dames as monsters in human shape for additional discussion see competing visions jeffersons and hamiltons reactions to the french revolution page 171.
federalists not only opposed the french revolution but events in france intensified their desire to align america with britain.
when revolutionary france declared war on britain in 1793 americans found themselves reluctantly drawn into european affairs.
attitudes toward france became a political lightning rod concentrating and focusing political feelings for both republicans and federalists.
the french revolution came to symbolize many of the hopes and fears of americans struggling to come to terms with their own revolutionary heritage.
republicans defined the revolution by its ideals of liberty equality and fraternity federalists focused on the revolutions bloody policies and saw it as confirmation of the danger of taking liberty and equality too far.
adams versus clinton a contest for vice president by 1792 washington feared that partisan conflict might tear apart the political fabric of the nation.
although hamilton and jeffersons mutual antagonism had hardened both men agreed that washington was the one figure who could rise above partisan squabbles and unite the nation.
hamilton implored washington to make a further sacrifice of your tranquility and happiness to the public good although republicans did not wish to challenge washington directly they decided to run the popular former anti federalist governor of new york george clinton against john adams for vice president.
republican newspapers praised washington but charged that adams was an avowed supporter of monarchy and aristocracy.
invoking recent events in france one radical newspaper editor even suggested that the time had arrived in america to lop off every unfruitful branch and root out of the soil of freedom all of the noxious weeds of aristocracy although adams defeated clinton by a comfortable margin the sectional character of politics was evident in the electoral college.
clinton carried the entire south the most solidly republican region.
diplomatic controversies and triumphs the new american nation had many diplomatic challenges some arising from the french revolution but others stemming from unresolved issues with britain.
american ships no longer enjoyed the protection of the british navy.
closer to home the british retained control of their forts in the northwest defying the treaty of paris 1783 which required them to relinquish them.
spains control of the mississippi river and new orleans both of which were vital to the prosperity of the old southwest modern kentucky tennessee alabama and mississippi was another concern 6 7.
war between france and britain opened opportunities for american merchants who traded with both sides.
although britain remained americas chief trading partner trade with france was increasingly important.
britain hoped to use its naval advantage to cut off trade between france and other nations including america.
the british navy impounded more than 250 ships and cargoes of american merchants who violated the british blockade against france.
angry republicans proposed an embargo on trade with the british.
federalists however argued that american economic wellbeing depended on good relations with britain not with france.
president washington appointed why did federalists become such ardent critics of the french revolution.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 r 6 7 map of spanish interests in the southwest spanish control of the mississippi river and new orleans was a source of concern to americans.
the mississippi river was a vital conduit for goods which were then shipped to new orleans.
oh o i virginia st louis kentucky north carolina r tennessee spanish louisiana missis sip pi south fort san fernando carolina georgia atlantic fort nogales ocean natchez st augustine pensacola new orleans gulf of mexico boundary claimed by spain after 1783 boundary set by pinckneys treaty 1795 area disputed by u s and spain spanish fort spanish settlement the respected federalist from new york and chief justice of the supreme court john jay as a special envoy to travel to london to negotiate a settlement.
in 1783 jay had helped negotiate the treaty of paris ending conflict between america and britain.
now in 1794 he negotiated a treaty called jays treaty by which britain agreed to compensate america for cargoes seized in 1793 1794 and to vacate forts in the northwest territory.
however the british refused to accept the right of neutral nations to trade freely with belligerents.
when the details of jays treaty were leaked to the press republicans were outraged finding the treaty too generous to the british.
across the mid atlantic and south where republican sympathies were strongest protesters burned effigies of jay and copies of the treaty.
the treaty also provoked a fierce debate in congress over the role of the house of representatives in foreign affairs.
republican congressmen demanded to see jays negotiating instructions believing that federalists had never intended to exact major concessions from the british.
the house how did french ideas influence american political culture.
spanish even threatened to withhold funding to implement the treaty until the instructions were published.
federalists denounced this as an unconstitutional intrusion on the treaty making powers of the president and the senate.
jay had negotiated with britain from a position of weakness but the american envoy charged with obtaining concessions from spain was in a stronger position.
the u s minister to britain federalist thomas pinckney traveled to spain to begin negotiations about american access to the mississippi and new orleans.
the result was pinckneys treaty 1795 which secured americas right to navigate the mississippi river and use new orleans.
it also settled the boundary between america and spanish florida.
spain had feared that america might try to acquire florida and louisiana by force so it was more than willing to cede favorable terms over trade and negotiate the boundary dispute between the two nations.
florida violence along the frontier securing the western frontier an area that included the northwest territory the tennessee frontier and the mississippi territory meant not only negotiating with britain and spain but also read the document the jay treaty conflicts at home and abroad competing visions jeffersons and hamiltons reactions to the french revolution thomas jefferson and his republican allies embraced the cause of the french revolution.
at the outset even alexander hamilton saw the revolution as a victory for american ideals of liberty.
the radical turn of the revolution however particularly its zealous embrace of violence caused hamilton and other federalists to abandon their support.
despite the increasingly bloody turn of events in france jefferson retained his faith in the essential justice of the revolutions goals.
he believed that the revolutions accomplishments the destruction of the old regime and of the institutions of aristocracy and monarchy were worth the cost in blood.
federalists not only denounced france but they took great pains to contrast anglo american concepts of ordered liberty with the licentiousness of the french revolution.
for jefferson the revolutions contribution to the destruction of tyranny justified whatever means were necessary to accomplish its worthy ends.
he compared the innocent victims of revolutionary justice to the casualties of war.
what does jeffersons dogged support for the french revolution reveal about his vision of politics.
hamiltons revulsion at the excesses of the french revolution was typical of federalists.
what does hamiltons view of the french revolution reveal about his vision of politics.
thomas jefferson to william short philadelphia jan 3.
1793 in the early periods of the french revolution a warm zeal for its success was in this country a sentiment truly universal.
the love of liberty is here the ruling passion of the citizens of the united states pervading every class animating every bosom.
as long therefore as the revolution of france bore the marks of being the cause of liberty it united all hearts and centered all opinions.
but this unanimity of approbation has been for a considerable time decreasing.
the excesses which have constantly multiplied with greater and greater aggravations have successively though slowly detached reflecting men from their partiality for an object which has appeared less and less to merit their regard.
dear sir the tone of your letters had for some time given me pain on account of the extreme warmth with which they censured the proceedings of the jacobins of france.
in the struggle which was necessary many guilty persons fell without the forms of trial and with them some innocent.
these i deplore as much as any body and shall deplore some of them to the day of my death.
but i deplore them as i should have done had they fallen in battle.
it was necessary to use the arm of the people a machine not quite so blind as balls and bombs but blind to a certain degree.
a few of their cordial friends met at their hands the fate of enemies.
but time and truth will rescue and embalm their memories while their posterity will be enjoying that very liberty for which they would never have hesitated to offer up their lives.
the liberty of the whole earth was depending on the issue of the contest and was ever such a prize won with so little innocent blood.
my own affections have been deeply wounded by some of the martyrs to this cause but rather than it should have failed i would have seen half the earth desolated and an adam and an eve left in every country and left free alexander hamilton unpublished thoughts on the french revolution philadelphia 1794 the tricolor french flag was adopted after the french revolution and became the official flag of the new french republic in 1794.
why did republicans oppose jays treaty.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 dealing with the indian nations that occupied much of this land.
the government also faced resentments from farmers over federal taxation of locally distilled whiskey.
settlers streamed into western territories invariably resulting in conflicts with the indigenous populations.
in the old northwest the shawnee delaware and miami confederated to defend their lands against settlers incursions.
in 1790 little turtle a war chief of the miami led a pan indian force of twelve different tribes that defeated an american army led by general josiah harmar in ohio.
a year later indians in ohio dealt an even more crushing blow to an army led by general arthur st clair.
more than 900 american soldiers were killed or wounded and st clair barely escaped with his life.
these demoralizing defeats prompted a reorganization of the war department.
in 1794 a new more professional army under general anthony wayne decisively defeated ohios indian tribes at the battle of fallen timbers.
in 1795 the treaty of greenville stipulated that the twelve ohio tribes relinquish their claims on most of ohio.
in indian cultures the signing of treaties was a ceremonial occasion in which certain rituals were observed including the exchange of gifts.
indians gave this wampum belt 6 8 an important ceremonial item to american negotiators at the treaty of greenville ceremony.
chippewa chief mash i pi nash i wish explained the meaning of this gift when i show you this belt i point out to you your children at one end of it and mine at the other.
remember we have taken the great spirit to witness our present actions we will make a new world and leave nothing on it to incommode our children wayne and the other american negotiators however did not understand the gift of wampum in the same way as the chippewa did.
for americans indians had joined the american family as dependents not equals.
the most serious test of the new republics ability to govern came in 1794 when anger over hamiltons economic policies turned violent.
resentment against the hated whiskey tax had festered since its enactment in 1791.
the whiskey rebellion erupted when farmers from pennsylvania and kentucky took up arms to protest the whiskey excise tax.
distilling had long been important economically in western pennsylvania and kentucky where farmers distilled grain into whiskey.
farmers could transport the alcohol more cheaply than the bulky and heavy grains from which it was produced.
whiskey also 6 8 wampum belt beads usually made from seashells were strung together in a wampum belt.
this belt given during the treaty of greenville ceremony symbolized the indian belief that they would now join with the united states in one great family.
the american negotiators interpreted the gift as a sign of indian submission.
how did american and indian views of the treaty of greenville differ.
conflicts at home and abroad 6 9 political cartoon whiskey rebellion in this cartoon which denounces the hated whiskey tax two distillers threaten to tar and feather an excise man tax collector.
meanwhile a demon hooks the tax collector by the nose and leads him to the gallows.
sold at a higher price than grain so western farmers could earn a higher profit on their crops.
protest against the whiskey tax began peacefully.
opponents of federalist policy sought repeal of the law and attacked it in the local press.
as anger intensified angry farmers drew on the rich traditions of protest that americans had used during the revolution such as the one depicted in this contemporary cartoon 6 9.
the scene shows angry tax protesters who have executed and burned in effigy a local tax collector.
by july 1794 frustration turned violent.
five hundred western pennsylvania farmers many armed with muskets marched on the home of a tax collector john neville to intimidate him.
two protestors were killed in the attack and nevilles house was burned to the ground.
two weeks later 6 000 armed men threatened to attack pittsburgh if the government did not repeal the tax.
federalists and republicans differed over the causes of the rebellion and how to respond to it.
federalists blamed the democratic republican societies for fomenting discord and favored a swift and decisive military response.
republicans faulted hamiltons economic program and counseled moderation and patience.
for an analysis of washingtons decision in dealing with this rebellion see choices and consequences washingtons decision to crush the whiskey rebellion.
after negotiations failed washington dispatched the militia and resistance to government authority crumbled.
one hundred and fifty people were arrested and two obscure figures were convicted of treason.
rather than see them become martyrs however washington pardoned them.
read the document whiskey rebellion address george washingtons 6th annual address to congress why did the whiskey rebellion present such a problem for republicans.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 choices and consequences washingtons decision to crush the whiskey rebellion the armed resistance of western farmers to the detested whiskey tax posed a serious dilemma for washington.
should the president negotiate with the rebels or use force to put down the rebellion.
washingtons cabinet members differed over the best course of action.
the whiskey rebellion tested the new government created by the constitution.
the situation was complicated by uncertainty over the militia.
even if washington wished to use it it was not clear if the militia would respond.
during shayss rebellion chapter 5 the militia had refused to fire on other citizens and sided with the rebels.
washington had to consider this issue and the larger question of how the new government ought to respond to a direct challenge to its authority.
washington had three choices choices call up the militia and dispatch them to western pennsylvania and crush the rebellion swiftly.
adopt a conciliatory posture make concessions to the rebels including repealing the tax and thereby avoid an armed response.
offer the rebels a chance to end their protest mobilize the militia and have it ready to march if the offer was rejected.
decision republican leaders outside the administration had hoped washington would adopt a conciliatory posture and recognize that since an unjust tax was the root of the problem it would make sense to accede to the rebels demands.
hamilton and other federalists counseled a decisive show of force.
washington opted instead for the third choice.
after efforts to peacefully persuade the rebels to stand down failed he acted decisively to put down the rebellion.
concerns that the militias of neighboring states might side with the rebels proved unfounded.
the rebels were no match for the militia and the rebellion fizzled once troops marched westward.
consequences washingtons decision to put down the rebellion ended it in western pennsylvania.
in other parts of the nation however such as kentucky where support for tax resistance was more pervasive resistance proved effective.
in kentucky few citizens were willing to act as tax collectors and juries were unlikely to convict people who refused to pay the taxes.
one consequence of the rebellion was the undermining of the authority of the democratic republican societies who were blamed for stirring up opposition to the government and fanning the resentments of the whiskey rebels.
continuing controversies why were some federalists reluctant to use force to put down the whiskey rebellion.
washingtons decision to use force has prompted controversy.
supporters of his actions argue that he wisely sought to demonstrate that armed resistance to government authority was not an affirmation of liberty but threatened to undermine liberty and the rule of law.
detractors of washingtons actions argue that pennsylvanias own government felt that it was unnecessary to mobilize the militia and that a peaceful resolution to the crisis was possible.
washington reviews the militia why did federalist enforcement of the whiskey tax fail in kentucky.
cultural politics in a passionate age cultural politics in a passionate age politics seeped into every aspect of popular culture after the adoption of the constitution.
even fashion became a political battleground so much so that sporting the wrong color badge could lead to violence.
the bitter political disputes of the day were also woven into the fabric of a new literary art form the novel.
novels were particularly important to women who were among the main readers of novels.
in a few exceptional cases women even became successful authors of novels.
the way the nation confronted race and slavery were influenced by the political conflicts of the era.
the slave uprising in the french caribbean colony of saint domingue modern haiti focused renewed attention on abolitionism and slavery.
political fashions and fashionable politics nearly every aspect of american culture was swept up in the political passions of the age.
in the politically charged 1790s political debates spilled over into the new nations streets and town squares.
ordinary citizens read newspapers or attended political meetings to keep abreast of the latest developments.
they also used taverns to host political meetings where federalists and their republican opponents toasted everything from the militia to the french revolution.
even the simple act of hoisting a glass of ale could become a political gesture particularly when the press reported the accompanying toasts.
citizens marched in parades and even rioted to express their frustrations with political developments.
even fashion was swept up into the political conflicts.
americans signaled their political allegiances and foreign policy preferences by adopting the latest paris or london styles.
republican supporters of the french revolution adorned their hats with a tricolor cockade.
federalists favored a black cockade a decoration soldiers had used during the american revolution.
by the end of the decade sporting the wrong type of ornament on ones hat in the streets of philadelphia could easily trigger a riot.
literature education and gender by the 1790s americans could choose from a staggering range of printed materials.
in addition to the expansion of newspapers books magazines broadsides and pamphlets proliferated.
the market for books increased dramatically in the 30 years between view the image ladys magazine the american revolution and 1800.
the number of booksellers in boston new york philadelphia and charleston almost quadrupled in that time.
in the 1790s 266 new lending libraries opened across america.
the new libraries were not restricted to prosperous coastal cities but as one contemporary noted in our inland towns of consequence social libraries have been instituted composed of books designed to amuse rather than to instruct although the cost of books may have been beyond those of modest means a subscription to one of these libraries was often not.
americans could also turn to magazines for education and amusement.
the titles of new magazines suggested an effort to appeal to both men and women.
for example the gentlemen and ladies town and country magazine began publishing in 1789.
the ladys magazine and repository of entertaining knowledge founded in 1791 in philadelphia targeted the growing audience of female readers.
the rise of a new literary form the novel in eighteenth century england and france helped to spur the enormous expansion in americas publishing industry.
some novelists wove political themes prominently into their tales.
americans eagerly consumed imported novels and new works written by american authors also appeared.
women became an important audience for the novel they also wrote many of the most successful early novels.
susanna rowsons charlotte temple first published in england 1791 was reprinted in america in 1794 where the first edition quickly sold out.
the storys american setting made it particularly popular in the new republic.
the moral of the novel was unmistakable.
the heroine charlotte temple foolishly leaves england for america where she elopes with a knave who reneges on his promise to marry her.
how did fashion become politicized in the 1790s.
chapter 6 6 10 allegory of female education in this needlework young maria crowninshield a student at the ladies academy in dorchester massachusetts depicts a young student receiving instruction from a female teacher.
the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 charlotte is abandoned suffers physical and mental depredations and dies soon after giving birth to a child out of wedlock.
immigrating to america in 1793 rowson fared much better than charlotte.
after a brief career as an actress rowson established the young ladies academy in boston 1797.
her curriculum included reading writing arithmetic and needlework.
another female author judith sargent murray became an outspoken advocate of equality and education for women.
her essay on the equality of the sexes published in the massachusetts magazine in 1790 under the pen name constantia argued that womens intellectual abilities were equal to those of men and that if properly educated women could equal men in accomplishment.
murray also used the novel to spread her ideals about the equality of the sexes.
her novel the story of margaretta 1798 recast the conventions of sentimental novels such as charlotte temple to reflect her views of female education.
rather than fall prey to seduction abandonment and ruin a fate typical of many female characters in popular novels margaretta uses her intelligence and superior education to avoid these perils.
murray helped found the dorchester ladies academy in massachusetts.
a 15 year old student at the academy maria crowninshield produced this allegory of female education 6 10.
although at one level this fine needlework conformed to the traditional ideas of female education which included sewing skills the subject matter signals the artists commitment to a modern expansive conception of female education.
the young girl depicted is reading a copy of english author hannah moores strictures on the modern system of female education 1799.
moores book which advocated an expansion of educational opportunities for women was one of many tracts defending womens education.
the most radical voice demanding changes in womens roles was mary wollstonecraft an english writer whose a vindication of the rights of women 1792 sparked a lively debate on both sides of the atlantic in the 1790s about the need for equality of education for men and women.
federalists republicans and the politics of race the political passions and divisions of the age also extended to the politics of race.
this became a major concern as a result of events in the caribbean where slaves in saint domingue modern haiti rose up against their french masters and seized control of the colony in 1791.
federalists and republicans were divided over how to respond to events there.
toussaint louverture a former slave forged an all black fighting force that routed the planters.
america was forced to decide between supporting this slave revolution and siding with france which sought to repress it.
at first the washington administration supported the ruling white elite but as louvertures forces solidified their hold over saint domingue the american government accepted the need to establish stable relations with the new government.
indeed as relations with france worsened many federalists began to urge washington to strengthen relations with saintdomingue hoping to renew the lucrative trade with the former french colony.
however whereas federalists supported recognition of saintdomingue republicans in congress opposed it.
how is virtue represented in maria crowninshields allegory of female education.
read the document james wilson on womans legal disabilities in james wilson an introductory lecture to a course of law lectures 1791 cultural politics in a passionate age their opposition was motivated in part by their loyalty to france which was eager to recapture the colony but also reflected the partys commitment to protecting slavery.
republicans feared that american slaves might emulate their oppressed brethren in the caribbean.
saint domingue conjured up a nightmare for slave owners such as the depiction of bloodletting during the revolution produced by a german engraver 6 11.
although fears of slave insurrection were most keen in the south northern republicans also voiced concerns.
congressman albert gallatin of pennsylvania warned that supporters of louvertures ideas might spread their views among the negro people there in america and excite dangerous insurrections among them even among those most opposed to slavery few were willing to support racial equality.
racist attitudes were found among ardent supporters of abolitionism.
images as history liberty displaying the arts and sciences explores the tensions within early abolitionist thought.
6 11 saint domingue revolution for republicans particularly in the south images such as this conjured up their worst nightmare a bloody slave insurrection.
why did republicans oppose normalizing relations with saint domingue.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 images as history liberty displaying the arts and sciences in the 1790s the library company of philadelphia a premier cultural institution founded in 1731 by benjamin franklin commissioned samuel jenningss painting liberty displaying the arts and sciences.
the painting was to represent the ideals of the new american nation.
what symbols does the artist include to show the cultural achievements of the new nation.
how does he portray african americans.
the library company directors asked jennings to include the goddess of liberty along with symbols of painting architecture mechanics astronomy including a broken chain at the feet of the goddess a symbol of the paintings abolitionist sentiments.
although jennings added his own ideas he followed the directors suggestions.
the painting reflected the influence of the classical world including copies of the writings of homer and virgil two of its greatest authors but the goddess of liberty holds a liberty pole topped by a liberty cap.
jennings did not slight the intellectual and cultural achievements of the modern world.
he used books by john milton and shakespeare to represent modern literary achievements at least of the english speaking world.
a telescope symbol of the advancement of science appears in the lower righthand corner.
finally as instructed by his patrons jennings included the goddess of liberty with a liberty pole and cap two symbols linked with the american revolution.
jennings included a group of negroes who are paying homage to liberty for the boundless blessings they receive through her cast in the subservient pose of bowing to liberty the african americans do not appear as masters of their own destinies.
nor does jenningss treatment suggest that african americans created any of the cultural achievements of the new nation.
although abolitionist in sympathy the painting does not endorse racial equality.
a group of african americans bows before liberty.
the broken chains symbolize the abolition of slavery.
liberty displaying the arts and sciences source the library company of philadelphia what symbols does the artist use to represent the achievements of the arts and science in the new american nation.
the telescope symbolizes the advancements of modern science.
the stormy presidency of john adams the stormy presidency of john adams george washington did not seek a third term a decision that set a precedent for subsequent presidents.
the unofficial two term limit that washington established bound presidents until 1940 when franklin delano roosevelt won a third term.
in the election of 1796 the federalist congressional caucus selected john adams and thomas pinckney as candidates while republicans put forward thomas jefferson and aaron burr.
party discipline however was lax.
when the electoral college met and voted for president and vice president 52 of the 136 electors voted for men not selected by either the federalist or republican congressional caucuses.
adams won the most votes and became president and jefferson polled the next most votes and became vice president.
although adams defeated jefferson the bitter electoral contest intensified the partisan divisions within america.
conflict in europe only exacerbated these tensions.
events in europe threatened to drag america into war.
fearful that america was threatened from abroad and concerned that domestic radicals were undermining american interests federalists passed repressive measures that prompted republicans to intensify their opposition to federalist power and rally around their leader thomas jefferson.
in 1800 jefferson again faced adams in a presidential election.
this time jefferson won but the election resulted in a tie between jefferson and his vice presidential running mate aaron burr.
the constitution provided that under these circumstances the house of representative would determine the outcome.
after a flurry of politicking federalists agreed to select jefferson who became president.
in richmond virginia the debate over liberty inspired a slave named gabriel to lead a rebellion to liberate virginias slaves.
although the rebellion failed it highlighted the inescapable conflict between american ideals of liberty and the realities of racial slavery.
washingtons farewell address washington never wavered in his belief that he acted above party but by the middle of his second term in office he had adopted most of hamiltons federalist agenda which prompted the most outspoken republican editors to attack washington.
rather than respond to these attacks directly washington used his farewell address a written statement widely printed in newspapers across the nation in september 1796 to reiterate his political ideals.
in his farewell address washington attacked the growing factionalism partisanship and regional tensions in american politics.
he warned the nation in the most solemn manner against the baneful effects of the spirit of party generally recognizing that foreign policy disputes had been particularly divisive he advised that america steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world washington was not counseling strict isolation but rather suggesting that america enter only into temporary alliances that served its interests.
above all he wished to see america pursue a policy free of irrational hatreds or allegiances to foreign nations.
the address sought to fuse idealism and realism into a workable approach to foreign policy.
in this famous portrait of washington done at the end of his presidency 1796 gilbert stuart created a painting filled with symbolism that captured the central role of washingtons presidency in launching the new nation 6 12.
when the painting was first displayed publicly the announcement noted that washington was surrounded with allegorical emblems of his public life in the service of his country read the document george washingtons farewell address what advice did washington offer in his farewell address.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 thomas jefferson is a firm republican john adams is an avowed monarchist.
will you by your votes contribute to make the avowed friend of monarchy president election statement in favor of jefferson 1796 which are highly illustrative of the great and tremendous storms which have frequently prevailed but made clear that these storms have abated and the appearance of the rainbow is introduced in the background as a sign of americas bright future.
although stuarts portrait suggested that the nation had weathered its worst storms the period after washingtons retirement from politics was even more contentious.
the election of 1796 was closely fought and bitterly divisive.
john adams defeated thomas jefferson by only three electoral votes.
intrigue had marred the election.
alexander hamilton sought to undermine adamss candidacy by backing thomas pinckney who was running with adams.
when adams learned of hamiltons plan he arranged to have his supporters in new england divert votes from pinckney.
the constitution did not anticipate the rise of parties nor did it envision the idea of presidential tickets with a designated candidate for president and vice president running together.
the founders system was simpler the president was the candidate with the most votes and the vice president was the runner up.
in accordance with republican theory this system would ensure that the executive contained the two men best qualified to lead the nation.
when federalist plots diverted votes from pinckney jefferson received the second most votes and hence became the new vice president.
the most obvious pattern in the election 6 12 portrait of president george washington gilbert stuarts painting included allegorical elements.
the passing storm and the rainbow symbolized the new nations stormy beginnings and bright future.
how does the artist represent the future of america in this portrait of george washington.
the stormy presidency of john adams 9 4 6 13 electoral map 1796 this map of the electoral votes in the presidential election of 1796 shows the regional basis of american politics at that time.
the strength of thomas jefferson the republican candidate was concentrated in the south and pennsylvania.
john adams the federalist candidate was strongest in new england new york new jersey and delaware.
electoral vote by state john adams federalist electoral vote 71 51 thomas jefferson democratic republican 68 49 thomas pinckney federalist 59 43 aaron burr democratic republican 30 22 maryland electors split others various 7 for adams 4 for jefferson 48 35 was regional.
john adams carried new england and most of the mid atlantic.
jefferson took the entire south and pennsylvania 6 13.
the xyz affair and quasi war with france adams pictured in 6 14 assumed the presidency just as a crisis with france was coming to a head.
in 1796 the french government still angry over what it viewed as a pro british tilt in american foreign policy had recalled its diplomatic envoy.
france began seizing american ships trading with britain.
hoping to avert war adams sent three american envoys to france to negotiate a settlement charles cotesworth pinckney of south carolina john marshall of virginia and elbridge gerry of massachusetts.
at first the french directory the revolutionary committee that ruled france from 1795 to 1799 snubbed the american delegation.
when three french officials identi fied simply as x y and z demanded a bribe from americas diplomats as the price of beginning negotiations public furor erupted over what was dubbed the xyz affair.
these officials popular vote sought a bribe of 250 000 for unknown themselves a loan of over 10 million to france and an ofunknown ficial apology from president adams for unflattering remarks unknown he had made about the french government.
in a contemporary unknown political cartoon 6 15 the fiveheaded monster of the french directory it had five members demands a bribe from americas unknown ambassadors.
the xyz affair galvanized americans who united behind adamss decision to prepare for war by increasing allocations for the military.
millions for defense but not one cent for tribute became the rallying cry.
hamiltons allies among the federalists sought a declaration of war against france but adams resisted them.
instead an undeclared naval war broke out between france and america.
this quasiwar lasted almost two 6 14 john adams john adams was elected president in 1796 in the first truly partisan presidential campaign in the new nations brief history.
how did the xyz affair affect american politics.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 6 15 the paris monster this cartoon ridicules french corruption and depravity in the xyz affair.
the many headed monster the symbol of french government wields a dagger while he solicits a bribe from the american delegation.
the american envoys respond we will not give you six pence years from 1798 to 1800.
in addition to creating a new department of the navy congress tripled the size of the regular army and created a special provisional army numbering 50 000 men.
washington reluctantly agreed to head the provisional army if hamilton were appointed his second in command a request that would have given hamilton authority over many military leaders more experienced than he.
hamiltons bold effort to elevate himself above so many other qualified officers angered many federalists who aligned themselves with adams.
federalists were now divided into adams and hamilton factions.
why did the federalists believe it was vital to american security to restrict immigration.
the alien and sedition acts federalists enacted a broad program to deal with the threats posed by the quasi war.
to pay for the enormous expansion of the military the federalistcontrolled congress passed a new property tax on land slaves and buildings.
federalists in congress then proposed laws the alien and sedition acts to protect america from foreign and domestic subversion.
the alien acts which included three separate laws made it more difficult to become a citizen and gave the government far reaching powers to read the document the alien and sedition acts the stormy presidency of john adams deport resident aliens.
the sedition act made it a crime to combine or conspire together with the intent to oppose any measure or measures of the government of the united states the act criminalized any attempt to write print utter or publish statements false scandalous or malicious against the government of the united states or either house of congress of the united states or the president conspicuously absent were penalties for attacking republican vice president thomas jefferson.
the federalist press was free to hurl whatever invectives it chose at jefferson with impunity.
federalists used the sedition act to prosecute 25 people all republican sympathizers including printers outspoken politicians and other prominent figures.
federalists even prosecuted one drunken republican for declaring that he did not care if a cannon salute to president adams fired thro his a the harshest sentence a 400 fine and an 18 month prison sentence went to david brown an itinerant preacher and political agitator who had raised a liberty pole in dedham massachusetts with a placard that read no stamp act no sedition no alien bills no land tax downfall to the tyrants of america peace and retirement to the president long live the vice president republicans had tried to use every constitutional means at their disposal to protest the sedition act.
they first sought to petition congress to repeal it and then tried to use the courts to challenge its constitutionality.
when both of these means failed republicans cast about for a new strategy.
in 1798 madison and jefferson articulated such a strategy in two separate documents the virginia resolution by madison and the kentucky resolution by jefferson both documents defended the rights of the states to judge the constitutionality of federal laws and if necessary to protect their citizens against the federal government.
republicans based this idea on the notion that the constitution was a compact among the people of the states who not only retained all powers not delegated to the new government but also retained a right to judge when acts of the federal government violated the constitution.
neither madison nor jefferson took the next logical step and asserted a right of the states to actively nullify an unconstitutional act of the federal government.
both men hoped that the states would use persuasion not force to challenge an unconstitutional exercise of federal power.
in keeping with this notion virginia and kentucky distributed their resolutions to the other state legislatures hoping that other states would also rally against the sedition act.
however legislatures in the federalist dominated new england states attacked the resolutions as dangerous and unconstitutional assertions of state power.
federalists argued that the final arbiter of the constitutionality of acts of congress ought to be the federal courts not the state legislatures.
angered by the northern federalist legislatures reactions jefferson authored a second set of kentucky resolutions 1799.
in these he introduced the constitutional doctrine of nullification which asserted that states could nullify unconstitutional laws.
jefferson did not explain how a state would accomplish the goal of constitutional nullification.
the virginia and kentucky resolutions became the foundation for subsequent arguments about states rights the theory that the constitution was a compact among the states and that the individual states retained the right to judge when the federal governments actions were unconstitutional.
the alien and sedition crisis also led to the development of a new theory of freedom of the press.
this new theory the basis for modern theories of freedom of the press argued that political opinions were not subject to government control.
rather than try to limit dissenting ideas the new view embraced the idea of a marketplace of ideas.
more speech not less was the antidote to the threat posed by dangerous ideas.
the disputed election of 1800 the quasi war with france which was winding down by 1800 had split federalists into two factions.
although adams supported a military build up he never abandoned hope of a negotiated settlement.
hamilton by contrast believed that war with france provided an opportunity to crush domestic opposition and forge an alliance with britain.
adams had little interest in such grandiose schemes which may have included vague plans for a joint anglo american conquest of spanish america.
the president also resented hamiltons meddling in his administration.
changes in the french government now made a peaceful solution likely.
the radical phase of the french revolution ended when napoleon view the closer look competing visions congressional debates over the sedition act what strategies were used to challenge the sedition act.
chapter 6 6 16 anti jefferson political cartoon jeffersons opponents portrayed him as an atheist who drew radical ideas from the french revolution.
in this image the american eagle tries to prevent jefferson from throwing the constitution into the flames emanating from the altar of gallic french despotism.
the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 bonaparte an ambitious general seized control of france in 1799.
eager to gain u s support for his military campaigns against spain and britain napoleon negotiated a treaty with adams that ended the naval conflict.
however adamss statesmanlike effort to seek peace angered hamiltonians.
adams also privately attacked hamiltons british faction in turn believing that adams lacked the resolve to deal with france or the republicans hamilton published a pamphlet denouncing the president.
the split among federalists could hardly have come at a worse time the election of 1800 loomed.
the election of 1800 presented a clear choice between federalist adams and republican jefferson.
each party indulged in more rancorous campaigning than either side had experienced in previous elections.
federalists attacked jefferson as an atheist and radical supporter of the french revolution themes captured in this political cartoon 6 16 which shows jefferson in league with the devil.
one connecticut minister declared i do not believe that the most high will permit a howling atheist to sit at the head of this nation republicans in why did the federalist political cartoon show jefferson about to burn the constitution.
turn prayed for deliverance from tories from aristocrats despite dire predictions about the dangers of electing jefferson some new englanders hid their family bibles fearing that president jefferson might confiscate them republicans garnered enough votes to win.
still the election was close.
as the map 6 17 shows support for adams was strongest in new england while jefferson carried the south and parts of the mid atlantic.
only eight votes marked the margin of victory between the two sides.
the republican victory triggered a constitutional crisis that few would have predicted.
the actual vote in the electoral college had produced a tie between jefferson and the republican candidate for vice president aaron burr.
the constitution did not direct electors to cast separate ballots for president and vice president.
a tie meant that the sitting house of representatives dominated by federalists would decide the election.
the new republican dominated house would not take its seats until march 1801.
the political situation was tense.
rumors of deals and conspiracies circulated widely.
pennsylvania and virginia both mobilized their militias a clear message that they would not sit by while scheming politicians in congress cast aside the will of the people.
the politicians indeed schemed and negotiated thus making resolution of the deadlock time consuming.
many federalists believed that jefferson was a fanatic viewing burr as a safer alternative.
alexander hamilton however who had been burrs rival in new york politics for more than a decade disagreed.
rather than see burr win hamilton persuaded federalists that jefferson was the lesser of the two evils.
jefferson had also assured federalists including hamilton that he would not undermine all hard won federalist policies of the previous decade.
with hamiltons support and assurances from jefferson a deal was finally struck.
it took five days and 35 ballots before the house finally elected jefferson.
jeffersons victory averted another constitutional crisis.
despite the mobilization of the virginia and pennsylvania militias while the house was voting the election of 1800 peacefully transferred power from federalists to republicans a notable achievement given the tense political atmosphere of the 1790s.
to avert future deadlock in presidential elections the twelfth amendment adopted in 1804 required that electors cast separate ballots for president and vice president.
the stormy presidency of john adams 9 4 6 17 electoral map of 1800 adamss support in the election of 1800 was concentrated chiefly in new england.
jefferson drew support from the south and the mid atlantic.
10 3 gabriel the slave leader of the rebellion was trained as a blacksmith and enjoyed consider4 able mobility.
his master allowed gabriel to hire himself out to others and keep part of his earnings for himself.
gabriel used his mobility to make contact with other slaves and free blacks and together with them formulated electoral vote by state popular vote electoral vote a bold plan to seize the state ar73 53 unknown thomas jefferson democratic republican senal and arm virginias slaves.
53 unknown gabriel not only knew about the aaron burr democratic republican slave uprising in saint domingue john adams 65 47 unknown and the french revolution but federalist incumbent was also keenly aware of the ideas charles c pinckney 64 46 unknown of the american revolution.
he federalist planned to march under a banmaryland north carolina ner emblazoned with the words pennsylvania electors split votes for federalist and death or liberty gabriel had democratic republican taken patrick henrys famous candidates words reversed them and transformed them into the rallying cry for a slave rebellion.
but the state militia easily crushed the rebellion.
to deal with the rebels a special court tried slaves without the the french revolution and the struggles between benefit of a jury.
twenty six of those put on trial federalists and republicans leading up to the elecwere convicted and sentenced to death.
although tion of 1800 helped spread ideas about liberty throughout american society including among slave virginia showed little concern for the rights of the accused slaves it had to pay close to 9 000 communities in the south.
the most dramatic ilto the owners of the condemned slaves who were lustration of this came in virginia in 1800.
gabriels legally entitled to be compensated for the loss of rebellion a slave insurrection united free blacks their property.
and slaves in a plot to liberate richmonds slaves.
gabriels rebellion mr.
jefferson though too revolutionary in his notions is yet a lover of liberty and will be desirous of something like orderly government.
mr burr loves nothing but himself.
and will be content with nothing short of permanent power in his own hands alexander hamilton 1800 read the document a virginia slave explains gabriels rebellion what events in the 1790s helped inspire gabriels rebellion.
chapter 6 the new republic an age of political passion 1789 1800 1790 1791 1793 1794 washington inaugurated hamiltons report on public credit whiskey rebellion jays treaty farmers in western pennsylvania protest the whiskey excise tax senate ratifies jays treaty with great britain.
republicans oppose treaty washington becomes americas first president federalist economic program implemented bill of rights ratified chapter review constitution amended to protect individual liberty and include additional structural supports for federalism review questions 1.
were anti federalist fears vindicated by the events of the 1790s.
did republican opposition to the sedition act owe more to states rights or individual rights.
how did the french revolution affect domestic american politics.
how did federalists view jefferson in the election of 1800.
how did the novel reflect and influence ideas about womens roles in the new republic.
key terms electoral college a group of electors appointed by each state who had the responsibility of picking the president.
republicans movement led by jefferson and madison that opposed federalists efforts to create a more powerful centralized government.
assumption of the state debts hamiltons scheme for the federal government to take over any outstanding state debts.
bank of the united states a bank chartered by the federal government.
the bank served as a depository for government funds helped bolster confidence in government securities made loans and provided the nation with a stable national currency.
democratic republican societies a new type of political organization informally allied with the republicans whose function was to help collect channel and influence public opinion.
jays treaty diplomatic treaty negotiated by federalist john jay in 1794.
according to the terms of the treaty britain agreed to compensate america for cargoes seized from 1793 to 1794 and promised to vacate forts in the northwest territory.
however america failed to win acceptance of the right of neutral nations to trade with belligerents without harassment.
whiskey rebellion the armed uprising of western pennsylvania farmers protesting the whiskey excise in 1794 was the most serious test of the new federal governments authority since ratification of the constitution.
xyz affair the furor created when americans learned that three french officials identified in diplomatic correspondence as x y and z demanded a bribe from americas diplomats as the price of beginning negotiations.
alien and sedition acts four laws designed to protect america from the danger of foreign and domestic subversion.
the first three the alien laws dealt with immigration and naturalization.
the sedition act criminalized criticism of the federal government.
states rights the theory that the constitution was a compact among the states and that the individual states retained the right to judge when the federal governments actions were unconstitutional.
gabriels rebellion a slave insurrection in richmond virginia that drew together free blacks and slaves in a plot to seize the richmond arsenal and foment a slave rebellion.
chapter review john adams elected president alien and sedition acts second kentucky resolution jefferson elected president washington declines to serve a third term and is succeeded by federalist john adams congress enacts a series of new acts to control aliens and punish attacks on the government jefferson introduces concept of nullification in his second kentucky resolutions peaceful transfer of power from federalists to republicans virginia and kentucky resolutions madison and jefferson draft resolutions protesting the sedition act and asserting the right of the states to check unconstitutional acts of the federal government myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of the new republic.
questions for analysis 1.
what was hamiltons vision for the new republic.
read the document alexander hamilton opposing visions for the new nation p 160 2.
what was jeffersons vision for the new republic.
other resources from this chapter read the document the jay treaty p 170 whiskey rebellion address george washingtons 6th annual address to congress p 173 james wilson on womans legal disabilities in james wilson an introductory lecture to a course of law lectures 1791 p 176 read the document thomas jefferson notes on virginia george washingtons farewell address p 179 p 165 the alien and sedition acts p 182 3.
did jeffersons statements about the french revolution justify federalist charges that he was a dangerous radical.
view the closer look competing visions jefferson and hamiltons reactions to the french revolution p 168 4.
what does the alien and sedition crisis reveal about political tensions in the new republic.
view the closer look competing visions congressional debates over the sedition act p 183 5.
explain the meaning and significance of gabriels rebellion.
read the document a virginia slave explains gabriels rebellion p 185 view the image george washingtons arrival in new york city 1789 p 158 ladys magazine p 175 c hapter politics in jeffersonian america p 190 what was the jeffersonian vision of government.
an expanding empire of liberty p 194 m is s ou ri r mandan crow shoshone cheyenne arapaho mandan villages winter quarters 1804 05 sioux indiana pawnee territory st louis ken anish r ito ry osage how did jeffersons policy toward indians fit into his vision of america.
dissension at home p 200 was jeffersons response to the federalist judiciary consistent with his political and constitutional beliefs.
america confronts a world at war p 201 what was peaceable coercion and why did it fail to avert war.
the republic reborn consequences of the war of 1812 p 208 how did the war of 1812 change american society.
crises and the collapse of the national republican consensus p 213 what did the missouri crisis reveal about the tensions in american society.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 tightening the reins of empire the british victory in the french and indian war in 1763 secured north america against french attack.
it also forced the british government to chart a new direction for dealing with america.
a cornerstone of the new policy was the proclamation of 1763 which prohibited settlement in lands west of the appalachian mountains see chapter 3.
having just fought an expensive war against the french the british were keen to prevent colonists and indians from starting a new war.
britain also felt a renewed urgency to raise funds to pay off the war debt and cover the costs of administering the colonies.
taxation without representation in 1763 george grenville the new prime minister ordered a detailed investigation of colonial revenues and was unhappy to discover that american customs duties produced less than 2 000 a year.
the lucrative trade in molasses between british north america and the caribbean islands alone should have yielded approximately 200 000 a year apart from all of the other goods traded between north america and britain which should also have generated customs duties.
to make the colonies pay their share of taxes grenville was determined to enforce existing laws and enact new taxes to bring in additional revenue.
as the figures in envisioning evidence a comparison of annual per capita tax rates in britain and the colonies in 1765 show compared to the inhabitants of britain and ireland the tax burden on the american colonists in the 1760s was low.
americans and britons had come to view taxation differently and these different visions of the morality and legality of britains new policies put the two on a collision course.
the very act of taxing exercised over those who are not represented appears to me to be depriving them of one of their most essential rights as freemen james otis the rights of the british colonies asserted and proved 1764 why is the scale in the cartoon the great financier out of balance.
the first step in grenvilles new program was the revenue act 1764 popularly known as the sugar act.
it lowered the duties colonists had to pay on molasses but taxed sugar and other goods imported to the colonies and increased penalties for smuggling.
it also created new ways for enforcing compliance with these laws.
violators could be prosecuted in british vice admiralty courts which operated without jury trials.
for some americans the sugar act violated two longheld beliefs the idea that colonists could not be taxed without their consent and the equally sacred notion that englishmen were entitled to a trial by a jury of their peers.
the massachusetts lawyer james otis attacked the sugar act as a violation of the rights of englishmen.
otis had already achieved notoriety for his opposition to the use of writs of assistance by customs officials.
otis insisted that under british law a court could issue a search warrant only for a specific place where there was probable cause to suspect illegal activity.
rather than require that officials designate where they intended to search the new general writs allowed customs officials to search any private property without first demonstrating probable cause or seeking the approval of a magistrate.
in his pamphlet attacking the sugar act the rights of the british colonies asserted and proved otis denied that the british had the authority to tax the colonists without their consent.
but otis stopped short of recommending active resistance to the sugar act.
instead he counseled patience reminding his readers that we must and ought to yield obedience to an act of parliament though erroneous till repealed whereas americans viewed the new tax on sugar and other imports as a burden and a view the closer look tea tax tempest tightening the reins of empire envisioning evidence a comparison of annual per capita tax rates in britain and the colonies in 1765 given the stridency of colonial opposition to british taxation one might think that americans were the most heavily taxed people in the british empire.
in fact however they were the least heavily taxed part of the empire.
americans were also generally wealthier than their countrymen across the atlantic.
american grievances were less about the levels of taxation than about the constitutional and political issues taxation raised.
policy makers in britain had trouble understanding this distinction which had profound consequences for relations with the colonies.
britain england scotland 26 shillings ireland 6 shillings 8 pence 1 shilling massachusetts 1 shilling 12 pence pennsylvania 1 shilling maryland 1 shilling new york 8 pence connecticut 7 pence virginia 5 pence until 1970 british currency was denominated in pounds shillings and pence s d there were 20 shillings to a pound and 12 pence to a shilling.
in the 1760s the daily wage for a skilled worker in london was 2 s 2 d and a beef dinner with a pint of beer cost 1 s.
in british north america wages and prices varied from colony to colony but free white american males enjoyed a higher standard of living than comparable workers did in britain.
in 1760 a philadelphia laborer earned just under 60 a year and a merchant 180.
source adapted from r r palmer the age of democratic revolution a political history of europe and america 1760 1800 princeton nj princeton university press 1959 which parts of the british empire were most heavily taxed.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 4 1 the great financier prime minister george grenville holds a balance in which debts far outweigh savings britannia symbol of great britain sits off to the right forlorn.
an indian princess symbol of the american colonies kneels with a yoke around her neck.
the writing on the yoke declares taxed without representation violation of their rights for the british the taxes were a modest imposition necessary to pay for the cost of eliminating the french from north america and administering the colonies.
this political cartoon 4 1 which portrays grenville holding a balance in which debts clearly outweigh savings illustrates britains financial predicament.
the british cartoonist who drew it obviously sympathized with americans.
he shows a native american princess the most common symbol of the colonies in british cartoons carrying a sack of money and bearing a heavy yoke around her neck.
inscribed on the yoke is the colonists complaint taxed without representation st l aw re nc er.
halifax portsmouth salem marblehead boston plymouth pomfret windham lebanon lak k la e er ie n eo ta r io io r elk ridge landing oh albany hartford wethersfield wallingford stratford fairfield elizabeth town piscataway arnwell twp.
newport norwich new london lyme new haven west haven milford new york woodbridge brunswick philadelphia salem baltimore frederick town lewes annapolis talbot dumfries leeds rappahannock williamsburg norfolk at l ant ic oce an new bern duplin cross creek brunswick wilmington fort johnson charleston savannah how did colonists react to the stamp act.
4 2 stamp act protests this map shows the scope of opposition to the detested stamp act.
protest was most intense in the seaports.
the stamp act crisis britain reacted to the colonists resistance to the sugar act by imposing another harsher tax the stamp act which required colonists to purchase special stamps and place them on everything from newspapers to playing cards.
a similar tax existed in britain and parliament believed that requiring colonists to pay such a tax at a lower rate than their brethren in britain was entirely reasonable.
many colonists however rejected this notion.
for them taxation without consent was a violation of their rights.
opposition was most intense in the seaports the map 4 2 shows how widespread anger against this latest tax was.
stamps had to be affixed to virtually all legal transactions and most printed documents so the new tax act alienated more americans than had any previous parliamentary tax.
the british could hardly have picked a worse target for their new scheme of taxation.
among those most burdened by the tax were lawyers and printers two of the most vocal and influential groups in the colonies.
protests against the stamp act filled colonial newspapers and produced a spate of pamphlets defending colonial rights.
the massachusetts house of representatives called on other colonial assemblies to send delegates to new york to frame a response to the stamp act crisis.
nine of the thirteen colonies view the image stamp act tightening the reins of empire sent a representative to the stamp act congress and although framed in respectful terms the declaration of the rights and grievances of the colonies was an important step toward articulating a common response to british policy forcing representatives from different colonies to work together for a common goal.
protest against this latest attack on american liberty was not limited to newspapers or legislative chambers.
opposition to the stamp act spilled out of doors into the streets of american cities and towns.
angry crowds attacked tax collectors and officials.
in a few cases crowds also attacked the homes of british officials including the home of the lieutenant governor of massachusetts thomas hutchinson.
george iii dismissed george grenville in 1765 leaving the task of responding to the american crisis to a young english nobleman charles wentworth marquess of rockingham the new prime minister.
rockingham shepherded two key pieces of legislation through parliament to deal with the crisis created by the stamp act.
the declaratory act affirmed parliaments authority to make laws and statutes binding on the colonies in all cases whatsoever the second piece of legislation repealed the hated stamp act.
britain believed that it had reasserted its authority over the colonies while removing the main cause of colonial protest.
british officials misjudged the reaction of colonists opposed to recent policy.
for critics of british policy it appeared that parliament had embarked on a path that would lead inevitably to the destruction of the colonists liberty.
colonial politics had moved from the margins to the center of british politics.
the issue of what to do about the colonies would define british politics for the next decade.
in the colonies the conflict over british policy also transformed american politics bringing to the fore a group of patriots aggressive supporters of american rights including the sons of liberty a group devoted to opposing british policy and defending american rights.
an assault on liberty the resolution of the stamp act crisis did not eliminate britains pressing financial need for colonial revenue nor did it reduce colonial determination to resist further efforts to tax americans.
what good will the repeal of the stamp act generated britain quickly squandered as it renewed its efforts to impose new taxes on the colonies.
the townshend acts 1767 named for charles townshend an ambitious british finance minister levied new taxes on glass paint paper and tea imported into the colonies.
townshend misinterpreted the stamp act protests.
he believed that colonists opposed internal taxes targeted at commerce within the colonies but that americans would accept external taxes such as customs duties that affected trade between the colonies and other parts of the british empire.
again many americans saw things differently.
the townshend acts prompted americans to clarify their views about taxation.
pennsylvania lawyer john dickinsons pamphlet letters from a farmer in pennsylvania 1767 1768 was an important statement of american views.
dickinson disputed parliaments right to tax the colonists at all.
parliament could regulate trade among different parts of the empire he acknowledged but only the peoples representatives could enact taxes designed primarily to raise revenues.
since americans had no representation in parliament that institution could not tax them.
in response to the townshend acts americans began a nonimportation movement an organized boycott against the purchase of any imported british goods.
women took an active role in the boycott urging that instead of imported fabrics americans wear only clothes made from domestic homespun fabrics.
the nonimportation movement offered american women a chance to contribute actively to the defense of american rights.
it also raised womens political consciousness.
as thirteen year old anna green winslow wrote in her journal regarding the decision to abandon imported fabrics i am as we say a daughter of liberty i chuse to wear as much of our manufactory as possible another import tea had become the basis of an important social ritual in colonial society.
amid the growing frustration with british policy tea drinking took on new political significance.
in 1774 penelope barker and a group of women in edenton north carolina organized a tea boycott.
word of the edenton protest eventually reached england where a british cartoonist lampooned its support for the american cause 4 3 on page 102.
this satire casts the edenton women as a motley assortment of hags and harlots whose unfeminine actions and neglect of their proper duties as women demonstrate their lack of virtue.
the tea boycott even inspired nine year old susan boudinot the daughter of a wealthy philadelphia family to demonstrate her solidarity with the read the document john dickinson letters from farmer in pennsylvania how did nonimportation transform womens political role in the colonies.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 a ladys adieu to her tea table no more shall i dish out the once lovd liquor though now detestable because im taught and i believe it true its use will fasten slavish chains upon my country and libertys the goddess i would choose to reign triumphant in america.
4 3 patriotic ladies of edenton this sarcastic british cartoon lampoons the efforts of american women to participate in the boycott of british imports.
the caricature shows the women as unfeminine and neglectful of their proper subordinate roles as wives and mothers.
virginia gazette january 20 1774 colonial cause in her own way.
when invited to tea at the home of the royal governor of new jersey susan curtsied respectfully raised her teacup to her lips and then tossed the contents out of a window.
the new duties imposed by the british were only one part of a more aggressive policy toward the colonies.
between 1765 and 1768 the british transferred the bulk of their military forces in america from the frontier to the major seaports sites of the most violent opposition to the stamp act.
this increased the already tense situation in these localities.
in 1768 the simmering tensions between colonists and the british government came to a head when british customs officials in boston seized merchant john hancocks ship liberty.
customs officials had long suspected hancock of smuggling and thought that seizing the liberty would give them the proof to prosecute him.
the decision proved to be a serious blunder.
the symbolic significance of the british assault on a ship named liberty was not lost on bostonians who saw this as an assault on the idea of liberty itself.
in response to the seizure of the liberty bostonians rioted driving customs officials from the town.
to quell unrest in boston the british dispatched additional troops and warships to the area.
by 1769 the british had stationed almost 4 000 troops dubbed redcoats because of their red uniforms in a city with a population of roughly 15 000.
how does revere stage the events of the boston massacre to evoke sympathy for the colonists cause.
relations between bostonians and the occupying forces were tense.
on march 5 1770 a group of citizens taunted a patrol of soldiers and pelted them with snowballs.
in the melee that followed some of the soldiers fired on the crowd killing five civilians.
the boston silversmith and engraver paul revere published a popular engraving of the boston massacre as the confrontation came to be called in which he portrayed the british as having deliberately fired on the unarmed crowd 4 4.
revere aligns the soldiers in a formal military pose and portrays the commanders as giving an order to fire.
when the soldiers responsible for the shootings were indicted for murder john adams a vocal critic of british policy volunteered to defend them.
adams sought to demonstrate to the british that the americans were not a lawless mob but a law abiding people.
a gifted lawyer he secured acquittals for all those accused except for two soldiers who were convicted of the lesser crime of manslaughter.
the evidence presented at the trial revealed that reveres version of the event while excellent propaganda was not an accurate rendering of the circumstances.
the new taxes and pressure for compliance had stiffened the colonists resistance.
so although parliament repealed most of the townshend acts in 1770 relations between the colonies and britain remained strained.
colonists continued to demand the traditional rights of englishmen such as trial by jury but american protests had moved in a new view the closer look images as history the hanging of absalom tightening the reins of empire 4 4 boston massacre paul reveres influential engraving of the boston massacre takes liberties with the facts to portray the british in the worst possible light.
the orderly arrangement of the troops and the stance of the officer at their side suggest that they acted under orders.
behind the troops revere has renamed the shop butchers hall though it made tea cheaper and merchants resented the monopoly it gave to the east india company.
others saw the act as a subtle way of reasserting britains right to tax the colonies.
one group of angry colonists in philadelphia calling themselves the tar and feathering committee warned that they would tar and feather any ships captain who landed with british tea.
the british found the colonists actions thuggish.
in this hostile british cartoon bostonians pay the excise man 4 5 a cruel looking bunch of colonists force a british customs official covered in tar and feathers to drink tea until he becomes sick.
a form of public humiliation tarring and feathering involved pouring hot tar onto the victims skin and then attaching a coat of feathers.
scraping off the resulting mess was painful and laborious.
4 5 bostonians paying the exciseman in this pro british cartoon bostonians are cruel thugs who have tarred and feathered the customs official and are forcing tea down his throat.
direction including the view that taxation without representation was a violation of fundamental rights.
resistance to british policy was also becoming more organized.
the sons of liberty created during the stamp act crisis continued their criticism and intensified their efforts to coordinate and enforce protests against parliament s policies.
after the repeal of the townshend acts americans enjoyed a brief respite from parliaments attentions as britain turned its focus elsewhere in its far flung empire especially to india.
however colonists soon faced another effort to tax them.
the intolerable acts and the first continental congress in 1773 parliament decided to help the flagging east india company increase its tea sales to the colonies.
many members of parliament had sizable investments in the company.
the new law lowered the price of tea to americans but kept the tax on tea and also gave the east india company a monopoly on the tea trade with the colonies.
again british authorities miscalculated american reactions.
colonists resented the new law even why did british policy seem to strike at the essence of colonists liberty.
view the closer look the bloody massacre chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 4 6 the able doctor or america swallowing the bitter draught paul reveres engraving presents america as a partially clad indian princess.
lord chief justice mansfield a symbol of british law holds america down.
the prime minister lord north shown with a copy of the boston port bill one of the intolerable acts protruding from his pocket forces tea down her throat.
the most dramatic response to the tea act occurred in december 1773 when bostonians dressed as indians boarded a british ship and tossed over 340 chests of tea into the harbor in what came to be known as the boston tea party.
to punish the colonists responsible for this act of what the british considered vandalism parliament passed the coercive acts known to colonists as the intolerable acts.
this legislation closed the port of boston annulled the massachusetts colonial charter dissolved or severely restricted that colonys political institutions and allowed the british to quarter house troops in private homes.
a generation later americans adopted the third amendment to the bill of rights which forbade quartering troops in civilian homes a direct response to this detested british practice.
the acts also allowed british officials charged with capital crimes to be tried outside the colonies.
some colonists called the last provision the murder act since they feared it would allow soldiers charged with murder to avoid prosecution.
americans were divided over how to respond to the intolerable acts.
some saw the bostonians who dumped tea into the harbor as radicals whose actions besmirched americans reputation as lawabiding subjects of the king.
others expressed outrage at the british policy that had forced bostonians what is the symbolic significance lord chief justice mansfields actions in this political cartoon.
to resort to such a dramatic protest.
this cartoon the able doctor or america swallowing the bitter draught 4 6 gives a different view of bostonians from the lawless ruffians depicted in bostonians paying the excise man 4 5.
here the british prime minister lord north brutally accosts america a half clad indian princess forcing tea down her throat while lord chief justice lord mansfield the symbol of british law pins her arms down.
the most important consequence of the intolerable acts was the decision by the colonies to convene a continental congress in philadelphia in late 1774.
all the colonies except georgia sent representatives.
among the colonial leaders who attended were patrick henry john adams and george washington.
congress endorsed the resolves of suffolk county massachusetts which denounced the intolerable acts and asserted the intention of colonists to nullify such a manifest violation of their rights and liberties the congress also recommended that every town county and city create a committee to enforce the boycott of british goods.
the informal network of committees that had opposed british policy now acquired a quasi legal status from congress.
although many americans hoped that a peaceful solution to the deepening crisis was possible in march 1774 the brilliant virginia orator patrick henry urged his fellow delegates in the read the document patrick henry give me liberty or give me death tightening the reins of empire virginia legislature to prepare for the inevitable conflict that loomed between the colonies and britain.
although no contemporaneous copy of his dramatic speech exists henrys words were recounted many years later assuming almost legendary status in american culture.
in response to british assaults henry declared give me liberty or give me death between the passage of the sugar act in 1764 and the meeting of the first continental congress in 1774 relations between britain and america had steadily deteriorated.
as the chart 4 7 shows britain had tried various revenue measures to raise funds from the colonies.
americans however remained opposed to taxation without representation.
rather than subdue the colonies british policy only strengthened the resolve of americans to defend their rights.
lexington concord and lord dunmores proclamation living on the edge of the british empire colonists had come to depend on their own militias as their primary means of public defense.
the laws of the individual colonies regulated these organizations of citizen soldiers.
during the colonial period the militia was more than just a force available to protect the colonists from hostile indians or attacks from the french or spanish.
in an era before police forces the militia also helped enforce public order putting down riots rebellions and other civil disturbances.
in january 1775 virginias george mason called on the colonists to put their militia in good order.
date act policy proclamation of 1763 prohibits colonists from moving westward intensifies problem of land scarcity in colonies sugar act reduces duty on molasses but provides for more vigorous methods of enforcement colonials articulate theory that taxation without representation is a violation of their most essential rights as freemen stamp act documents and printed materials including legal documents newspapers and playing cards must use special stamped paper riots in major urban areas harassment of revenue officers colonial representatives meet for stamp act congress quartering act colonists must supply british troops with housing and firewood colonial assemblies protest new york punished for failure to comply with law declaratory act repeal of stamp act britain asserts its right to legislate for colonies in all cases stamp act repealed britain reasserts its authority while removing the obnoxious provisions of the stamp act townshend acts new duties placed on glass lead paper paint tea act coercive acts port of boston closed town intolerable acts meetings restricted prohibitory act parliament gives east india company monopoly but provides a subsidy to east india company that decreases the price of tea for americans britain declares intention to coerce americans into submission consequences 4 7 british policies and their consequences for relations with the american colonies non importation movement gains ground 90 000 pounds of tea tossed into boston harbor first continental congress meets and other colonies express support for bostonians continental congress adopts a declaration of rights asserting american rights what was the impact of lord dunmores proclamation on southern colonists.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 if we view the whole of the conduct of the british ministry and parliament i do not see how any one can doubt but that there is a settled fixd plan for inslaving the colonies or bringing them under arbitrary government.
connecticut minister the reverend ebenezer baldwin 1774 mason declared that a well regulated militia composed of gentlemen freeholders and other free man is the natural strength and only stable security of a free government the british too understood the importance of the militia to colonial resistance.
not only did they pose a military threat but they were also indispensable to helping mobilize americans and organizing their opposition to british policy.
disarming the militias became a priority for the british.
their first target was massachusetts which had become a hotbed of resistance the british dispatched troops to concord in april 1775 to seize gunpowder and other military supplies.
paul revere an outspoken member of the sons of liberty was charged with riding from boston to lexington and concord to warn citizens that british troops were on the march.
revere got as far as lexington before a british patrol captured him.
fortunately for revere he had already encountered another member of the sons of liberty that night dr samuel prescott who was returning from the home of his fiance.
prescott agreed to carry word that british troops were marching from boston.
the alarm spread throughout the countryside.
when the 700 british regulars finally arrived at lexingtons town green they faced 60 70 militiamen.
although the militia agreed to disperse someone it is not clear who fired a shot and the two sides exchanged fire.
the battle of lexington marked the first military conflict between britain and america and the colonists had demonstrated their mettle.
the british then marched to concord where they confronted a larger and better organized militia detachment at the north bridge.
the militia stood their ground and exchanged fire with the british why did british regulars choose concord as their military objective.
regulars who were forced to retreat.
while the british retreated back to boston colonial reinforcements poured into concord and the surrounding countryside.
the british column was an easy target for militiamen who took up positions along the roadside and in the adjacent woods.
a rhode island newspaper captured the views of patriots when it commented that british aggression marked the start of a war which shall hereafter fill an important page in history although the british had mounted a direct assault on the massachusetts militia they opted for a stealthier plan for disarming the virginia militia.
under cover of darkness a detachment of royal marines entered virginias capital of williamsburg seized the gun powder and destroyed the firing mechanisms on the muskets stored in the militias magazine storehouse.
when citizens of williamsburg learned of the assault they marched on the governors mansion to protest.
as word of the british raid spread through the colony militia led by patrick henry planned to march on williamsburg.
lord dunmore the royal governor warned that if the militia entered williamsburg he would declare freedom to slaves and reduce the city of williamsburg to ashes at the last moment a compromise was worked out and the governor made restitution for the stolen powder and damaged guns.
still dunmores threat to free virginias slaves had shocked the colony.
two weeks later colonists learned of lord dunmores proclamation.
dunmore offered freedom to any slave who joined the british forces in putting down the american rebellion.
within a month 300 slaves had joined dunmores ethiopian regiment whose ranks would swell to 800 or more.
the uniforms of this unit included a sash emblazoned with the motto liberty to slaves virginians complained that the british were using every art to seduce the negroes while others viewed dunmores decision as diabolical many virginians who were wavering on the issue of american independence now concluded that a break with britain was inevitable even desirable.
some virginians recognized that virginias slaves were seeking the same liberty that colonists claimed.
for example lund washington who managed his cousin georges mount vernon estate including his slaves observed that there is not a man of them but would leave us if they could make their escape patriots versus loyalists patriots versus loyalists by 1775 the rift between britain and the colonies had grown precipitously large.
indeed it was not just colonists who believed that if britain continued on its present course it would end in disaster.
a satirical british cartoon the political cartoon for the year 1775 4 8 published in london vividly captured this view.
it depicts king george iii riding in a coach heading straight over a cliff.
lord chief justice mansfield holds the reins of the carriage of state which rides roughshod over the magna carta a legal text closely linked with the rights of englishmen and the british constitution another symbol of liberty.
the cartoonists symbolism suggested a view that was becoming increasingly popular in the colonies americans could no longer expect the political and legal system of britain to protect their liberty.
although some americans were persuaded that britain was intent on trampling their liberty other colonists remained loyal to the crown.
for patriots it was becoming increasingly clear that they could no longer count on the legal protections that had safeguarded their liberty for generations.
loyalists by contrast disputed this claim.
for those loyal to george iii liberty could be maintained only by upholding english law.
loyalists viewed patriots actions as lawlessness not affirmations of liberty.
the battle of bunker hill two months after lexington and concord the two sides clashed again in charlestown across the charles river from boston.
american forces had dug in at bunker hill and nearby breeds hill prepared to hold off the british in boston.
the main fighting actually took place at breeds hill which was closer to the harbor.
the british underestimated the colonists resolve to hold their ground.
although the british took bunker and breeds hills they had purchased their victory at a steep cost in dead and wounded.
even more important americans had shown the british that they were not the untrained rabble the british had portrayed and that they could become a formidable fighting force.
the painter john trumbull immortalized the battle in his painting the death of general warren at the battle of bunker hill.
for a discussion of this painting and how it reflected the realities of a battle in which neither side won a clear victor see images as history trumbulls the death of general warren at the battle of bunker hill page 108.
despite the armed confrontations at lexington concord and bunker hill the continental congress had not abandoned hope of reconciliation with king george iii.
in july 1775 congress drafted the 4 8 the political cartoon for the year 1775 george iii rides next to lord chief judge mansfield in a carriage heading toward the edge of a cliff.
the carriage crushes the magna carta and the british constitution symbols of the rule of law while flames engulf boston in the background.
what does the political cartoon for the year 1775 reveal about the nature of relations between the colonies and britain.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 images as history trumbulls the death of general warren at the battle of bunker hill american john trumbulls painting the death of general warren at the battle of bunker hill 1786 painted eleven years after the battle captured an important moment in the american war for independence.
like benjamin wests the death of general wolfe see page 90 trumbulls painting depicts the heroic death of a military figure but the two paintings differ in a number of fascinating ways.
while the death of general wolfe portrayed a clear victory for the british the death of general warren showed a more complex event in which neither side was completely victorious while the americans lost the battle they proved themselves an effective fighting force and exacted a high price from the british for their victory.
how did trumbulls composition reflect the realities of this battle a struggle in which neither side won a clear victory.
trumbullspainting the death of general warren was part of a series of paintings he began to commemorate the great events of our countrys revolution the artist intended to use his painting as the basis for a set of engravings that he could sell as cheap prints to a popular market on both sides of the atlantic.
with this in mind trumbull captured the chaotic horror of a battle scene in which both armies displayed heroism and nobility.
the american general warren lies mortally wounded cradled in the arms of one of his troops in the same pose in which benjamin west portrayed british general wolfe.
one element of the painting meant to appeal to british viewers is the depiction of british major john small in the center ofthe composition near warren.
small stays the hand of one of his infantryman poised to bayonet the dying warren.
by placing these two noble gestures warrens sacrifice and smalls humanitarian intervention at the center of the painting trumbull shifts attention away from the actual outcome of the battle to the idea that virtuous men on both sides performed noble deeds.
this decision enhanced the moral complexity of the events while also making it and later engravings based on it attractive to british and american customers effectively doubling the size of his potential market.
trumbulls canvas also advanced the democratization of art begun by benjamin west.
in this painting virtue resides neither in one nation nor in any particular class of men.
trumbull portrays a broad range of soldiers heroically from a gentlemanly british officer to a barefoot colonial soldier.
indeed abigail adams an outspoken supporter of american independence and the wife of the prominent politician john adams noted that trumbull teaches mankind that it is not rank nor titles but character alone which interests posterity trumbull all but ignored african americans consigning the two he did include to minor roles in the painting.
trumbull described the african american standing in the lower right corner behind an injured colonial the death of general warren at the battle of bunker hill how did trumbull craft his painting so it would appeal to both an american and british audience.
patriots versus loyalists officer as a faithful negro at least fourteen african americans were among the troops defending breeds hill and bunker hill.
the african american peter salem played an important role in the actual battle perhaps firing the shot that killed major pitcairn the british figure collapsing near the center of the painting.
the paintings slighting of that role probably general warrens pose evokes the image of jesus being cradled in the arms of mary.
reflected trumbulls own racial ideas and those of his audience who were not used to seeing african americans depicted in anything but a subservient role.
for the moment the democratization of art was restricted to those of european descent.
african americans treatment in american art mirrored their marginalization in the larger society.
trumbull highlights the idea of virtue and honor as universal values by showing a british officer preventing a soldier from bayoneting the dying warren.
rather than portray an african american as heroic warren marginalizes this figure literally placing him in the shadow of a white officer at the end of the canvas.
major pitcairn who led the british assault on concord is mortally wounded in this battle.
what does trumbulls portrayal of african americans tell us about his views and those of his likely audiences.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 olive branch petition asking george iii to intervene on their behalf.
the king rejected the american appeal.
with that rejection the time for reconciliation passed and the supporters of american independence in the continental congress gained momentum.
the push for independence opened a division within colonial society between colonists who supported independence and those who remained loyal to the british.
common sense and the declaration of independence in january 1776 thomas paine a recent immigrant to america from england wrote a pamphlet that argued forcefully for american independence.
in common sense paine not only attacked recent british policy he framed a stinging indictment of monarchy and defended a democratic theory of representative government.
after stating the simple facts plain arguments and common sense of the matter paine concluded that separation from britain was the only action that made sense for america.
paines work was printed in a cheap format that allowed artisans farmers and others with little money to purchase a copy.
he wrote in plain forceful prose avoiding literary and classical allusions that would have required knowledge of latin.
the book was a phenomenal publishing success.
common sense did more than simply fuel americans desire for independence it helped change the framework in which americans thought about politics itself.
before paines pamphlet most americans even those who believed that reconciliation with britain was impossible still maintained a respectful attitude toward george iii.
most americans had grown up in a culture that venerated constitutional monarchy but paines savage critique of this institution had a liberating impact.
paine called monarchy ridiculous after demonstrating that history proved that monarchy was incompatible with liberty paine turned to the current british monarch george iii whom he equated with savagery itself.
he denounced the king for his assaults on american liberty noting that even brutes do not devour their young those who supported reconciliation with britain found paines scathing attacks on george iii appalling.
paine also gave a voice to many who wished to radically transform american political life.
he was unabashedly democratic at a time when many including those most eager to separate from britain viewed democracy as a danger to be avoided what arguments did paines common sense present.
at all cost.
common sense became a blueprint for those who wished to experiment with democratic government although not everyone who ardently supported american independence appreciated paines ideas.
there is something absurd in supposing a continent to be perpetually governed by an island thomas paine common sense 1776 in july 1775 a month after congress drafted the olive branch petition pleading with george iii to abandon the cruel policies of his ministers and such statutes as immediately distress the colonists the king declared that the american colonists were in open and avowed rebellion the prohibitory act which the british parliament enacted into law in december 1775 banned all trade with the thirteen colonies.
word of the ban arrived in america in february 1776.
coming on the heels of paines indictment of british tyranny the policy further inflamed american resentments against britain.
after the adoption of the prohibitory act support for independence gained ground.
in may congress instructed the individual colonies to adopt such government as shall in the opinion of the representatives of the people best conduce to the happiness and safety of their constituents congress added a preamble five days later that affirmed the exercise of every kind of authority under the said crown should be totally suppressed although congress had not formally declared independence it had effectively asserted that the colonies had become independent states no longer under the authority of parliament or the king.
richard henry lee of virginia introduced a resolution that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states congress then debated the lee resolution and on june 11 1776 appointed a committee to draft a formal declaration of independence.
with john adams massachusetts as its chair the committee included robert livingston new york thomas jefferson virginia read the document thomas paine common sense patriots versus loyalists roger sherman connecticut and benjamin franklin pennsylvania.
adams designated jefferson to take the lead in drafting the formal resolution.
on june 28 the committee presented the congressional delegates with the draft.
congress cut about a quarter of the text and made some other revisions to the document.
on july 4 1776 congress approved the final text of the declaration of independence a public defense of americas decision to declare independence from britain that was to be printed and sent to the individual states.
copies of the declaration were then widely distributed.
thomas jefferson admitted that his text reflected the sentiments of the day whether expressed in conversation or letters printed essays the introductory paragraph explained the reasons for separating from britain.
the second paragraph provided a powerful defense of the liberty and equality and affirmed that all men are created equal and therefore entitled to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness a long list of grievances against george iii took up the bulk of the text.
printed as a single broadside the indented list of charges against george iii was immediately recognizable 4 9.
the drafters of the declaration of independence aimed it at both a domestic and a foreign audience.
it made the case for independence to the american people and announced to the british government the reasons for taking up arms.
the declaration also sought to help american diplomacy.
if america were to fight the most powerful nation on earth it would need help from other european powers such as holland spain and especially of britains long time rival france.
because a powerful monarch then ruled france the declaration refrained from using the inflammatory antimonarchical rhetoric favored by thomas paine in common sense.
george iiis misdeeds not monarchy itself were to blame for americas demand for independence.
the plight of the loyalists the division between patriots colonists who supported american independence and loyalists those wishing to remain loyal to the king drove a deep wedge in colonial society.
john adams speculated that americans were evenly divided among patriots loyalists and those striving to remain neutral.
although it is difficult to establish hard figures for how colonists divided over 4 9 the declaration of independence the declaration of independence was printed as a broadside.
this single sheet format made it easy to post in public places.
the layout of the declaration the typography and paragraphing guides the reader through the main parts of its argument.
what audiences did the declaration of independence address.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness declaration of independence 1776 4 10 magna britannia her colonies reduced this image created by benjamin franklin plays on the dismemberment of the empire as fatal to both the colonies and the mother country.
franklin used this image early in americas opposition to british policy.
loyalists later used the dismemberment metaphor to persuade americans to oppose independence.
independence historians estimate that patriots constituted about 40 percent of the white population neutrals another 40 percent and loyalists probably about 20 percent.
many prominent loyalists had opposed british policy toward the colonies but refused to accept the decision for independence.
minister samuel seabury captured the view of many loyalists when he wrote to talk of a colony independent of the mothercountry is no better sense than to talk of a limb independent of the body to which it belongs the image of the dismemberment of the empire was a powerful one in the minds of colonials and britons alike.
in the 1760s supporters of american rights had used such images to persuade britain to change its policy toward the colonies.
at the time benjamin franklin was a colonial lobbyist in london working to repeal british taxes.
he designed an engraving magna britannia her colonies reduced to appeal to parliament evoking the horror of a possible separation between the colonists and the mother country 4 10.
how did the metaphor of dismemberment influence loyalist thought.
seaburys reassertion of the horrors that would follow from the dismemberment of the empire tapped into powerful fears and anxieties among americans unsure about independence.
loyalists suffered hardships during the struggle for independence.
in some places where patriot feelings were strongest individuals could be ostracized for refusing to support the patriot cause.
legal disabilities were also imposed on individuals who refused to take a loyalty oath including exclusion from service on juries and disarmament.
many states passed laws seizing loyalist property.
a complicated issue arising from these laws was how to deal with women married to loyalists.
some women brought property from their own family into their marriage.
was this property also liable to confiscation.
the story of grace growden galloway illustrates the rapid reversal of fortune that could befall anyone who opposed the patriots side in the american revolution.
see choices and consequences a loyalist wifes dilemma.
the loyalist cause appealed to many americans not just wealthy men and women like grace and joseph galloway.
new york boasted a sizeable loyalist population as did parts of the backcountry in the carolinas.
some religious sects particularly groups such as the quakers who were pacifists opposed the violence of war.
beginning with lord dunmores proclamation many slaves had sensed that a british victory not independence offered them the best chance for freedom.
as many as 100 000 slaves freed themselves by running away during the dislocation created by the war.
view the image tory s day of judgment patriots versus loyalists choices and consequences a loyalist wifes dilemma before the struggle for independence grace growden galloway stood at the apex of philadelphia society.
her husband joseph galloway was wealthy and influential in pennsylvania politics.
throughout the escalating conflict with britain joseph galloway supported reconciliation and when war broke out he became a loyalist.
realizing that he could no longer count on the goodwill of his former friends and neighbors to protect him galloway and his daughter fled philadelphia perhaps the most ardent patriot city outside new england for british controlled new york in 1776.
the government of pennsylvania confiscated galloways property but grace galloway was determined to protect the property she had inherited from her own family and had brought into her marriage.
she faced a difficult set of choices concerning her property choices follow her husband and daughter into exile accepting that neither she nor her husband would probably ever recover their property.
continuing controversies what does grace growden galloways plight reveal about the situation of loyalists during the american revolution.
the legal status of the property of a woman married to a loyalist was complicated.
this issue came before american courts in martin v commonwealth 1805.
building on a new conception of women as independent political actors massachusetts claimed that a womans choice to stay or flee was hers alone.
the massachusetts high court however disagreed with this new view of womens legal autonomy.
the court held that the womans decision to leave the state had been her husbands not her own and therefore the state did not have the right to seize her land.
although a defeat for womens rights the outcome of the case would have certainly pleased grace growden galloway.
follow her husband and daughter into exile and use every legal means available to prevent the confiscation of her own property and fight an uphill battle to protect it from afar.
stay in philadelphia and use every legal option to protect the properties that she had brought into her marriage.
decision grace chose to stay and fight.
she hoped that by remaining in her home she could avoid eviction.
she also concluded that the chances of defending her own property against confiscation would be easier if she stayed in philadelphia.
consequences grace endured great hardship while defending her rights but was ultimately evicted.
snubbed and shunned by many of her former friends and acquaintances and driven from her home she lived in a modest set of rented rooms.
in her diary grace recounts her struggles and the indignities she suffered including the time she saw my own chariot standing at my door for the use of others while i am forced to walk she never rejoined her family and died alone in 1781.
although evicted from her home she was more successful at protecting the property she had brought into the marriage which eventually passed on to her descendents.
eighteenth century coach what does martin v commonwealth reveal about womens roles in revolutionary era america.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 america at war the british had reason to be confident when they contemplated their military advantages over the colonies at the start of the war.
britains navy was the most powerful in the world and its army was formidable.
the population of the british isles was more than four times greater than that of the colonies.
america began the war with only a citizens militia.
fighting a powerful army meant that america would have to create a professional force.
congress appointed george washington the commander of the new continental army.
although britains population was much larger than that of the colonies the relative size of the two armies in the field was not that lopsided.
at the start of the conflict british general howe enjoyed something like a two to one advantage over general washington.
numbers alone do not tell the whole story.
british supply lines were stretched thin and american forces were supplemented by militia forces which not only increased the size of the patriot forces but forced the british to deal with fighting both a conventional army and a nonconventional one as well.
even if the british were able to defeat the american armed forces in the field and gain control of americas cities conquering and pacifying all thirteen colonies would be virtually impossible.
the british also never grasped that they were fighting a new type of war not a struggle against another european power but a battle against a decentralized independence movement.
the war in the north stiff resistance at breeds hill and bunker hill had convinced the british military that the colonial militias were not an undisciplined rabble that would retreat if confronted by a well trained professional army.
the creation of a continental army under to place any dependance upon militia is assuredly resting upon a broken staff.
men accustomed to unbounded freedom and no controul cannot brook the restraint which is indispensably necessary to the good order and government of an army without which licentiousness and every kind of disorder triumphantly reign.
to bring men to a proper degree of subordination is not the work of a day a month or even a year george washington to the president of congress september 24 1776 the leadership of george washington underscored this fact and led the british to change their tactics.
rather than employing the army to subdue a rebel population the british prepared for a sustained military conflict.
realizing that patriot sympathies in new england were strong the british retreated to new york a colony with many loyalists.
new york not only provided a safer base of operations but the british also believed that if they could hold new york they would cut new england off from the rest of america.
although determined to defend new york washington suffered a major defeat at brooklyn heights in august 1776.
washington then retreated to manhattan but british major general sir william howe soon drove the americans from new york.
retreating south through new jersey washington eventually crossed the delaware river into pennsylvania.
during the winter however washingtons ranks dwindled as many militiamen returned home.
these citizen soldiers had repulsed the immediate threat.
they would also protect the countryside and prevent loyalist pockets from forming outside of british controlled territory but they were ill suited to sustained battle.
washington lamented their unpredictable coming and going come in you cannot tell how and go you cannot tell when and act you cannot tell where the militias lack of discipline why did washington have paines the american crisis read to the troops before he crossed the delaware to attack british and german mercenaries.
america at war the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the service of his country but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of men and women thomas paine the american crisis 1776 and long term commitment to fight was a constant source of frustration to washington and american military leaders.
still the militia remained vital contributing both to the military and political success of the war effort.
believing that he had decisively defeated washington an overconfident howe established his base camp in new york city and planned to enjoy the winter holidays.
realizing that america desperately needed a victory washington launched a surprise attack on christmas night 1776.
he ordered that thomas paines inspirational essay the american crisis be read to his troops.
paine enjoined americans not to abandon hope.
leading his soldiers across the partially frozen delaware river under cover of darkness washington overwhelmed an outpost manned by german mercenaries at trenton.
a week later washington won another daring victory at princeton.
howe had squandered his advantage and allowed washington to regroup and score two important victories.
washington shrewdly abandoned his early strategy of fighting a conventional war.
he now realized that his primary goal was to wear down his opponents and avoid a decisive defeat.
such a strategy played to americas natural advantages and would eventually force the british to accept that they could not conquer america.
to commemorate washingtons victory at princeton the trustees of princeton college commissioned the eminent american painter charles wilson peale to paint washington at the battle of princeton 4 11.
the portrait replaced a painting of george iii damaged during the battle when a cannonball removed the kings head.
british strategy shifted in 1777.
howe decided to make more effective use of british naval power.
a key element of this plan was a coordinated effort to capture american cities including the rebellions political center philadelphia which fell in september.
the british also sought to isolate ardently patriot new england from the rest of the nation.
4 11 washington at the battle of princeton in this painting the officer behind washington is posed in the same position as general wolfe in benjamin wests painting the death of general wolfe.
in this painting washington by contrast stands firm a symbol of the virtuous new republic that rises from the noble sacrifice depicted in the background.
source princeton university commissioned by the trustees.
pp222 photo bruce m white view the closer look washington at the battle of princeton how does peales painting of washington differ from trumbulls the death of general warren.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 quebec qu que q uebec c 4 12 northern campaigns although the british won important victories around new york city washingtons triumphs at trenton and princeton helped restore american morale.
the turning point in the war in the north however was the defeat of the british at saratoga which helped persuade the french to increase their support for the american cause.
montreal k e n n e b e c r lake champlain connect icut r ft ticonderoga castine lake o nta r i o ft stanwix saratoga ft niagara m o h aw k r bennington cherry valley 6 albany boston d e law ar e wyoming valley west point r.
hudson r newtown morristown easton princeton germantown valley forge brandywine new york atl antic monmouth trenton philadelphia ocean british patriots british victories patriot victories a british army under general john burgoyne marched south from canada.
burgoyne hoped to join forces with howe moving up the hudson river from new york city.
but howe moved against philadelphia instead and an american force under general horatio gates defeated burgoyne at saratoga in upstate new york 4 12.
in addition to providing americans with an important victory and morale boost the british defeat at saratoga persuaded the french to commit troops and naval forces to aid the colonists.
despite this impressive victory the americans had failed to retake philadelphia and the beleaguered continental army took up quarters at valley forge pennsylvania in the winter of 1777 1778.
what role did the french navy play in the victory at yorktown.
william howe withdraws from boston to halifax 1776 howe brothers capture new york 1776 washington retreats then re crosses the delaware 1776 1777 1777 william howe sails from new york moves on philadelphia a 1777 washington meets howe at brandywine and germantown wn 1777 gates forces burgoynes surrender at saratoga 1777 the active entry of france in march 1778 changed the dynamics of the conflict.
rather than simply providing money and munitions france was now at war with britain and committed to helping america win independence.
in 1778 france and america signed a treaty promising to fight until american independence was secured.
spain soon joined france as an opponent of britain and attacked british outposts in the mississippi valley and florida.
within two years britain declared war on holland which had become an important source of supplies for the american war effort.
the great western european powers were now at war.
what had begun as a colonial war for independence fought exclusively in north america had america at war charlottesville m ja es r british williamsburg patriots yorktown british victories patriot victories da n r.
sycamore shoals guilford courthouse clinton and cornwallis force surrender of charleston may 1780 cornwallis bests gates at camden and moves north august 1780 morgan meets british at cowpens defeats tarleton january 1781 c r a p e fe a kings mountain charlotte 3 fishing creek cowpens moores creek bridge 1776 r cornwallis pursues greenes army across the dan river february 1781 greene confronts cornwallis at guilford courthouse march 1781 after a retreat to wilmington cornwallis moves to virginia april 1781 washington moves south pins cornwallis at yorktown august 1781 french admiral de grasse from west indies defeats the british fleet september 1781 wilmington camden s av an atl antic n ah r ocean charleston savannah 4 13 southern campaigns although the british scored impressive victories in the south in 1780 especially at charleston and savannah american forces recovered and forced cornwallis to move to virginia in 1781.
this proved to be a strategic error since it allowed the french fleet to cut off cornwallis and enabled washington to trap the british at yorktown.
mushroomed into a global conflict involving the mediterranean africa india and the caribbean.
france attacked britains wealthy caribbean sugar islands and captured some of them.
in the mediterranean a joint french and spanish force besieged the british fortress of gibraltar.
britain had to divert resources from north america to protect these possessions.
fighting a war on multiple fronts drained british resources.
the southern campaigns and final victory at yorktown in 1779 1780 the british shifted their attention to the south where there was considerable loyalist sympathy.
they also saw the south with its cash crops of tobacco indigo and rice as more valuable economically than the north.
initially the british strategy seemed to pay off.
in 1780 british troops scored impressive victories at savannah georgia charleston south carolina and camden south carolina.
but they could not consolidate their power in the region.
the colonial militias harassed loyalists and sustained the patriot cause.
the british were especially vulnerable to hit and run operations by commanders such as south carolinas francis marion.
nicknamed the swamp fox marion would attack out of nowhere and then disappear into the swamps before the british could retaliate.
the war in the south changed dramatically in 1781 when general daniel morgan defeated the british forces at cowpens south carolina.
american forces also inflicted heavy losses on the british at guilford court house north carolina.
although the british still controlled savannah and charleston the british commander lord cornwallis then moved to virginia and established a well fortified base at yorktown in the winter of 1781 4 13.
cornwalliss retreat to yorktown proved to be a strategic blunder for the british that washington turned to americas advantage.
before saratoga what role did the french navy play in the american victory at yorktown.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 the large french navy had not played a significant part in the war and americas own small navy was no match for the superior british fleet.
with their naval superiority the british were confident that establishing a base at yorktown made sense.
with the guns of the british navy at their disposal and new supplies coming from new york and london yorktown seemed like a strategic location to regroup.
but things went awry for the british when early in the fall of 1781 the french dispatched a formidable fleet under the command of admiral paul de grasse from the caribbean to north america.
with the arrival of the french navy the balance of power at sea shifted giving the americans a naval advantage.
washington seized the opportunity asking the large french army in the north under the comte de rochambeau to join american troops in an assault on yorktown.
when de grasses fleet forced a british squadron that was supposed to help cornwallis to withdraw the americans and french trapped him in yorktown.
although french support was indispensable this fanciful french image of the victory at yorktown portrays this historic moment as though the americans hardly figured in it 4 14.
outnumbered and with his land and sea escapes cut off cornwallis surrendered in october 1781.
washington then appointed general benjamin lincoln to receive the british surrender offered by a subordinate of cornwallis.
the british defeat at yorktown provided american diplomats with a strong bargaining position in negotiating a peace treaty with britain.
the treaty of paris 1783 officially ended the war between the newly created united states and britain.
the treaty recognized american independence acknowledged americas border with canada and recognized american fishing rights off newfoundland.
4 14 defeat of cornwallis at yorktown a french artists fanciful depiction of the american and french victory at yorktown focused entirely on the french navy and army.
a medieval looking walled city in the background also signifies his lack of familiarity with the events.
what was the treaty of paris.
the radicalism of the american revolution the radicalism of the american revolution the american revolution encompassed two interrelated struggles.
the revolution was both a colonial war for independence and a revolutionary struggle to change american government and society.
thus the war was both a struggle for home rule the right of americans to govern themselves and a war for who should rule at home a contest to determine the nature of american government and the structure of society.
the american revolution set in motion a social and political transformation that affected nearly every aspect of american society.
the declaration of independence had articulated the twin ideals of equality and liberty.
some americans took the declarations bold affirmation of liberty and equality to be an endorsement of more than colonial independence.
for them these words were revolutionary.
the declaration inspired them to undertake a radical transformation of american politics and society.
the first constitutions drafted by the states in 1776 included language that echoed the declarations affirmation of liberty and equality.
few americans doubted the importance of this affirmation how far to take it however proved controversial.
the pennsylvania constitution went further than any other state constitution in embracing a democratic conception of equality at least for white men.
not every group in america benefited equally from the promise of the revolution.
african slaves indians and women were either excluded from or not included fully in the revolutions promise of equality and liberty.
although the promise of the revolution remained unfilled for many in america oppressed groups throughout american history would use it to seek the full rights of citizenship.
popular politics in the revolutionary era british taxation was not the only set of policies that produced violent resistance during the revolutionary era.
colonists also opposed unfair taxes imposed by their own colonial governments.
the colonial elites who dominated government also came under attack.
in the carolinas a movement sought reform of colonial government.
the regulators as their name implied sought to regulate society by eliminating corruption and bringing the rule of law to places that lacked it.
the regulators resented planters and merchants who lived near the coast and were eager to tax western farmers but were not willing to share political power with them.
thus in backcountry north carolina regulators opposed taxes including those enacted to pay for a lavish new palace for the royal governor.
some regulators such as herman husband combined religious themes with democratic ideas to attack corruption and inequality in north carolina.
husband fused his religious rhetoric with a class conscious critique of the eastern elites who dominated state politics.
he noted that obedience to just laws and subjection to slavery were not the same.
resistance to unjust authority was legitimate because god gave all men a knowledge of their privileges and a true zeal to maintain them in contrast with husbands views the royal governor and his supporters among the clergy asserted that subjection to lawful authority not resistance was the plain and principal doctrine of christianity in 1770 1 000 regulators marched on the courthouse in hillsborough.
the protesters not only shut down the court but also publicly whipped a court official who was notorious for charging excessive fees to process legal documents.
the angry crowd also punished lawyers whose high fees angered backcountry residents.
such fees fell heavily on poor folk and blocked their access to the courts.
the protests prompted the governor to dispatch the militia which defeated the regulators and restored order.
although the regulators were not victorious their class conscious rhetoric and critique of power and corruption resonated in the carolina backcountry.
who were the regulators.
chapter 4 4 15 timothy matlack to symbolize matlacks role in drafting the pennsylvania constitution of 1776 the painter included several items in the background including law books the great seal of pennsylvania the pennsylvania constitution and a powder horn and musket.
source gift in memory of martha legg mcpheeters and m theresa b hopkins fund emily l ainsley fund juliana cheney edwards collection and a shuman collection.
photograph 2010 musem of fine arts boston.
revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 constitutional experiments testing the limits of democracy when the continental congress directed the states to draft new constitutions they became laboratories for constitutional experimentation.
different visions of constitutional government were set against one another in this vibrant public debate.
virginia broke new ground by framing a detailed declaration of rights that became a model for other states.
by contrast virtually every other state apart from vermont rejected pennsylvanias radical democratic experiment.
massachusetts like virginia also became a model for other states pioneering constitutional developments that became essential features of american constitutionalism particularly in the separation of powers and checks and balances between the different branches of government.
in june 1776 the new state of virginia drafted a declaration of rights and a constitution.
the chief architect of the declaration of rights was george mason an influential patriot leader.
the declaration what made pennsylvanias constitution so radical for its day.
asserted that life liberty and property were fundamental rights and that all men are by nature equally free and independent some virginians worried that this language might encourage slaves to revolt.
another delegate calmed these fears by pointing out that the militia would be more than adequate to protect virginia from its slaves.
indeed the declaration of rights also affirmed that a well regulated militia composed of the body of the people trained to arms is the proper natural and safe defense of a free state that standing armies in time of peace should be avoided as dangerous to liberty and that in all cases the military should be under strict subordination to and be governed by the civil power the declaration also protected other basic liberties trial by jury freedom of the press and freedom of religion.
pennsylvania drafted its constitution not long after virginias.
while members of a slave owning planter elite drafted virginias declaration of rights and constitution a more democratic coalition that included urban artisans influenced by the ideas of thomas paine and backcountry farmers resentful of the old eastern colonial elites and similar to the regulators drafted pennsylvanias constitution.
echoing paines common sense the pennsylvania constitution created a form of representative government with a single legislature a system known as unicameralism.
responding to the frustration of frontier settlers who had sought the creation of a state militia to protect them from indian attack and the necessities of fighting britain the pennsylvania constitution also created a citizens militia and became the first state constitution to expressly protect the right of citizens to bear arms in defense of themselves and the state in keeping with paines democratic ideas the constitution rejected property requirements for voting.
any male taxpayer who resided in the state for a year could vote.
timothy matlack who had helped write this radical constitution commissioned a portrait that reflected its diverse influences 4 15.
a powder horn and musket appear in the background.
the pennsylvania constitution and important british legal texts rest on the table behind him.
the revolution prompted a public debate over how far to take the idea of democracy.
although pennsylvania went further than most in implementing these ideas similar debates occurred in the press in other states.
the traditional whig theory of representation assumed that only property owners could exercise the independent judgment necessary to vote.
individuals without property would be at the mercy of the rich and powerful who could influence their votes on election day.
whig theory also viewed read the document pennsylvania constitution of 1776 the radicalism of the american revolution the possession of property as an essential way of demonstrating that one had a permanent stake in society.
according to the whigs only men with such an interest could act in the long term interests of society.
the revolution nurtured a far more democratic vision of government.
the anonymous author of the pamphlet the people the best governors asserted that the people know best their own wants and necessities and therefore are best able to rule themselves according to this view a propertied elite was not needed to act as a check on the people.
those who rejected the radical notion of equality implicit in democracy ridiculed the new more democratic theories.
the reverend charles bullman of south carolina for example suggested that if these ideas were not checked every silly clown and illiterate mechanic will take upon him to censure the conduct of his prince or governor among the patriot elite no figure expressed greater reservations about the dangers of too much democracy and of unicameralism than john adams who reluctantly conceded that paine had helped rally americans to the idea of independence but also feared that paines work had a better hand at pulling down than building up governments.
indeed adams worried that paines feeble ideas about government would mislead americans when the time came to draft new state constitutions.
adams incorporated his own views on the matter into his short but influential thoughts on government which he wrote in response to a request from north carolinas provincial congress the body responsible for framing its new constitution.
most states were unwilling to follow pennsylvanias radical model opting to retain a property requirement for voting and office holding.
in general however the new property requirements the states adopted were lower than they had been during the colonial period so on balance the pool of eligible voters increased.
although not a resounding victory for those who shared the democratic views of thomas paine and the author of the people the best government the revolution clearly led to a greater democratization of politics.
although not the most democratic experiment in government the massachusetts constitution produced interesting innovations.
john adams played a leading role in helping to draft it.
adopted in 1780 it remains the oldest continuously functioning written constitution in the world.
setting the terms for nearly all subsequent constitution making in america massachusetts took revolutionary era constitutional ideas in new directions.
massachusetts saw a constitution as the supreme law that had to rest on the express consent of the people.
legislative bodies had drafted earlier state constitutions but a special convention drafted the massachusetts constitution which it then submitted directly to the people for ratification.
massachusetts also took the unprecedented step of eliminating property requirements for this special ratification process.
thus even those white men who would not meet the property requirements for voting for the legislature under the proposed constitution could vote on the constitution.
the notion that a constitution had to be submitted to the people directly for ratification was a radical innovation that quickly john adams to james sullivan became an accepted may 1776 feature of american constitutional life.
the massachusetts constitution was also the first to implement an effective system of checks and balances.
while all the early state governments supported the principle of separation of powers making the powers of the legislative executive and judicial functions of government distinct these constitutions had not built in the checks and balances that would make this ideal a practical reality.
to make separation of powers effective the different branches of government had to be able to check one anothers power.
massachusetts went further than any other state in achieving this goal.
the massachusetts governor had considerable power including the right to veto acts of the legislature.
this enabled the executive to check the legislature.
the legislature could check the governor through its ability to override a veto by a two thirds vote.
finally massachusetts made the governor an office directly elected by the people not appointed by the legislature as many other states had opted to do.
another important experiment in constitutional government was the articles of confederation the constitution that congress framed for the new united states of america.
although congress drafted the articles in 1777 the states did not ratify them for another four years.
the articles did not create a national government but rather a firm league of friendship among the sovereign states.
thus article ii affirmed that each state retains its sovereignty freedom and independence and every power jurisdiction and right which is not by this confederation expressly delegated to the united shall we say that every individual of the community old and young male and female as well as rich and poor must consent expressly to every act of legislation why did the traditional whig view of representation oppose democracy.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 states in congress assembled because fighting the british was the top priority congress cobbled together the articles of confederation without providing many features that the individual states had included in their constitutions.
fear of british style government also shaped the minds of congress.
having just cast off a powerful central government with a king the articles abandoned the idea of a single unified executive to enforce the law.
nor did congress have the power to tax another power that the british had abused.
the articles created a weak government whose ability to raise revenue engage in military actions and conduct diplomacy depended entirely on the goodwill of the states.
african americans struggle for freedom the great english literary figure dr samuel johnson pointed out the hypocrisy of americans claiming to be champions of liberty while enslaving africans.
some slaves invoked the ideas of the revolution explicitly whereas others voted with their feet and freed themselves.
the dislocations associated with americas dr samuel johnson 1775 war for independence provided opportunities for african americans to escape bondage.
for some fleeing to the british provided the best chance for freedom.
other slaves seized on the ideas nurtured by the broader revolutionary changes that accompanied the war for independence.
the ideas of liberty and equality intensified the burgeoning movement for the abolition of slavery.
although the revolution did not eradicate slavery it did put it on the road to extinction in new england and the mid atlantic regions.
slaves eager to cast off their own shackles appropriated the revolutions language of liberty.
during the stamp act protests in south carolina 1765 slaves staged their own parade chanting liberty white south carolinians viewed such activities as evidence of a plan for rebellion.
to thwart the imagined threat they mobilized the militia which also served as slave patrols.
blacks in new england fared better when they invoked the revolutions ideals than did blacks in the south.
in 1773 1774 and 1777 slaves petitioned the government of massachusetts for their freedom using the language of the declaration of independence including the idea of natural rights and the notion that government rested how is it that we hear the loudest yelps for liberty among the drivers of negroes what was the impact of the american revolution on the institution of slavery.
on the consent of the governed.
they asserted we have in common with all other men a naturel right to our freedoms without being deprivd of them by our fellow men less than a decade later another slave mum bett successfully sued for her freedom.
a jury in western massachusetts based its verdict on the language of the states declaration of rights which stated that all men are born free and equal and have certain natural essential and unalienable rights among which may be reckoned the right of enjoying and defending their lives and liberties mum bett changed her name to elizabeth freeman worked as a housekeeper for the lawyer who defended her and became a respected midwife and nurse.
citing this precedent the states highest court abolished slavery in massachusetts in the 1780s.
new england went further than any other region in its support for the abolition of slavery.
vermonts 1777 constitution expressly prohibited slavery the first constitution in the nation to take such a step.
in the mid atlantic pennsylvania and new york adopted gradual emancipation laws.
the american revolution in indian country the struggle between britain and the american colonies had enormous consequences for american indians.
although neutrality appealed to many indians avoiding entanglement in the conflict between britain and america became impossible.
faced with the need to make a choice many indian nations sided with britain whose colonial policies including the proclamation of 1763 had blocked american westward expansion.
an american victory would mean more settlers streaming into indian country and destruction of the habitats that indians depended on for their survival.
the declaration of independence had underscored americas deep seated fear and hostility toward indians.
among the complaints jefferson leveled against the king was he has excited domestic insurrections amongst us and has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless indian savages whose known rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages sexes and conditions jeffersons description of indians as savages engaged in acts of barbarism rallied americans against the british.
one event that whipped up anti indian feelings among americans was the murder of jane mccrea read the document slave petition to the governor of massachusetts 1774 the radicalism of the american revolution in upstate new york by mohawk indians.
jane was traveling to meet her fianc a british soldier when probritish mohawks attacked her.
mccreas political sympathies did not prevent her from becoming a martyr for the patriot cause.
colonial newspapers lamented her fate which was also memorialized in poetry.
in 1780 a novel about her demise appeared and the painter john trumbull made several sketches of mccreas murder for a possible painting before moving on to other projects.
joel barlow a close friend of jefferson and important literary figure in early america memorialized the event in one of his poems and john vanderlyn portrayed the event in this dramatic painting 4 16 which was displayed in 1804.
vanderlyns representation of the light skinned mccrea and the dark skinned indians underscores the role of the painting as a morality tale between good and evil.
the indians are depicted as cruel savages about to murder mccrea.
pro british tribes scored notable victories on the western frontier during 1782.
after these successes many indians were stunned to learn that the british had surrendered at yorktown.
indians were excluded from the negotiations that ended the war.
many viewed the treaty of paris 1783 which ceded indian country between the appalachians and the mississippi river to america as a betrayal.
and virtuous american patriots whose names brutus and honestus signified their commitment to ancient roman republican virtue.
women also served in the war effort.
when mustered into service the militia often depended on support from women.
an eyewitness to such a mobilization in cambridge massachusetts in 1774 noted that women surpassed the men for eagerness spirit in the defense of liberty by arms women not only provided moral support animating their husbands sons to fight for their liberties but also helped making cartridges some women became molly pitchers who hauled water and carried supplies to soldiers.
deborah sampson disguised herself as a man and served in the continental army.
a physician discovered sampson while treating her for fever.
the continental army also had camp followers women including the wives of soldiers who washed cooked nursed and tended to other needs of soldiers.
the revolutions emphasis on liberty and equality boosted notions of gender equality.
abigail adams wife of john adams demanded that her husband remember the ladies and work toward greater legal equality for women see competing 4 16 death of jane mccrea john vanderlyn painted this scene decades after the event occurred.
he took liberties with history.
mccreas fianc the military figure rushing to rescue her circled in red wears the blue uniform of a continental soldier.
in reality mccrea was a loyalist and her fianc a british regular.
libertys daughters women and the revolutionary movement women took an active role in the revolutionary cause.
one of the most outspoken female patriots was mercy otis warren wife of patriot leader james warren and sister of james otis.
warrens gifts as a poet playwright and eventually historian allowed her to champion the american cause in literary endeavors.
her satirical plays mocked british policy and leading british politicians and military figures.
the fictional names of the characters in her plays communicated warrens disdain for the british.
her scathing satire mocked the actions of general hateall secretary of state dupe and governor rapatio.
these sinister plotters against american liberty were matched by talented why did so many indians side with the british during the american revolution.
chapter 4 4 17 issac winslow and his family by joseph blackburn 1755 this portrait of the winslow family done two decades before the american revolution captures the more patriarchal view of the family.
the father stands aloof from his family.
source joseph blackburn american born in england active in north america 1753 1763 isaac winslow and his family 1755 oil on canvas 138 43 x 201 29 cm 54 1 2 x 79 1 4 in.
museum of fine arts boston a shuman collection abraham shuman fund 42 684 photograph 2011 museum of fine arts boston.
4 18 right cadwalader family charles wilson peales portrait of the cadwalader family evokes the ideal of companionate marriage in which husbands and wives enjoyed an intimate and egalitarian relationship within marriage.
revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 visions remember the ladies.
a few women even demanded a measure of political equality at least for women who owned property.
one supporter of this idea was hannah corbin sister of patriot leader richard henry lee.
while abigail adams was a model of female propriety corbins unconventional lifestyle made her acutely aware of the inferior legal status of women.
after her husband died at age 35 corbin managed their plantation.
her husbands will stipulated that if she ever remarried corbin would lose control of the estate.
corbin was unwilling to accept the choice of remaining a widow or losing control of her property.
rejecting contemporary moral codes she began a common law relationship with another man living together as husband and wife without being legally married.
the fact that they were not legally married allowed her to preserve control of her estate.
the defiant and independent corbin later asked her brother why women who owned property were prohibited from voting.
lee could provide no reasonable response.
he even conceded that in theory allowing such women to vote was plausible but noted that it has never been the practice either here or in england and speculated that perhaps twas thought rather out of character for women to press into those tumultuous assemblages of men every state except new jersey limited suffrage to men.
it is not clear if new jerseys omission was deliberate or accidental.
still new jersey women who fulfilled the states property requirements took full advantage of this omission and voted in elections until the state legislature revoked this right in 1807.
was hannah corbins argument for womens suffrage consistent with whig theory.
although the revolution did not usher in the legal or political changes sought by adams and corbin the ideas of equality espoused by the revolution did influence marriage and family life.
lucy knox wife of general henry knox told her husband a year after the declaration of independence to not consider yourself as commander in chief of your own house but recognize that there is such a thing as equal command she viewed marriage as an egalitarian relationship between husband and wife in which the two lived together as companions.
scholars describe this as companionate marriage.
the revolution not only altered ideas about marriage but also changed attitudes about patriarchal authority a fact reflected in the portraiture of the day.
these changes are evident if one compares the pre revolutionary era painting of the winslow family 4 17 and the revolutionaryera portrait of the cadwalader family 4 18.
in his painting of the cadwalader family charles wilson peale gives a model of a companionate marriage.
a comparison of the portraits shows how ideas of family relations including the relationship between husband and wife and parents and children had changed.
in peales painting john and elizabeth cadwalader look directly at one another.
his hand rests on hers and their young child reaches for the peach held by her father.
the intimacy of the family is evidenced in the physical closeness of its members.
by contrast the portrait of the winslow family reveals little of this closeness.
the husband has no physical contact with his wife or his children.
read the document adams family correspondence between abigail and john march april 1776 the radicalism of the american revolution competing visions remember the ladies a strong supporter of independence and an articulate and forceful personality abigail adams believed that the american revolution provided an opportunity for women to gain much needed legal reform.
this was particularly needed in property law where women were considered legally dead once they married.
in this spirited letter written shortly before congress declared independence from britain abigail made her displeasure with the inferior legal status of women clear to her husband.
in a dismissive reply adams nevertheless revealed how the revolutions ideas about equality permeated american society.
abigail adams to john adams 31 mar.
1776 i desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands.
remember all men would be tyrants if they could.
if particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice or representation.
john adams to abigail adams 14 apr.
1776 as to your extraordinary code of laws i cannot but laugh.
we have been told that our struggle has loosened the bands of government every where.
that children and apprentices were disobedient that schools and colleges were grown turbulent that indians slighted their guardians and negroes grew insolent to their masters.
but your letter was the first intimation that another tribe more numerous and powerful than all the rest were grown discontented this is rather too coarse a compliment but you are so saucy i wont blot it out.
depend upon it we know better than to repeal our masculine systems.
abigail adams john adams was abigail adamss demand for womens rights consistent with the revolutions ideals.
chapter 4 revolutionary america change and transformation 1764 1783 lak la ke er ie n eo ta r io newport norwich new london lyme new haven west haven milford new york woodbridge brunswick philadelphia salem baltimore frederick town lewes annapolis talbot dumfries leeds rappahannock io r elk ridge landing oh boston plymouth pomfret albany hartford wethersfield wallingford stratford fairfield elizabeth town piscataway arnwell twp.
williamsburg norfolk atl a nti c oce a n duplin new bern cross s creek wi wilmington 1773 1775 sugar act stamp act boston massacre boston tea party british tax molasses sugar and other items.
colonies protest being taxed without their consent.
colonial protest intensifies against britains new policies british troops fire on crowd in boston sons of liberty toss tea into boston harbor concord and lexington these early battles demonstrated the colonists capacity to use military force to protect their rights.
chapter review olive branch petition congress makes final attempt to persuade the king to address american grievances review questions 1.
what arguments did colonists use to oppose the stamp act.
how did paul reveres representation of the boston massacre in his famous engraving stir up resentment against the british.
how did revere manipulate the events to present them in the worst possible light.
how did jeffersons argument for independence in the declaration differ from paines argument in common sense.
how did the massachusetts constitution depart from the earlier models of virginia and pennsylvania.
did the revolutions ideals of liberty and equality significantly affect the lives of blacks women and american indians.
key terms stamp act legislation that required colonists to purchase special stamps and place them on all legal documents.
newspapers and playing cards had to be printed on special stamped paper.
nonimportation movement a boycott against the purchase of any imported british goods.
intolerable acts legislation passed by parliament to punish bostonians for the boston tea party.
it closed the port of boston annulled the massachusetts colonial charter and dissolved or severely restricted that colonys political institutions and allowed british officials charged with capital crimes to be tried outside the colonies.
lord dunmores proclamation official announcement issued by lord dunmore royal governor of virginia.
it offered freedom to any slave who joined the british forces in putting down the american rebellion.
common sense thomas paines influential pamphlet that forcefully argued for american independence attacked the institution of monarchy and defended a democratic theory of representative government.
declaration of independence on july 4 1776 congress approved the final text of the declaration of independence a public defense of americas decision to declare independence from britain that was to be printed and sent to the individual states.
patriots colonists who supported american independence.
loyalists colonists who remained loyal to the king and britain.
treaty of paris 1783 treaty between the newly created united states of america and britain that officially ended the war between the two and formally recognized american independence.
chapter review thomas paine publishes common sense jane mccrea murdered by mohawk indians massachusetts constitution defeat of cornwallis at yorktown paine states the case for american independence in a pamphlet that becomes an instant best seller the murder becomes a rallying cry for americans against british treachery massachusetts introduces a range of legal innovations including the idea of special ratification conventions to approve its constitution american and french forces defeat british army at yorktown ending the revolutionary war declaration of independence american colonies declare independence pennsylvania declaration of rights and constitution pennsylvania constitution adopts simple democratic scheme of government myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of revolutionary america.
questions for analysis 1.
why did colonists believe parliament could regulate trade but not tax them without representation.
other resources from this chapter read the document patrick henry give me liberty or give me death p 104 read the document john dickinson letters from a thomas paine common sense p 110 farmer in pennsylvania p 101 pennsylvania constitution of 1776 p 120 2.
what ideas and images helped persuade americans to support the patriot cause.
view the closer look the bloody massacre p 103 view the closer look tea tax tempest p 98 images as history the hanging of absalom p 102 view the image 3.
what military advantages did the americans possess and how did their strategy shift to take better advantage of these realities.
view the closer look washington at the battle of princeton p 115 4.
what impact did the revolution have on the institution of slavery.
read the document slave petition to the governor of massachusetts 1774 p 122 5.
how did the revolution impact gender roles.
read the document adams family correspondence between abigail and john march april 1776 p 124 stamp act p 100 torys day of judgment p 112 what role did the concept of virtue play in american politics after the revolution.
life under the articles of confederation p 138 what major problems did america face during the confederation period.
the movement for constitutional reform p 143 what were the main differences between the articles of confederation and the constitution.
the great debate p 148 what were the antifederalists major objections to the constitution.
chapter republicanism and the politics of virtue p 130 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 in 1776 patriot leader john adams wrote that public virtue is the only foundation of republics.
there must be a positive passion for the public good the public interest adams echoed many americans views when he wrote that republican government depended on the concept of civic virtue which meant pursuing the public good and placing it ahead of personal interest or local attachments.
men were expected to serve in the militia sit on juries and if they were truly virtuous and wise take on the burden of public service as elected representatives.
women too were expected to play a major role in the political life of the new republic assuming the role of republican mothers and wives who would instill patriotism and virtue in their children and spouses.
americans of the revolutionary generation took their cues from the lessons of history particularly the example of the roman republic and its ideal of public virtue.
when dr joseph warren physician and patriot leader addressed bostonians on the fifth anniversary of the boston massacre in 1775 he literally donned a roman toga the long flowing gown that symbolized a free adult roman mans freedom and citizenship.
warrens dramatic gesture linking himself with roman republicanism was mirrored in the pages of nearly every american newspaper of the day where letters and essays on political matters were signed with pen names drawn from the history of the roman republic such as the senators brutus and cato and the general cincinnatus.
to mold a new generation of virtuous citizens americans looked to education religion and even architecture.
no american was more enthusiastic about architectures capacity to instruct than thomas jefferson.
public buildings jefferson wrote should be more than things of beauty and convenience above all they should state a creed rather than emulate contemporary georgian style buildings such as the pennsylvania state house see chapter 3 where the declaration of independence was drafted jefferson argued for a return to the purity of roman architecture.
in his design for the virginia state capitol pictured here jefferson recreated the simple beauty of roman architecture.
he believed that the capitol would inspire citizens to emulate the ideals of the ancient roman republic which included an emphasis on civic participation and public virtue.
in the decade following independence americans faith in their ability to create a virtuous republic was challenged.
an aborted coup led by disgruntled continental army officers conflicts between debtors and creditors and an uprising in western massachusetts drove the nation to a political crisis.
the postwar period tested americas faith in republicanism and led some leaders to abandon traditional republican theory with its emphasis on virtue and to embrace a new approach to constitutional government that relied on a balance of conflicting interests and a system of checks and balances.
the culmination of this struggle between the two competing visions of constitutional government was the u s constitution and the bill of rights.
we may look up to armies for our defense but virtue is our best security.
it is not possible that any state should long remain free where virtue is not supremely honored samuel adams 1775 chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 republicanism and the politics of virtue the american revolution marked a decisive break from ideas and values that had defined british culture for centuries.
monarchy and aristocracy were swept away.
america was now a republic.
republicanism placed a premium on the ideal of virtue.
as the poet playwright and historian mercy otis warren observed americans needed to cherish true genuine republican virtue the postwar period would test this commitment in a host of ways.
george washington the american cincinnatus no individual in america was more closely identified with the ideal of virtue than george washington.
a symbol of the virtuous citizen soldier responding to the summons of his nation and retiring to private life once his service was no longer needed washington was a model of civic virtue.
his reputation for public virtue and ability to command the respect of his troops had helped the beleaguered continental army during some of its more dire campaigns.
in 1783 washington faced a different challenge.
this time it was not the threat of enemy troops but the rumors of a military coup by the continental armys officers.
washington wielded his personal authority to win over disgruntled members of the corps and made an impassioned appeal to reason and virtue crushing the revolt without firing a shot.
washington had learned of rumors that the armys leadership would no longer tolerate congresss failure to deal with complaints about their pay and pensions.
an anonymous essay had circulated among officers suggesting that the time might soon come to turn their arms against congress itself.
the officers anger had been simmering for some time.
frustration with the confederation congress was widespread washington was well aware of the officers grievances.
he had complained about the inefficiency and ineffectiveness of congress on many occasions.
with no power to tax congress had to depend on voluntary contributions from the states.
without reliable revenue it was difficult to wage war or conduct the routine business of governing.
faced with a possible rebellion by his own officers washington resolved to why did americans believe washington was the modern cincinnatus.
address his men in person and persuade them of the folly of their plan.
on a dark wintry day in march 1783 washington traveled to newburgh new york to address the officer corps.
the assembled officers met in a makeshift building that some of them had dubbed the temple of virtue washington prepared to read a letter that he hoped would persuade the officers that their demands would be met.
fumbling to find a pair of glasses he had recently acquired he paused and then addressed the hushed crowd gentlemen you must pardon me.
i have grown grey in your service and now find myself growing blind the impact on his audience was dramatic.
there was something so natural so unaffected in his appeal major samuel shaw later wrote as rendered it superior to the most studied oratory and you might see sensibility moisten every eye washingtons own wartime sacrifices had already provided a powerful role model for the officer corps.
now the figure of their beloved commander growing gray and blind in the service of his country struck a resonant chord.
he exhorted his men to give posterity proof of unexampled patriotism and patient virtue civic virtue had triumphed over corruption and the newburgh conspiracy was crushed without a shot being fired.
another event that enhanced washingtons reputation as the embodiment of republican virtue was the public ceremony of turning over his military commission to congress after the war.
in annapolis maryland where congress was convened washington addressed a room crowded with congressional delegates and a gallery packed with well wishers.
having now finished the work assigned me he informed his audience many of whom were brought to tears i here offer my commission and take read the document george washington the newburgh address 1783 republicanism and the politics of virtue my leave of the employments of public life by abandoning public life and returning to his plow washington was seen as placing the good of the nation ahead of personal glory.
in the publics view washington had transformed himself into the modern cincinnatus an allusion to the ancient worlds great symbol of public virtue the roman general cincinnatus.
after serving the roman republic as its supreme commander cincinnatus had returned to his farm.
after resigning washington went on a triumphal tour of the nation.
in philadelphia he was saluted by cannons and ringing bells from the citys steeples.
he sat for portraits by americas leading painters and enjoyed listening to commemorative verses that compared him to cincinnatus.
well schooled in the history of the ancient roman republic americans understood that a popular military leaders decision to emulate romes dictatorial general julius caesar rather than cincinnatus would lead to despotism.
years later the virginia legislature commissioned the french sculptor jean antoine houdon to create a life sized statue of washington as the modern cincinnatus 5 1.
washington stands before a plow the symbol of the virtuous farmer the ideal embodied by cincinnatus.
no free government or the blessing of liberty can be preserved to any people but by a firm adherence to justice moderation temperance frugality and virtue.
virginia declaration of rights 1776 the politics of virtue views from the states the republican emphasis on virtue suffused american culture.
the first state constitutions drafted after independence used their declarations of rights to outline the rights of citizens and also instruct citizens in the premises of republican government.
in these declarations of rights the ideal of virtue was literally written into american law.
the virginia declaration of rights 1776 asserted that free government could not survive without a virtuous citizenry a point echoed by the massachusetts constitution four years later.
educating citizens in the importance of republican ideals became a priority for the new nation.
art architecture and even fashion were pressed into service to mold the character of a new generation of citizens.
jeffersons design for the new virginia capitol was the most ambitious visible symbol of instilling republican values by reforming architecture.
see the chapter opening image p.
the impact of the revolution was even seen in home furnishings.
before the revolution decorative elements on american furniture copied british fashions including fanciful designs such as the scrolled pediment with rosettes on this chest of drawers 5 1 george washington as the modern cincinnatus george washington is cast as the modern cincinnatus in this sculpture.
he stands in front of a plow and beside the roman fasces a bundle of rods and an ax that symbolized the legal power of magistrates.
his sword rests on the fasces a visual reminder that in a republic military power resides with civilian leaders.
what was the newburgh conspiracy.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 5 2 chippendale high chest this pre revolutionary chest reflected british styles including the floral decorative patterns at the end of the curving swans neck pediment on top of the chest.
5 3 samuel mcintire carving this piece of furniture made in salem after the revolution uses simple classical lines.
symbols of republicanism such as the goddess of liberty replaced purely decorative elements.
after the revolution symbols that represented the republican values of the new nation replaced some of these purely decorative elements.
a beautifully crafted example of this adorns a chest of drawers made in salem massachusetts 5 3.
the broken pediment is a simple classical design.
gone is the fancy carving in the pediment of the late colonial chest 5 2.
in its place is the goddess of liberty herself.
to reinforce the ideal of roman republicanism the chest has two classical columns.
these flank another set of carvings that illustrate the prosperity that republicanism will bring to the new nation.
education was another means of inculcating virtue.
the massachusetts constitution expressly linked republicanism virtue and education.
the state achieved this by providing public primary education for boys and girls.
several of the larger towns also provided secondary education for boys.
thomas jefferson framed the most ambitious proposal to create a public system of education in 1778.
in a bill for the more general diffusion of knowledge he proposed source samuel mcintire chest on chest detail mahogany mahogany veneer ebony and satinwood inlay pine eighteenth century american arts no.
4 the m and m karolik collection of eighteenth century american arts 41 580.
museum of fine arts boston 41 58.
photograph 2010 museum of fine arts boston how did changes in furniture design reflect the influence of republican ideas.
that virginia adopt a publicly funded system of education.
white children including boys and girls would be educated at public expense for three years.
the best male students would then be selected for secondary education and a small select group from among this cohort would later attend the college of william and mary.
jefferson introduced his bill in the state legislature several times although it never passed.
jeffersons faith in education reflected his debt to the ideals of the enlightenment the international philosophical movement based on the notion that reason and science would improve humanity.
see chapter 3.
following the english philosopher john locke enlightenment thinkers believed that people were born a blank slate upon which society could write its own moral code.
many american founders including jefferson were also influenced by other enlightenment ideas.
philosophers of the enlightenment believed that humans had an innate moral sense akin to the five physical senses.
in the same way that people see different shades of the color spectrum so the moral sense helped people see the difference between right and wrong.
one need only cultivate this inborn sense to produce enlightened citizens.
taken together lockean psychology and enlightenment moral theory led many americans to put enormous faith in educations ability to shape morality and mold character.
inspired by enlightenment ideals about education and the american revolutions faith in representative government americans founded new educational institutions to help create an enlightened citizenry.
ezra stiles the president of yale college wrote in 1786 that the spirit for academy making is vigorous the charter for one of these new academies in north carolina declared that the good education of youth has the most direct tendency to promote the virtue increase the wealth and extend the fame of any people north carolina was one of the states that founded a university.
georgia and vermont also established public institutions of higher education.
among the new private colleges were williams massachusetts transylvania kentucky the college of charleston south carolina and bowdoin maine.
educators also published new republican materials to instruct children in reading writing and arithmetic.
spellers and readers included patriotic lessons with illustrations that reinforced their republican message.
in a book of alphabet rhymes for example the bald eagle from the great seal of read the document noah webster an american school teacher calls for an american language 1789 republicanism and the politics of virtue america the new nations official symbol represented the letter e 5 4.
the design of the great seal had gone through many versions before congress finally approved one that included an american eagle clutching an olive branch and thirteen arrows symbolizing the new governments power to make war and negotiate peace.
the thirteen states are represented by the same number of stars stripes and arrows.
charles thomson the secretary of congress observed that the eagle bore a shield to symbolize that the united states ought to rely on their own virtue the expansion of education opened up possibilities for white women.
whereas jeffersons plan for educational reform called for basic education for women other reformers recommended more ambitious plans to educate the nations female population.
jeffersons friend the eminent philadelphia physician benjamin rush offered a robust statement of the importance of education in a republic but also framed a bold call to educate women for their role as republican citizens.
women needed to be familiar with the political ideas of republicanism.
as the mothers of future citizens of the republic women had a special role to play.
rush was not alone in championing female education.
the philadelphia young ladies academy 1787 was typical of the new institutions for educating women.
in addition to music dance and needlework these new schools taught girls subjects such as rhetoric oratory and history once exclusively taught to boys.
martha ryan a student at one of the new schools in north carolina inscribed the phrase liberty or death in her cipher book 5 5.
although influenced by republican ideas her book also revealed the continuing importance of traditional ideas about womens roles.
bound into the book were penmanship exercises that intoned such traditional moral injunctions as honour father and mother images as history womens roles tradition and change explores the effects of republican ideas on womens roles page 134.
supporters of enlightenment ideas such as rush and jefferson believed that education would help nurture the virtue necessary for the survival of republicanism.
other americans however looked to religion to foster virtue.
one minister reminded his parishioners that although the civil authority have no right to establish religion it was still true that religion is connected with the morals of the people another minister noted that by instilling good sentiments into the tender minds 5 4 book of childrens verses this book of childrens verse uses americas new national symbol the bald eagle taken from the great seal of the united states.
educational materials such as this one included republican and patriotic themes.
5 5 martha ryans cipher book the cover of martha ryans cipher book proclaims liberty.
yet the book included penmanship exercises with such traditional precepts as honour father and mother a good girl will mind why was education so important to the founders of the american republic.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 images as history womens roles tradition and change although republicanism allowed some women to transform the roles assigned to them it retained the traditional view that a womans primary duties were to her family.
in the engraving keep within the compass the woman who stays within the compass enjoys a life of harmony and prosperity.
stepping outside it carried grave consequences.
republican ideals of womanhood were stitched into a needlework sampler prepared by a school girl nabby martin of providence rhode island.
samplers were a standard part of a young womans education.
nabby included images of young couples flowers and domestic animals common to pre revolution samplers but republican themes also show through.
the home the symbol of domesticity traditionally the heart and center image of a young girls sampler has been replaced by the rhode island state house.
politics not home is the center of this piece.
nabby also showed her respect for the republican emphasis on education by including the college of rhode island brown university.
as a female nabby martin was barred from the world of the state house and the college of rhode island but the inclusion of their images in her sampler is significant.
although working with an art form closely tied to womens roles martin turned her gaze to the wider world both buildings represented.
the republican message of the sampler is clear let virtue be a guide to thee.
how is virtue represented visually in martins needlework.
the text that accompanied this image advised keep within compass and you shall be sure to avoid many troubles which others endure the building pictured is the college of rhode island the forerunner of brown university.
when a woman steps outside the compass she faces arrest and imprisonment.
keep within the compass 1784 courtesy winterthur museum nabby martin sampler 1786 how did republican ideas change notions about womens roles.
the message of the sampler is announced in the central text let virtue be a guide to thee instead of a home the rhode island state house is the central image.
republicanism and the politics of virtue of children and youth you will teach them to stand fast in their liberty post revolutionary america remained a predominantly protestant culture in which religious dissent was tolerated only within limits.
some states continued to bar catholics and jews from public office.
the assumption behind such laws was that only protestants could be counted on to have the necessary virtue to seek the public good.
although excluded from the full benefits of citizenship religious dissenters were allowed to worship according to the dictates of conscience.
most state bills of rights and constitutions guaranteed the free exercise of religion.
revolutionary ideas of liberty and equality slowly led states to abandon the notion that only protestants could be trusted to hold public office.
religious tests requiring potential office holders to swear a belief in the divinity of jesus as a requirement for holding public office were abolished in virginia 1785 georgia 1789 pennsylvania 1790 south carolina 1790 delaware 1792 and vermont 1793.
before the revolution many colonies provided direct government support to religion or followed the english practice of having an official church.
spurred by revolutionary ideals america moved toward the separation of church and state.
the post revolutionary era witnessed a move to disestablish the anglican church in those places where it enjoyed public funding.
two different justifications for the separation of church and state emerged.
for champions of the enlightenment such as jefferson separation of church and state was inspired by the fear that religion might use the power of government to oppress citizens of different religious views or that religion might corrupt government.
dissenting protestant sects notably the baptists and methodists opposed state support for religion for a different reason.
these groups had long felt oppressed by the state supported anglican church particularly by taxation to support that church.
for virginias baptists separation of church and state was a means to protect the purity of religion from corruption by government.
evangelicals and supporters of the enlightenment came together in virginia in 1785 when the state legislature considered a bill for non preferential aid for ministers of the christian religion.
since the scheme was non preferential it would not establish an official state church but rather provide funds to all protestant churches in a nondiscriminatory fashion.
patrick henry and richard henry lee two of the states leading politicians campaigned in favor of the bill.
james madison and thomas jefferson champions of enlightenment values led the opposition.
madison and jefferson outlined their case against state support for religion in the memorial and remonstrance against religious assessments 1785.
this essay not only was instrumental in defeating the bill it also became a landmark in american church state relations.
democracy triumphant.
according to traditional republican theory citizens were expected to defer to their betters who were assumed to be the most virtuous members of society.
before the american revolution the state legislatures were dominated by men of wealth.
as one legislator noted it is right that men of birth and fortune in every government that is free should be invested with power and enjoy higher honours than the people virtue according to this view required one to have the wealth supposedly necessary to cultivate wisdom and knowledge.
one newspaper writer captured this traditional conception of virtue when he wrote that representatives should be able in estate able in knowledge and learning the revolution however challenged this ideal substituting a more democratic theory of virtue.
a writer calling himself democritus captured the essence of this new theory when he urged that citizens vote only for a man of middling circumstances and common understanding not members of a wealthy or educated elite.
in nearly every state a new type of politician emerged who embodied the more democratic version of republicanism men such as new yorks abraham yates a shoemaker and pennsylvanias william findley a weaver.
supporters of the elitist republican view of politics mocked the humble origins of the new politicians and questioned their ability to function as legislators.
one contemporary political satirist took aim at findleys humble origins as a weaver it will be more honourable for such men to stay at their looms and knot threads than to come forward in a legislative capacity the post revolutionary debate over the meaning of virtue and democracy shaped politics.
when william smith a prosperous baltimore why did many supporters of republicanism fear democracy.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 flour merchant ran for office in 1789 his enemies attacked him by claiming that mr.
smith has distilled riches from the tears of the poor and grown fat upon their curses smiths supporters viewed his independence as one of his main qualifications for office.
in their view he was a man of great commercial knowledge of known integrity and possessed of a character and independent fortune which place him above temptation smiths support for this traditional idea of virtue was reflected in this portrait 5 6 painted by charles wilson peale.
rather than include symbols that reflected smiths life as a prosperous city merchant peale depicted smith as a simply dressed country gentlemen.
the books that the artist included poetical works on rural life reinforce this notion.
peale also placed smith in front of a roman column another visual cue to symbolize his virtue.
the debate over what made a good representative in part reflected a process of democratization in american culture.
the revolution greatly expanded the number of white male voters eligible to participate in the political process.
most states lowered property requirements for voting and pennsylvania abandoned such requirements entirely.
taken together the expansion of democratic ideas and changes in suffrage requirements changed the character of politics in america.
as this graph 5 7 reveals the impact on the composition of state legislatures was profound.
after the revolution the percentage of wealthy citizens elected to the legislature dropped and the numbers of those of the middling sort or middling classes increased.
one boston newspaper writer complained that since the war blustering ignorant men had unfortunately pushed themselves into office not everyone saw the rise of these new politicians in negative terms.
for those who believed in democracy these trends were a positive development.
now government included a class of citizens who hither to have thought it more for their interest to be contented with a humbler walk in life 5 6 william smith and his grandson the new democratic politiin this portrait of william smith the artist conjures up an image of a country cians favored policies designed gentleman who devoted himself to contemplation.
references to smiths career as to enable ordinary citizens to a prosperous baltimore merchant are deliberately excluded.
why did william smiths portrait cast him as a country gentleman rather than an urban merchant.
republicanism and the politics of virtue economic status of legislators in new hampshire new york and new jersey pre war moderate 17 post war wealthy 36 well to do 47 participate in government.
they introduced for example higher salaries for elected representatives encouraging ordinary people to serve in government.
they also made efforts to relocate state capitals inland so that travel to them would be easier for backcountry farmers.
debtors versus creditors economic issues proved particularly contentious in post revolutionary america.
spokesmen for these new politicians favored policies to ease the burdens of farmers and artisans.
stay laws created generous grace periods for the recovery of debts and protected farmers from having their farms seized for nonpayment of debts.
tender laws allowed farmers to pay debts with goods rather than hard currency.
merchants generally opposed these policies.
the lack of specie silver and gold currency hindered economic exchange.
spokesmen for debtors argued that government had an obligation to use paper money to ease the shortage of currency.
by expanding the money supply and printing more paper currency the government encouraged inflation.
increasing the amount of money in circulation facilitated commerce.
when done cautiously this type of inflationary policy provided a means of pumping up the economy.
as long as the government did not flood the moderate 62 wealthy 12 5 7 the democratization of the state legislatures the number of wealthy legislators decreased and the number of men of moderate wealth increased.
these changes were pronounced in parts of the mid atlantic and new england and are reflected in the data regarding property holdings of legislators elected in new york new jersey and new hampshire.
adapted from jackson turner main government by the people the american revolution and the democratization of the legislatures william and mary quarterly 1966 well to do 26 market with paper driving down its value debtors and creditors could adjust their behavior to take into account the effects of modest inflation in prices for various commodities.
by encouraging economic activity paper money could provide an important tool for economic growth.
farmers were especially fond of this system because they could repay their debts with depreciated currency money that was worth less than the amount of the original debt.
this system however could function only if merchants did not dramatically raise prices to compensate for the declining value of paper money.
a rapid rise in prices could lead inflation to spiral out of control.
most merchants however viewed paper money as a bad policy that hurt their interests.
no state was more aggressive in using paper money to solve its financial problems than rhode island.
unfortunately however the decision to print large amounts of paper money never won the support of merchants in providence and newport.
when presented with paper money merchants increased prices and eventually refused to accept depreciated paper currency.
in response the state legislature imposed a steep fine on any merchant who refused to accept paper currency.
one writer lampooned the situation of rogue island in verse hail.
realm of rogues renowd for fraud and guile all hail ye knavries of yon little isle how did the composition of the state legislatures change after the american revolution.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 life under the articles of confederation from the outset the articles of confederation americas first federal constitution was plagued by problems.
without the power to tax or coerce states to follow the treaties it had negotiated the confederation congress could not resolve the nations economic problems and diplomatic issues.
leaders also worried that the confederation lacked the military power to deal with rebellions or foreign foes.
no taxation with representation 5 8 continental paper currency the value of continental paper currency dropped precipitously as congress printed more money and faith in the value of the currency dwindled.
americans resented british efforts to tax them prior to the revolution.
given their fears of strong government and hostility to taxation the articles of confederation the weak constitution created by the confederation congress did not empower the new central government to tax americans.
instead the articles relied on requisitions made to the states to fund government business.
few states bothered to comply with these requisitions in a timely manner and the new government of the united states was plagued by shortages of funds.
although it lacked the power to tax congress had to fund the war.
to help pay for the war effort congress printed almost 250 million in paper currency that was not backed by gold or silver and led to staggering inflation.
by 1781 it took more than 150 continental dollars to purchase what had cost one dollar in 1777.
this dramatic drop in the value of continental currency led to the phrase as worthless as a continental to describe something with no value.
as 5 8 illustrates it would take a pile of continentals to purchase what a single dollar might have paid for less than five years before.
the treaty of paris 1783 formally ended hostilities between britain and the new united states of america.
peace did not however solve the economic problems that the new nation faced.
indeed the end of the war ushered in new economic why did the articles of confederation fail to give the confederation congress power to tax.
boycotts of british goods and the disruption of trade during wartime meant that consumers had been denied access to luxury items including china textiles and wine.
demand for british goods surged after the war and the new nation was flooded with imports.
british merchants encouraged americans to buy goods on credit.
american merchants by contrast now faced a host of new obstacles to trade with britain.
in particular the loss of the lucrative trade with the british west indies was a severe blow to the american economy.
americas trade deficit with britain drained what little gold and silver reserves were available to the nation.
american banks had to curtail loans.
when merchants were forced to call in debts to satisfy their british suppliers they included the debts individuals owed them.
this constriction of credit sent the economy into a tailspin.
the combination of restricted access to trade with britain and its empire falling agricultural prices and mounting debt produced the new nations first economic depression.
diplomacy frustration and stalemate the new nation also faced military challenges.
british troops were still garrisoned in parts of the ohio valley.
relations with the indian tribes along the frontier remained tense.
farther from the nations borders americans faced different problems.
without a powerful navy to protect american commerce ships were easy prey for pirates.
piracy was particularly rampant in the mediterranean where the north african states of morocco algiers tunis and tripoli known as the barbary states sanctioned it.
the barbary pirates extorted money from merchant vessels in exchange for safe passage.
failure to pay resulted in the seizure of ships and imprisonment of sailors.
american sailors taken as captives by life under the articles of confederation hudson bay ish newfoundland no rt claimed by england and u s ha me ri c claimed by england and u s a nova scotia r brit la wr en ce lake of the woods m st fort michilimackinac fort niagara i ss ip iss pi r barbary pirates languished in north african prisons or were sold into slavery.
in july 1785 when pirates captured two american ships algiers demanded nearly 60 000 in ransom to release the vessels and their crews.
the american navy was too weak to challenge these pirate fleets.
while the loss of claimed by trade burdened the nations spain russia fledgling economy the sad and england fate of american captives became a source of national humiliation.
frustration with the inability to defend its interests on the high seas grew but america faced even more serious problems closer to its borders.
defending the nations interests in the mediterranean would have to wait while america dealt with the threats posed by pacific indians and the british ocean and spanish in north america.
the map 5 9 shows the british and spanish presence along americas england borders a fact that increased spain american anxiety.
russia congress had little power united states to compel the states to live british held forts up to the nations treaty obligations including provisions requiring americans to pay prewar debts and compensate loyalists for property confiscated during the war.
britain used americas failure to comply with these provisions as a pretext for retaining control of its forts in the old northwest the region of the new nation bordering the great lakes 5 9.
these outposts allowed the british to continue their lucrative fur trade with the indians.
the war against britain had strained relations between america and its indian neighbors.
many indian peoples such as the iroquois in new york and the creeks in georgia had sided with the british.
pte au fer oswegatchie boston oswego detroit fort miami new york yorktown u n ite d state s atl antic ocean charleston savannah claimed by u s and spain s pa n is h spanish florida gulf of mexico cuba hispaniola a me r ica caribbean sea 5 9 border disputes in old northwest and southwest the british refused to abandon their forts in the old northwest until congress complied with all the provisions of the treaty of paris.
in the old southwest spain frustrated americas efforts to secure the rights to navigate the mississippi river.
while british peace negotiators had sought to protect the interests of loyalists they did nothing to secure a just peace for their indian allies.
the leader of the mohawks another indian nation that had sided with the british pointed out that the government of view the map territorial claims in eastern america after the treaty of paris what diplomatic frustrations hampered the new american nation.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 george iii had no right whatever to grant away to the states of america their rights or properties without a manifest breach of all justice and equity given the absence of indian representation in the treaty that ended hostilities between the united states and britain it is hardly surprising that the interests of indian peoples were not reflected in the final terms.
the treaty of paris ceded the entire old northwest territory to the united states.
american diplomats were not sympathetic to the claims of indians.
operating under a theory of conquest in which indians were a subdued people american negotiators assumed that defeated tribes had to relinquish all claims to western lands.
rejecting this view indians organized to resist incursions.
rather than mark the start of an era of peace the period after the revolution was one of continued conflict between indians and americans.
those tribes that were best organized politically and militarily were better able to defend their interests against american expansionism.
the indian population east of the mississippi numbered between 150 000 and 200 000 and was divided into 85 different nations.
the white population of the new united states was approximately 2 4 million.
pressure to open up indian lands for white settlement created conflict.
indians had no illusions about the goal of american policy.
the insatiable desire for indian land led the creeks to bestow the name ecunnaunuxulgee on georgians people greedily grasping after the lands of red people when confronted with the determination of indians to defend their lands americans were forced to negotiate more fairly.
american leaders soon realized that missionary work and trade were more likely to secure harmonious relations than conquest and military confrontation.
by 1787 congress had shifted both its tone and strategy for dealing with indian policy.
in place of the theory of conquest congress recommended the utmost good faith in dealing with the indians.
the spanish presence in the old southwest was another threat.
navigation of the mississippi river was crucial for the economic development of this region.
goods traveling down the mississippi needed to be unloaded at new orleans and placed on ocean bound vessels.
spain denied americans free access to the mississippi and new orleans.
congress authorized secretary of foreign affairs john jay to negotiate with the spanish.
spain proposed opening its empire to trade with america if the united states renounced its claim to navigate the what was the theory of conquest and how did it influence diplomatic relations with indian peoples.
mississippi.
the terms would have been a boon to new england merchants who would have benefited from new trade opportunities with spanish america but alienated southerners particularly those in the southwest who viewed the mississippi as their pipeline to world markets.
settling the old northwest the most important achievement of the confederation period was the plan congress devised for western settlement.
a committee chaired by thomas jefferson devised the initial plan for settling the west 5 10.
this proposal imagined a rational mathematical scheme for carving out as many as 16 new states from the northwest territory.
jeffersons plan combined republican theories of self government with enlightenment ideas about geography.
boundaries would be drawn along an orderly grid after being surveyed.
reflecting his debt to classical republicanism jeffersons chose names for the new territories such as polypotamia land of many rivers republicanism guided this plan in other ways.
in his ordinance of 1784 jefferson proposed that new territories be incorporated into the union as states on an equal footing with the original thirteen.
jefferson also sought local selfgovernment for settlers almost immediately.
when the free population reached 20 000 a constitutional convention would set up a permanent state government.
the plan banned slavery after the year 1800 and recommended that land be made available in parcels small enough for average americans to purchase.
jefferson envisioned the northwest territory populated by white yeoman farmers.
the land ordinance of 1785 adopted by congress departed from jeffersons original proposal.
it called for the creation of townships of 36 square miles.
land was to be sold for no less than one dollar an acre in hard currency.
ordinary citizens would have had trouble raising this amount of cash and therefore had little chance to purchase land directly from the government.
jeffersons hope that western land could be sold directly to citizens and create a republic of small independent farmers was jettisoned in favor of a plan that favored speculators.
the northwest ordinance of 1787 was the final plan for the governance of the new territories.
this act was considerably less democratic than jeffersons original proposal but maintained life under the articles of confederation his orderly model for dividing up the territory.
governors appointed by congress would rule the northwest territories.
when the population reached 5 000 adult males settlers could elect their own territorial legislatures.
when the population reached 60 000 free inhabitants including women the territories could seek admission to the confederation.
the language of the northwest ordinance echoed the republican ideals of the revolution.
congress proclaimed that fundamental principles of civil and religious liberty were the foundation for the new states to be created from the territories.
in keeping with the republican ideas about virtue and the need for an educated citizenry the ordinance declared religion morality and knowledge being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged most important the ordinance rejected slavery in the new states to be carved out of the northwest territories.
shayss rebellion the postwar economic downturn hit farmers in massachusetts particularly hard.
as farm foreclosures increased and families saw their farms seized by their creditors frustration mounted.
revolutionary war veterans marched on the town of northampton to shut down the local courts and prevent further foreclosures.
the armed crowd prevented the judges dressed in formal judicial attire long black robes and gray wigs from entering the courthouse.
the protestors dubbed shaysites after their leader daniel shays believed they were protecting the good of the commonwealth and opposing the tyrannical government in the massachusetts state governor james bowdoin condemned the court closings as fraught with the most fatal and pernicious consequences that must tend to subvert all law and government shayss rebellion had begun.
when angry farmers in great barrington another town in western massachusetts closed their local court the governor dispatched the state militia.
one member of the crowd sympathetic to the shaysites 5 10 jeffersons plan for the west jeffersons gridlike map for the settlement of the west was influenced by the ideas of enlightenment thinkers.
the names that jefferson proposed for these territories were inspired by classical antiquity.
thus one potential state was named sylvania a forested region there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in the said territory otherwise than in the punishment of crimes whereof the party shall have been duly convicted northwest ordinance of 1787 view the closer look competing visions reactions to shayss rebellion what republican features distinguish the northwest ordinance.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 vermont new hampshire petersham february 4 1787 concord massachusetts northampton boston bay worcester great barrington springfield massachusetts january 25 1787 sheffield february 27 1787 taunton connecticut rhode island site of courts closed by regulators august december 1787 battle movement of shaysite rebels movement of states army 5 11 court closings and major battles in shayss rebellion shays and his supporters closed courts in central and western massachusetts.
forces loyal to the state routed the shaysites in a decisive battle at the springfield state armory.
suggested putting the matter to a vote among the militiamen supporters of opening the court stood to one side of the road while those opposed crossed the highway.
nearly 800 of 1 000 members of the militia who had been sent to protect the courts voted with their feet to join the rebels and keep the courts closed.
the towns affected by the court closing are shown in the map 5 11 which also shows the location of the armed confrontations between the shaysites and government forces.
shays and his followers were defeated in a battle near the state arsenal what was shayss rebellion.
in springfield.
the failure of shayss rebellion the most serious challenge to government authority in the new nation gave additional impetus to those eager to reform the structure of the articles of confederation and create a more powerful central government.
george washington was among the most alarmed by events in massachusetts.
the one figure among the nations patriot elite who seemed relatively unfazed by the rebellion in western massachusetts was thomas jefferson who learned of the rebellion while living in paris and serving america as a diplomat.
read the document military reports on shayss rebellion the movement for constitutional reform the movement for constitutional reform the economic political and diplomatic problems faced by the confederation government including shayss rebellion inspired a small but talented group of politicians to advocate reform of the articles of confederation.
as nationalists men who believed in the need for a stronger national government they regarded constitutional reform as imperative.
rather than continue to put their faith in virtue nationalists sought to create a powerful central government to protect american interests abroad and deal with internal threats such as shayss rebellion.
for the nationalists the postwar era was a time of crisis that demanded decisive action if america were to survive.
nationalists proposed a new model of government to protect individual liberty and promote the common good.
the federal constitution created by this group relied on a system of checks and balances not virtue to protect liberty.
the road to philadelphia delegates from maryland and virginia gathered at george washingtons home in mount vernon 1785 to discuss economic matters.
a year later in annapolis maryland 1786 delegates from five states discussed the problems of the confederation.
finally in 1787 delegates from 12 of the 13 states gathered in philadelphia to reform the articles of confederation.
the 55 delegates in philadelphia included an impressive cast of characters.
virginia sent james madison and george mason two of its most esteemed political figures.
pennsylvanias representatives included the oldest delegate benjamin franklin then aged 81 and james wilson the nations premier legal mind.
new yorks delegation boasted the brilliant but brash alexander hamilton.
the delegates chose george washington to preside over the meeting.
lawyers dominated the convention and nearly all the delegates were wealthy men.
a strict rule of secrecy was imposed on the proceedings a decision that facilitated a more frank debate among the delegates but only intensified rumors about their activities.
the rule of secrecy was stringently enforced the windows of the pennsylvania state house were nailed shut and a guard posted at the door.
writing from france where he was serving as american minister jefferson described the assembly as a meeting of demigods men of such impressive accomplishments that they seemed like the mythical heroes of antiquity part human and part divine.
some contemporaries however were suspicious of the conventions secrecy.
one pennsylvania newspaper warned of the monster being fashioned behind a thick veil of secrecy later generations of americans have tended to echo jeffersons observations that the convention was composed of extraordinarily talented politicians a view illustrated by this mid nineteenth century painting by thomas rossiter 5 12 in which the founders are bathed in light not shrouded in secrecy.
large states versus small states instead of arguing over reforming the articles of confederation as originally intended the philadelphia convention took up a bold proposal offered by the virginia delegation.
the virginia plan drafted mainly by james madison abandoned the federal system created by the articles in favor of a new we have probably had too good an opinion of human nature in forming our confederation george washington 1786 what were the main features of the virginia plan.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 5 12 constitutional convention jeffersons observation that the framers of the constitution were an assembly of demigods is captured in thomas rossiters nineteenth century painting of the philadelphia convention.
rather than appearing in a dark conclave the members of the convention are bathed in light.
model of government that had both federal and national features.
the states would retain power but the new national government would be supreme in those areas in which it was given authority.
the virginia plan created a new government composed of a single executive the branch of government charged with among other things the execution of laws a two house legislature congress the lawmaking body and a separate judiciary courts.
the lower house of congress would be directly elected by the people and the upper house would be elected by the lower house from a list provided by the state legislatures.
under the articles of confederation small states such as maryland had the same vote as large states such as virginia.
rather than this one state one vote principle each state would have representation in proportion to its population.
the new congress would have the power to legislate in all cases to which the separate states are incompetent or in which the harmony of why did small states oppose the virginia plan.
the united states may be interrupted by the exercise of individual state legislation although this did not explicitly address nettlesome issues such as the power to tax such powers were clearly within the purview of this broad grant of authority.
the authors of the virginia plan especially james madison thought that a more general grant of authority rather than a long list of enumerated powers would be more politically acceptable to the delegates.
representatives from the small states opposed the virginia plan.
two weeks after the virginia plan was introduced william patterson of new jersey made a counterproposal often dubbed the new jersey plan.
it called for a modified federal system based on the existing articles of confederation.
it proposed a single legislature in which each state would have one vote which would maintain the parity between small and large states.
in contrast to the articles of confederation the new national legislature would be the supreme law read the document virginia or randolph plan the movement for constitutional reform of the land and would be binding on the states.
the national legislature would have the power to tax and regulate interstate commerce.
although the new jersey plan was defeated it had revealed the difficulty of reaching a consensus without accommodating the concerns of the small states which feared that the new system would give larger states inordinate influence over the new government.
the figure 5 13 shows the differences between the virginia and new jersey plans and how each differed from the articles of confederation.
although both of these plans would have given the new central government broad new powers particularly over economic matters representatives from the large and small states remained divided over how the legislature would be structured.
on june 29 1787 oliver ellsworth of connecticut reintroduced an earlier compromise that he and roger sherman also of connecticut had devised.
the plan provided for equal representation for large and small states in the upper house and a lower house in which representation would be apportioned on the basis of population.
on july 16 1787 the convention adopted the great compromise sometimes known as the connecticut compromise because of ellsworth and shermans role in framing it.
the great compromise solved one of the most difficult issues facing the convention the struggle over representation based on population versus equal representation among the states.
conflict over slavery although the connecticut compromise solved one of the most difficult problems faced by the convention it also focused attention on another equally contentious issue whether to count slaves in the apportionment of the new lower house.
the southern states seeking sufficient representation in the new legislature to protect slavery were determined that their slaves be counted.
opponents of slavery by contrast wished to see slaves taxed as property but did not wish to count them when calculating representation in the new lower house.
the convention settled on a solution in which slaves were counted as three fifths of a person for purposes of taxation and legislative apportionment.
the threefifths ratio had been worked out by the confederation congress earlier when it faced another issue pertaining to slavery.
conflict flared over the slave trade.
one of the most intense attacks on the slave trade was voiced by virginian george mason the largest slave owner in the convention who warned his fellow delegates of the threat to the republic of the institution of slavery every master of slaves is born a petty tyrant slavery discourages arts manufactures mason recommended ending the slave trade as a first step toward eliminating slavery.
several delegates viewed masons actions cynically.
virginia had an excess of slaves and would profit enormously from an internal slave trade if the external trade with africa were abolished.
south carolinian articles of confederation virginia plan new jersey plan structure of the legislature single house one state one vote two houses both determined by population single house one state one vote taxation no power to tax power to tax power to tax judicial power no judicial power apart from courts to hear admiralty cases federal judiciary federal judiciary single executive chosen by national legislature single or plural executive elected by congress executive power no permanent executive a committee of the states exercises executive functions when congress is not in session 5 13 comparison of the articles of confederation virginia and new jersey plans although the virginia and new jersey plans differed on representation each would have given the new government the vital power of taxation.
watch the video lecture slavery and the constitution how did the conflict over slavery shape the debates of the constitutional convention.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 the states were divided into different interests not by their difference of size but by other circumstances the most material of which resulted partly from climate but principally from the effects of their having or not having slaves james madison 1787 charles pinckney argued that all the great republics of the ancient world had accepted the necessity of slavery.
his cousin general charles cotesworth pinckney another delegate from south carolina told delegates that his state would never accept the constitution if the slave trade was banned.
again compromise held the convention together.
the new congress was denied the authority to ban the slave trade until 1808.
although the word slavery never appears in the constitution a number of clauses in the document protected it.
article iv section 2 prevented fugitive slaves defined as any person held to service or labour in one state from fleeing to another state to seek asylum and freedom.
article i section 8 prohibited the national government from taxing the exports of any state a provision that prevented the products of slave labor such as rice indigo tobacco or sugar from being singled out for sanctions by those hostile to slavery.
in james madisons view the greatest division in the convention was not the conflict between large states and small states but slavery.
filling out the constitutional design after sorting out the structure of the legislative branch of government the convention struggled over the executive branch.
george mason argued for a three man executive.
a plural executive he argued could better represent the different regional interests of the nation.
rejecting this proposal the convention settled on a unitary executive.
there was also disagreement over how to choose the executive.
james wilson wanted to see the executive elected by the people whereas mason argued that the people lacked the wisdom to make such a decision.
roger shermans plan to have the national legislature pick how did the electoral college strengthen the powers of the states and further the ideals of republicanism.
the executive was challenged as a threat to the separation of powers.
eventually the convention settled on an electoral college composed of men chosen by each state in a manner to be determined by the individual state legislatures.
by giving the states some control over selection of the president this system provided another way of strengthening the power of the states within the new federal system.
the electoral college also reflected the ideals of republicanism held by the delegates.
by creating a filtering mechanism for the selection of the president the electoral college was designed to help ensure that the men chosen were drawn from the ranks of the leading citizens men renowned for their knowledge and virtue.
delegates also clashed over the term of office that the executive would serve.
alexander hamilton proposed that the executive have a life term but this leaned too close to monarchy for most delegates.
some delegates favored a single term of as much as seven years while others argued that a shorter term with the possibility of reelection would provide a greater check on the president.
the convention ultimately settled on a four year term with no limits on the number of terms a president might serve.
the final structure of the executive branch was detailed in article ii of the constitution.
throughout august the convention sketched the barest outline for the third branch of government the federal judiciary.
a new supreme court was created and congress was authorized to create such inferior courts as it deemed necessary.
the supreme courts authority extended in all cases in law and equity arising under the constitution the laws of the united states and treaties made under their authority although a number of delegates assumed that the courts would exercise the power of judicial review the power to declare acts of congress the movement for constitutional reform unconstitutional the constitution failed to make such power explicit.
two delegates from new york robert yates and john lansing left before the document was completed and therefore did not sign it.
three other delegates edmund randolph george mason and elbridge gerry refused to sign the constitution because of their reservations about its final draft.
despite these protests benjamin franklin captured the feelings of many delegates when he wrote that despite its faults it was doubtful whether any other convention we can obtain may be able to make a better constitution.
it therefore astonishes me sir to find this system approaching as near to perfection as it does after the convention concluded its work and the text of the constitution was made public a woman asked franklin well doctor what have we got a republic or a monarchy a republic replied the doctor if you can keep it the constitution reflected the give and take and the spirit of compromise that prevailed at the convention.
the new constitution was a radical departure from the articles of confederation 5 14.
the powerful national legislature created by the constitution was given authority to enact all laws necessary and proper to carrying out responsibilities delegated by the constitution.
the new national legislature had two houses a house of representatives and a senate.
each state had two senators.
representation in the house of representatives was based on population with slaves counting as three fifths of a person.
amendments to the constitution would require the approval of three quarters of the states not the unanimous consent required under the articles.
although executive power under the articles of confederation had been weak the new president could veto legislation negotiate treaties and issue pardons.
the ill defined powers of the new supreme court left some wondering if the judiciary would be the weakest of the three branches not co equal with the legislature and the executive.
the new federal constitution also broke with well established precedents that had shaped the state constitutions drafted after the revolution.
unlike the typical state constitution the federal constitution did not include a declaration of rights stating the basic rights and liberties retained by the people nor did it reassert the basic republican principles upon which government rested.
most state constitutions created relatively weak executives another marked contrast with the new federal constitution and its strong executive branch.
articles of confederation constitution structure of the legislature single house one state one vote two houses one determined by population upper house equal state representation taxation no power to tax power to tax judicial power no judicial power apart from courts to hear admiralty cases federal judiciary executive power no permanent executive a committee of the states exercises executive functions when congress is not in session executive chosen by electors chosen by state legislators 5 14 comparison of the articles of confederation and the constitution as this chart shows the new federal government created by the constitution was far more powerful than the old government under the articles of confederation.
what were the most important differences between the federal constitution and the typical state constitutions of this period.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 the great debate the publication of the constitution inaugurated one of the most vigorous political campaigns in american history.
in taverns and town squares americans argued over the new constitution.
as one contemporary remarked the plan of a government proposed to us by the convention affords matter for conversation to every rank of beings from the governor to the door keeper soon two sides emerged in the debate over ratification.
federalists versus anti federalists the supporters of the constitution described themselves as federalists thus saddling their opponents with the name anti federalists.
never entirely happy with this name opponents of the constitution complained that they were the true supporters of federalism and attacked pro constitutional forces as consolidationists who wished to consolidate the union into a single national government and rob the states of their power.
looking back on the bitter struggle over ratification one anti federalist quipped that because the issue before the nation was ratification of the constitution the two sides were more aptly described as rats and anti rats citizens paraded raised their glasses to toast or attacked the new government.
some even rioted to express their sentiments.
anti federalists in carlisle pennsylvania burned an effigy of federalist james wilson to express their disapproval of the new constitution.
wilson a renowned lawyer and a recent immigrant from scotland was one of the most important supporters of the constitution in pennsylvania.
he was also an easy target for ridicule since he spoke with a thick scottish accent that his enemies mocked.
the supporters of the constitution also took to the streets to defend it and occasionally to intimidate their opponents.
a federalist crowd wrecked the printing presses of anti federalist publishers in new york city.
these disturbances were the exception however not the rule.
the debate could be heated but americans typically confined their passions to the printed page.
hundreds of columns of newspaper text were devoted to the debate over the merits of the constitution and dozens of pamphlets were written for and against it.
the federalist for example a sophisticated defense of the constitution written by john jay alexander hamilton and james madison was first published as newspaper essays in new york.
it is now regarded by many scholars as americas most important contribution to western why did federalist and anti federalist authors adopt names such as publius and brutus.
political philosophy.
writing under the pen name publius a hero of the roman republic the authors hoped to cloak themselves in the toga of roman virtue.
this strategy was designed to focus the publics attention on the ideas not the men responsible for the essays.
the federalist not only responded to anti federalist criticism it also provided a sophisticated analysis of republican government and a point by point discussion of the merits of the constitution.
although its influence on the outcome of ratification was modest the federalist soon became the favorite text of judges legislators and others interested in interpreting the meaning of the constitution.
it continues to be the text most often cited by the supreme court when trying to identify the original understanding of the constitution.
anti federalists produced no single text comparable to the federalist.
however the writings of elbridge gerry and george mason prominent anti federalists who had participated in the philadelphia convention but had refused to sign the constitution were widely reprinted.
authors who adopted the pen names brutus and federal farmer each framed sophisticated critiques of the constitution.
brutus invoked the same ideal of roman virtue that publius had appropriated for the supporters of the constitution.
the name federal farmer traded on the association of republican ideals of simplicity associated with the ideal of the yeoman farmer.
both texts developed an alternative vision of republican government.
rather than accept the need for a powerful central government anti federalists clung to the idea of a system in which the bulk of governmental functions would continue to reside in the states.
see competing visions brutus and publius debate the nature of republicanism.
although the struggle over ratification produced some of the most intellectually sophisticated writings in american history in other respects it was a textbook example of negative campaigning.
if publius and brutus provided an example of dispassionate reason metaphorically invoking roman ideals of virtue by their pen names other authors on both sides were not above the great debate competing visions bru brutus utus and and publius publius s debate debate the e nature nature o f republicanism repub blicanis sm of one disagreement one di between n federalists fed fe eralists and d anti federalists ant ntii federalists arose arosse from fro their different differeent views v of the nature naatu ture r of republican government.
gov over e nment.
a number of prominent p anti federalists antti fe federalists clung to the th traditional theory the heor oryy that a republican repub bli lica can government only interests gove go v rn nment could cou uld onl nlyy survive s rvvive if a nation remained su reema mained small and d the the peoples p interest stss were w re fairly homogeneous.
we homo moge gene n ous.
federali list sts s most most notably no otably y pub ubli lius us argued it would be easier eas ea ier to protect liberty lib liber ertyy in a large and d diverse dive di v rse republic.
federalists publius the anti federalist author brutus defended the traditional idea that a free republic could survive only in a small area in which the people shared the same values culture and history.
when a republic became too large he argued it became contentious and the common good was sacrificed as competing factions vied to promote their own narrow interests.
in short brutus was confident that history demonstrated the impossibility of a nation the size of the new united states remaining a free republic without a confederation style government.
if respect is to be paid to the opinion of the greatest and wisest men who have ever thought or wrote on the science of government we shall be constrained to conclude that a free republic cannot succeed over a country of such immense extent.
as that of the whole united states.
history furnishes no example of a free republic any thing like the extent of the united states.
the grecian republics were of small extent so also was that of the romans.
in a republic the manners sentiments and interests of the people should be similar.
if this be not the case there will be a constant clashing of opinions and the representatives of one part will be continually striving against those of the other.
this will retard the operations of government and prevent such conclusions as will promote the public good.
if we apply this remark to the condition of the united states we shall be convinced that it forbids that we should be one government.
writing as publius in the federalist james madison disputed the traditional theory of republicanism advanced by brutus and other anti federalists.
by increasing the number of factions and expanding the size of the republic publius argued that it would be less likely for any one faction to further their agenda and dominate politics.
according to this new theory politics would become a kaleidoscope of ever shifting alliances.
moreover in a larger republic politics itself would act like a filter and be more likely to select leaders of skill and talents.
finally madison noted that the federal system would act like a fire wall isolating factions within individual states and preventing them from spreading their wicked agendas to other states.
men of factious tempers of local prejudices or of sinister designs may by intrigue by corruption or by other means first obtain the suffrages and then betray the interests of the people.
the question resulting is whether small or extensive republics are more favorable to the election of proper guardians of the public.
the smaller the society.
the fewer the distinct parties and interests the more frequently will a majority be found of the same party.
the more easily will they concert and execute their plans of oppression.
extend the sphere and you take in a greater variety of parties and interests you make it less probable that a majority of the whole will have a common motive to invade the rights of other citizens or if such a common motive exists it will be more difficult for all who feel it to discover their own strength and to act in unison with each other.
the influence of factious leaders may kindle a flame within their particular states but will be unable to spread a general conflagration through the other states.
in the extent and proper structure of the union therefore we behold a republican remedy for the diseases most incident to republican government.
why did brutus and publius differ about the relationship between size and republicanism.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 slinging mud when it served their interests.
federalists for example denounced their opponents as shaysites a charge repeated in the satirical print the looking glass for 1787 5 15.
in this cartoon connecticut appears stuck in the mud a cart laden with debt is dragged in opposite directions by federalists and anti federalists.
the artist who created this pro federalist political cartoon stooped lower than most one anti federalist character has his trousers pulled down around his ankles and his bottom exposed to his federalist opponents.
anti federalists charged that federalists were part of an aristocratic elite who wished to dominate common folk.
amos singletary from massachusetts warned his fellow citizens that the lawyers and rich merchants who backed the constitution favored the interests of the aristocratic few over those of the democratic many.
in his view the new constitution would undo the democratic reforms of the revolution returning control to powerful economic groups.
although anti federalism attracted supporters of democracy such as singletary it also appealed to wealthy planters such as virginias george mason who was less concerned about the constitutions antidemocratic features and more worried about the centralization of power.
mason feared that liberty would be annihilated if a central government gained too much power.
although anti federalists did not agree about everything they shared important objections to the constitution.
the essential anti federalist critique emerged early in the debate.
at the top was the fear of consolidation the concern that the federal government would absorb all power into its orbit.
anti federalists believed that there would be too few representatives in congress to represent the diverse interests of the american people.
representatives would also live far from their constituents and lose touch with the concerns of those they served.
the extensive powers of the president and the potentially vast jurisdiction of the supreme court also worried anti federalists who feared that the federal government would become tyrannical.
the absence of a bill of rights proved to be one of the anti federalists most effective criticisms.
in their view history demonstrated that once in power even the most virtuous rulers were tempted to increase their powers at the expense of popular liberty.
a written declaration stating clearly the rights and powers retained by the people was therefore an essential safeguard for liberty.
rather than accept that the omission of a bill of rights was a serious flaw in the constitution federalists argued that it was unnecessary.
james wilson defended the absence of a bill of rights by noting that the new government was one of delegated power only and hence all powers not ceded to it were retained by the how does the looking glass for 1787 portray the anti federalists.
people and the states.
it would have been superfluous and absurd he observed to stipulate that we should enjoy those privileges of which we are not divested either by the intention or the act that brought that body into existence in the federalist publius argued that the inclusion of a bill of rights would be dangerous.
by listing exactly which rights were protected the new government would by implication exclude other rights that it did not explicitly include among those reserved to the people.
since it would be impossible to create a list of all the rights enjoyed by the people it was better not to list any.
for an overview of disagreement between federalists and anti federalists see 5 16.
ratification federalists realized that anti federalists would try to block unconditional ratification and seek prior amendments to the constitution.
early and decisive federalist successes in delaware new jersey pennsylvania georgia and connecticut established a momentum that federalists capitalized on to achieve their goal of unconditional ratification.
eventually in massachusetts fed 5 15 the looking glass for 1787 this federalist political cartoon from connecticut portrays the state as a cart stuck in the mud and weighed down by paper money and debt.
while federalists proclaim comply with congress and pull the state toward a bright sun the antifederalists exclaim success to shays and drag the cart toward a shadowy future symbolized by the dark clouds.
these lawyers and men of learning and moneyed men that talk so finely and gloss over matters so smoothly to make us poor illiterate people swallow down the pill expect to get into congress themselves.
and then they will swallow up all us little folks like the great leviathan amos singletary 1788 read the document patrick henry speaks against the constitution the great debate 5 16 anti federalist versus federalist ideas anti federalists and federalists each believed in republican government but they disagreed over how to structure such a government to protect liberty.
james madison george mason federalists anti federalists support strong central government oppose strong central government oppose bill of rights as unnecessary and perhaps even harmful to liberty favor inclusion of a bill of rights as necessary to protect liberty doubt effectiveness of militia and favor federal standing army favor militia and oppose federal standing army republicanism can survive only in a large and diverse republic republicanism can survive only in a small republic virtue is a weak foundation for republicanism a system of checks and balances is better suited to preserving a republican government against corruption republicanism depends on a virtuous population to prevent corruption eralist faced a powerful anti federalist opposition and conceded the need for subsequent amendment once the constitution was adopted.
federalists willingness to compromise also won over moderates who might have opposed the constitution in battleground states if men were angels no government would be necessary.
if angels were to govern men neither external nor internal controls on government would be necessary.
in framing a government which is to be administered by men over men the great difficulty lies in this you must first enable the government to control the governed and in the next place oblige it to control itself james madison the federalist 1788 read the document federalist no.
10 such as massachusetts.
had the federalists maintained a hard line sticking to james wilsons argument that a bill of rights was unnecessary the constitution might never have been ratified.
if states with powerful wellorganized anti federalist coalitions such as virginia had held ratification conventions earlier the constitution might have been defeated or been radically altered by amendments.
new hampshires vote to ratify on june 21 1788 gave federalists the nine states needed to ratify the constitution.
although the constitution was now the new law of the land it was vital to persuade anti federalists in virginia and new york to accept it.
despite opposition from anti federalists like patrick henry virginia ratified the constitution on june 25.
that left only new york north carolina and rhode island outside the new union.
in new york city federalists staged a grand federal procession to show that the constitution enjoyed broad support particularly among the citys artisans who saw a strong government as a way to protect their economic interests from foreign competition.
the parade drew members from virtually all of the citys crafts and included dozens of floats.
printers for example marched alongside a printing press mounted on a horse drawn cart which churned out an ode that praised the constitution.
a banner with the name publius the author of the federalist flew proudly above the press and the printers sported caps with liberty of press written in large letters.
another group of artisans carried this banner 5 17 which celebrated their work with pewter an alloy of tin and lead that was widely used to make tableware.
their banner carried the following verses the federal plan most solid and secure americans their freedom will ensure all arts shall flourish in columbias land and all her sons join as one social band new york anti federalists had a dilemma should they continue to oppose the constitution or work within the new system of government.
to understand how they made their decision see choices and consequences to ratify or not.
new yorks ratification dashed the last hopes of opponents of the constitution to secure prior amendments.
federalists had secured unconditional ratification of the new frame of government.
most americans probably opposed the constitution when it was first proposed and the vote on ratification was close in many states.
several factors helped account for the federalists victory.
supporters of the constitution organized themselves around a well defined goal ratification.
by contrast why did urban artisans support the constitution.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 choices and consequences to ratify or not by the time new yorks ratification convention met in poughkeepsie nine states had already ratified the constitution making it the new law of the land.
could anti federalists continue to oppose the constitution and thereby place new york outside the new nation.
many anti federalists considered such a prospect unrealistic so they turned to the question of amending the constitution.
the outcome of the convention depended on the decisions of moderate anti federalists led by the merchant melancton smith.
new york anti federalists faced a momentous decision continue to oppose the constitution or work within the new system of government.
choices support the constitution with the promise that the first congress would amend it.
support the constitution provisionally until it was amended but consider seceding from the union if amendments were not made.
block ratification and continue to oppose the constitution.
decision smith opted for the first choice making new york the eleventh state to ratify the constitution on july 25 1787.
in a powerful speech in the new york convention he reiterated his hope for future amendments but recognized the need to work through the mode prescribed by the constitution consequences if smith and other swing anti federalist delegates in the convention had opposed ratification new york would have remained outside the union and the new nation might have split into separate confederacies.
if smith and other moderates had insisted on amendments before ratification federalists would likely have stood their ground and the convention might have failed to ratify the constitution.
as it was smiths decision put more pressure on rhode island and north carolina to accept the new constitution.
it also gave impetus to the move to amend the constitution after ratification.
federalist newspapers seized on the visual image of a roman style temple to represent the nation and added a new column for each state that voted to ratify the constitution.
the pillars and temple metaphor like jeffersons model for the virginia state capitol evoked roman ideals of virtue and liberty.
continuing controversies why did new york anti federalists accept the constitution and wait for amendments.
although the anti federalists were defeated in 1788 many of their fears and ideals about government still resonate in american politics.
were the anti federalists backward looking politicians who failed to grasp the genius of the new constitution or visionaries who predicted that the growth and centralization of american government might pose a threat to liberty.
americans still argue over the legacy of anti federalism.
why did new york anti federalists compromise on the question of amendments.
massachusetts newspaper celebrates new york as the eleventh pillar the great debate 5 17 pewterers banner in a new york city parade celebrating the constitution federalist artisans carried a banner that included the u s flag and depicted artisans crafting objects of pewter.
the verse at the top proclaims the bright future for america under the new constitution.
anti federalists could not provide a clear alternative.
some favored a new convention to revise the constitution.
others favored amending the constitution prior to ratification and some were content to amend the new document later.
finally federalists were more effective at getting their message into print.
many newspaper editors refused to print anti federalist materials.
the dynamics of ratification were complex.
no single theory accounts for why individuals and regions supported the constitution but the map shows several patterns in voting 5 18.
geography economics and individual experiences all shaped the vote on the constitution.
merchants and artisans in regions tied to commerce such as seacoasts and inland areas close to navigable rivers looked to a stronger union to protect their economic interests and became federalists.
inhabitants of frontier regions that faced indian threats also supported a stronger central 5 18 geographical distribution of the vote on ratification support for the constitution was strongest along coastal regions and frontiers exposed to threats from external enemies and among small states such as delaware maryland and new jersey.
anti federalism was strongest in the backcountry of new england the mid atlantic and the south.
disputed between the united states and great britain british canada.
or nc e r l aw maine to mass st la disputed between new hampshire and new york re vermont n lake superi u ro n lake m i ch i ga h ke l o new hampshire n ta r i o new york june 1788 massachusetts july 1788 e lak e eri feb 1788 rhode island pennsylvania may 1790 dec 1787 connecticut jan 1788 o hi o r virginia june 1788 new jersey dec 1787 delaware dec 1787 north carolina maryland april 1788 nov 1789 georgia south carolina atl antic ocean may 1788 jan 1788 federalist majority for gulf of mexico spanish florida government because of these security concerns.
except for rhode island small states supported the constitution.
officers of the continental army who had dealt with a weak congress under the articles also supported the constitution.
anti federalists drew together an equally diverse coalition that opposed any effort to centralize authority and lessen the power of the states.
backcountry farmers particularly those less closely connected to major commercial markets opposed the constitution.
state politicians especially the newly empowered men of moderate wealth and more humble origins who dominated politics in states such as pennsylvania and new york were strongly anti federalist.
finally wealthy planters in parts of the south who feared that a distant and powerful government would not represent their interests became anti federalists.
the creation of a loyal opposition despite the intensity of the struggle over ratification anti federalists did not continue their opposition to the constitution once the nine states needed to ratify adopted it.
indeed rather than choose to become an anti constitutional party anti federalists accepted having to work within the framework provided by the constitution.
continued opposition to the constitution would only have led to anarchy which most anti federalists wished to avoid as much as did their federalist opponents.
anti federalists turned their attentions to campaigning for election to the first congress and to securing amendments to the constitution.
anti federalist majority against evenly divided view the map interactive map ratification of the constitution why was there no anti constitution movement after ratification.
chapter 5 a virtuous republic creating a workable government 1783 1789 america adopts a new national symbol newburgh conspiracy land ordinance of 1784 washington prevents coup by continental army officers thomas jefferson proposes a model for settling the old northwest territory thomas jefferson appointed ambassador to france chapter review six years after being proposed america adopts a new symbol for the nation the great seal of the united states a design intended to embody the republican ideals of the nation treaty of paris hostilities between united states and britain conclude and britain recognizes american independence jefferson appointment as french ambassador insulates him from the hysteria surrounding shayss rebellion review questions 1.
americans in the post revolutionary era looked to rome for inspiration in building a virtuous republic.
how were these ideas reflected in american art and architecture in this period.
what were the most notable achievements and failures of the confederation government.
what were the most divisive issues the constitutional convention faced and what compromises did the delegates reach to solve them.
which groups in society tended to support or oppose the constitution.
anti federalists were alarmed by the power of the federal government.
do you think the antifederalist objections to the constitution have any validity today.
key terms articles of confederation americas first constitutional government in effect from 1781 1788.
the articles created a weak decentralized form of government that lacked the power to tax and compel state obedience to treaties it negotiated.
old northwest the region of the new nation bordering on the great lakes.
northwest ordinance of 1787 one of several laws adopted by the confederation congress designed to provide a plan for the orderly settlement of the northwest territory the area north of the ohio river and west of pennsylvania.
in addition to providing for a plan for self governance the ordinance also prohibited slavery from the northwest territory.
shayss rebellion uprising in western massachusetts in which farmers organized themselves as local militia units and closed down courts to prevent their farms from being seized by creditors.
virginia plan a plan framed by james madison and introduced in the constitution convention by edmund randolph that called on delegations to abandon the government of the articles and create a new strong national government.
new jersey plan proposal made by william patterson of new jersey as an alternative to the more nationalistic virginia plan that would have retained the principle of state equality in the legislature embodied in the articles of confederation.
great compromise compromise plan proposed by roger sherman and oliver ellsworth of connecticut that called for equal representation of each state in the upper house and a lower house based on population.
federalists the name adopted by the supporters of the constitution who favored a stronger centralized government.
anti federalists the name applied to opponents of the constitution who insisted that they not their opponents were the true supporters of the ideal of federalism.
anti federalists opposed weakening the power of the states and feared that the constitution yielded too much power to the new central government.
chapter review petersham february 4 1787 concord northampton bosto worcester great barrington springfield massachus january 25 1787 effield ruary 27 1787 connecticut rhode island virginia statute for religious freedom philadelphia convention drafts constitution new hampshire becomes ninth state to ratify constitution university of north carolina chartered madison and jefferson win approval of bill promoting religious freedom delegates assemble in philadelphia to revise articles of confederation constitution becomes new law of the land shayss rebellion begins hamilton madison and jay publish the first installment of the federalist although the university of georgia was the first public university chartered in the united states 1785 the university of north carolina 1789 was the first public institution of higher education to admit students and offer classes farmers in western massachusetts close courts the most sophisticated defense of the constitution appears in the new york press myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of a virtuous republic.
questions for analysis 1.
how did george washington embody the ideas of republicanism.
read the document george washington the newburgh other resources from this chapter read the document military reports on shayss rebellion p 142 virginia or randolph plan p 144 address 1783 p 130 view the map 2.
what impact did republican ideals and nationalism have on american culture after the revolution.
territorial claims in eastern america after the treaty of paris p 139 interactive map ratification of the constitution p 153 read the document noah webster an american school teacher calls for an american language 1789 p 132 3.
what does shayss rebellion reveal about the problems of the confederation government.
view the closer look competing visions reactions to shayss rebellion p 141 4 who were the anti federalists and why did they oppose the constitution.
read the document patrick henry speaks against the constitution p 150 5.
did the ideas embodied in the constitution mark a break with traditional republicanism and revolutionaryera constitutionalism or were they a logical outgrowth of them.
read the document federalist no.
10 p 151 watch the video lecture slavery and the constitution p 145 chapter launching the new government p 158 chapter 7 the american revolution how was the continental army able to win the war for independence from great britain.
7 1 introduction when the american war for independence from great britain began in 1775 15 year old joseph martin was too young to join the continental army.
but when recruiters returned to his connecticut village a year later he was ready to go.
the recruiters were looking for volunteers to go to new york where the british were rumored to have 15 000 troops.
i did not care if there had been fifteen times fifteen thousand martin said later.
i never spent a thought about numbers.
the americans were invincible in my opinion just two days after the declaration of independence was signed martin traded his plow for a musket an early type of rifle.
a week later he arrived in new york city where he hoped to snuff sniff a little gunpowder as he recalled i was now what i had long wished to be a soldier i had obtained my hearts desire it was now my business to prove myself equal to my profession if martin had known what lay ahead he might not have been so pleased about his new profession.
the army in new york was ill trained ill equipped and just plain ill almost the whole regiment are sick reported a massachusetts officer of his unit.
the british army in contrast was well trained well equipped and well supported by the british navy.
rather than the 15 000 troops martin had heard of the british had assembled a force of 25 000 men in new york.
more than 400 british ships floated in the harbor.
this was the biggest army and the largest fleet the british had ever sent overseas.
in the face of such overwhelming force the americans should have been easily defeated.
but they were not.
in this chapter you will read how soldiers like joseph martin stood up to mighty great britain in a successful revolution that created a new nation.
this painting shows british troops in battle during the american revolution.
compare this painting to the one on the opposite page.
what differences do you see between the soldiers in these two armies.
this painting shows american soldiers at the battle of brandywine in 1777 during the war for independence from great britain.
the american revolution 119 7 2.
american strengths and weaknesses the patriots were in a weak position when the american revolution began.
they had a hastily organized untrained army and a small navy.
their weaknesses were far more obvious than their strengths.
american weaknesses the continental army was always short of men.
general george washington never had more than 20 000 troops at one time and place.
many soldiers enlisted for six months or a year.
just when they were learning how to fight they would pick up their muskets and go home to take care of their farms and families.
few americans were trained for battle.
some were hunters and could shoot well enough from behind a tree.
but when facing a mass of well disciplined redcoats they were likely to turn and run.
the army was plagued by shortages.
guns and gunpowder were so scarce that benjamin franklin suggested arming the troops with bows and arrows.
food shortages forced soldiers to beg for handouts.
uniforms were scarce as well.
in winter one could track shoeless soldiers by their bloody footprints in the snow.
such shortages outraged washington.
but when he complained to the second continental congress nothing changed.
congress the new nations only government lacked the power to raise money for supplies by taxing the colonies now the new nations states.
in desperation congress printed paper money to pay for the war.
but the value of this money dropped so low that merchants demanded to be paid in gold instead.
like everything else gold was scarce.
atthe beginning of the war american soldiers were poorly trained and poorly equipped.
they lacked gunpowder rifles food and clothing.
some men had only spears or axes for weapons.
american revolution the struggle of the colonies in north america to gain their independence from great britain continental army the american army during the american revolution american strengths still the americans did have strengths.
one was the patriotism of people like joseph martin who willingly gave their lives to defend the ideal of a country based on liberty and democracy.
without them the war would have been quickly lost.
the americans also received help from overseas.
motivated by their old hatred of the english the french secretly aided the americans.
during the first two years of the war 90 percent of the americans gunpowder came from europe mostly from france.
in addition a polish jew named haym salomon who immigrated to new york in 1775 helped to finance the war effort.
the americans other great strength was their commander.
general washington was more than an experienced military leader.
he was also a man who inspired courage and confidence.
in the dark days to come it was washington who would keep the ragtag continental army together.
ip chapter 7 7 3 british strengths and weaknesses in contrast to the american colonies great britain entered the war from a position of strength.
yet despite both their real and their perceived advantages the british forces encountered many problems.
british strengths with a professional army of about 42 000 troops at the beginning of the war british forces greatly outnumbered the continental army.
in addition george iii hired 30 000 mercenaries from germany.
these hired soldiers were known as hessians heh shenz because they came from a part of germany called hesse cassel.
the british were also able to recruit many loyalists african americans and american indians to fight on their side.
british and hessian troops were well trained in european military tactics.
they excelled in large battles fought by a mass of troops on open ground.
they also had far more experience firing artillery than americans had.
the british forces were well supplied as well.
unlike the pitifully equipped continental army they seldom lacked for food uniforms weapons or ammunition.
british weaknesses even so the war presented great britain with huge problems.
one was the distance between great britain and america.
sending troops and supplies across the atlantic was slow and costly.
news of battles arrived in england long after they had occurred making it difficult for british leaders to plan a course of action.
a second problem was that king george and his ministers were never able to convince the british people that defeating the rebels was vital to the future of great britain.
the longer the war dragged on the less happy the british taxpayers became about paying its heavy costs.
a third problem was poor leadership.
lord george germain the man chosen to direct the british troops had no real sense of how to defeat the rebels.
how could he.
he had never set foot in north america.
nor did it occur to him to go see for himself what his army was up against.
if he had germain might have realized that this was not a war that could be won by conquering a city or two.
to end the revolution germains forces would have to crush the patriots will to fight state by state.
instead germain kept changing plans and generals hoping that some combination of the two would bring him an easy victory.
british soldiers were trained professionals.
they were well equipped with plenty of ammunition good muskets adequate food and uniforms.
the american revolution 121 1a great britain almost wins the war after the british abandoned boston in the spring of 1776 germain came up with his first plan for winning the war.
british forces in america led by general william howe were ordered to capture new york city.
from that base british troops would then move north to destroy the rebellion at its heart massachusetts.
to block the british invasion washington hurried with his army from boston to new york.
it was there that he heard the good news by signing the declaration of independence congress had finally declared the colonies to be free and independent states.
washington had the declaration of independence read aloud to his troops.
the time had come he said to show our enemies and the whole world that free men contending for their own land are superior to any mercenaries on earth ihe declaration made it clear that the troops had the support of all the colonies who agreed that independence was a prize worth fighting for.
african americans faced a difficult decision during the revolution.
which country was more likely to give them freedom atthe end of the war america or great britain.
many blacks chose to fight with the americans.
with their help the continental army defeated the british atthe battle of cowpens in south carolina pictured below.
african americans and the war for african americans however the declaration of independence raised both hopes and questions.
did jeffersons words all men are created equal apply to them.
would independence bring an end to slavery.
should they join the revolution.
even before independence was declared a number of african americans had joined the patriot cause.
black militiamen both free and slave fought at lexington concord and bunker hill.
early in the war however blacks were banned from the continental army.
washington did not want the army to become a haven for runaway slaves.
in contrast the british promised freedom to all slaves who took up arms for the king.
as a result thousands of runaways became loyalists and fought for great britain.
a shortage of volunteers soon forced washington to change his mind.
by 1779 about 15 percent of the soldiers in the continental army were african americans.
large numbers of black sailors also served in the continental navy.
as black americans joined the war effort some whites began to question their own beliefs.
how could they accept slavery if they truly believed that all people are created equal with the same rights to life liberty and happiness.
by the wars end vermont connecticut massachusetts new hampshire rhode island and pennsylvania had all taken steps to end slavery.
122 chapter 7 defeat in new york on august 27 1776 the american and british armies met in brooklyn new york for what promised to be a decisive battle.
ihe americans began their defense of the city in high spirits.
but the inexperienced americans were no match for the british with their greater numbers and superior training.
in two days of fighting the british lost only 377 men while the americans lost 1 407.
satisfied that the war was nearly won howe ordered a halt to the british attack.
washington he assumed would do what any self respecting european general would do in a hopeless situation.
he would surrender honorably.
and so howe waited.
washington had no intention of giving up.
but for his army to survive he would have to retreat.
even though washington knew this he could not bring himself to utter the word retreat.
an officer named thomas mifflin rescued him from his pride.
what is your strength mifflin asked.
nine thousand washington replied.
it is not sufficient said mifflin bluntly.
we must retreat fading hopes ihe battle for new york city was the first of many defeats for the americans.
in the weeks that followed british forces chased the americans out of new york through new jersey and finally across the delaware river into pennsylvania.
for joseph martin and his comrades this was a trying time.
there was little food to eat and the soldiers grew weak from hunger.
as the weather turned cold muddy roads and icy streams added to their misery.
with their terms of enlistment nearly up many soldiers headed for home.
along the way they spread the word that anyone who volunteered to risk his life in the continental army had to be crazy.
by the time washington reached pennsylvania only a few thousand men were still under his command.
many of his remaining troops he reported were entirely naked and most so thinly clad clothed as to be unfit for service more troops had to be found and found quickly he wrote his brother.
otherwise i think the game will be pretty well up while chasing the retreating conti.
nental army british soldiers looted the.
homes of americans both patriots and loyalists.
such actions turned many former supporters into enemies.
j i the american revolution 123 7 5 a pep talk and surprise victories by the end of 1776 the british also thought the war was just about over.
general howe offered to pardon all rebels who signed a statement promising to remain in peaceful obedience to the king.
thousands took him up on his offer.
with morale low and his soldiers threatening to return home george washington planned a daring attack on the hessians at trenton.
crossing the ice choked delaware river at night he surprised the enemy overwhelming them completely.
the crisis washington knew he had to do something quickly.
gathering his last troops together he read to them from thomas paines new pamphlet the crisis.
these are the times that try mens souls.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the service of their country but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.
next washington outlined a daring plan to attack hessian troops who were camped for the winter in trenton new jersey.
heartened by thomas paines words his men did not shrink from the service of their country victory in trenton late on december 25 1776 washingtons army crossed the ice choked delaware river in small boats.
on the new jersey shore washington gave his men the password for the long nighttime march ahead victory or death as the american troops made their way toward trenton a driving snow chilled them to the bone.
ice and rocks cut through their worn out shoes.
one officer reported to washington that the troops guns were too wet to fire.
use the bayonets the general replied.
the town must be taken when the americans reached trenton they found the hessians happily sleeping off their christmas feasts.
caught completely by surprise the mercenaries surrendered.
washington took 868 prisoners without losing even a single man.
a week later the americans captured another 300 british troops at princeton new jersey.
these defeats convinced howe that it would take more than capturing new york city and issuing pardons to win the war.
news of washingtons victories electrified patriots.
a few days ago they had given up their cause for lost wrote an unhappy loyalist.
their late successes have turned the scale and they are all liberty mad again the game was not yet up.
4 chapter 7 7 6 the tide begins to turn when the american revolution began both sides adopted the same military strategy or overall plan for winning the war.
that strategy was to defeat the enemy in one big battle.
after barely escaping from his loss in new york washington revised his strategy.
in the future he wrote congress he would avoid large battles that might put his army at risk.
instead the war would be defensive rather than defeating the british washington hoped to tire them out.
a new british strategy germain revised the british strategy as well.
his new plan was to divide the rebels by taking control of new yorks hudson river valley.
control of this waterway would allow the british to cut new england off from the rest of the states.
without men and supplies from the new england states the continental army would surely collapse.
to carry out this plan general john burgoyne ber goin left canada in june 1777 with about 8 000 british soldiers and american indian warriors.
he planned to move this army south to albany new york.
there he would meet up with general howe who was supposed to march his army north from new york city.
catherine schulyer was the wife of philip schulyer a major general in the continental army and a member of the continental congress.
they lived near albany in the path of british forces advancing toward saratoga.
to leave nothing useful for the british catherine burned the family wheatfields.
problems with burgoyne s plan there were two big problems with burgoynes plan.
the first was that what looked like an easy invasion route on a map was anything but easy.
the route burgoyne chose from canada to albany took his army through more than 20 miles of tangled wilderness.
his army had to build bridges chop down countless trees and lay out miles of log roads through swamps as it crept toward albany.
to make matters worse burgoyne didnt travel light.
his army was slowed by more than 600 wagons 30 of them filled with his personal baggage.
even in the wilderness gentleman johnny burgoyne sipped champagne with his supper.
the second problem with burgoynes plan was that general howe had his own ideas about how to win the war.
instead of marching to albany howe headed for philadelphia the rebels capital.
there he hoped to lure washington into another major battle.
howe hoped it would be the last one.
washington however refused to risk his army in another big battle.
he would not fight for philadelphia.
instead he played hide and seek with howe attacking here and there and then disappearing into the countryside.
strategy an overall plan such as for winning a war the american revolution 125 ally a nation that joins another nation in some common effort such as fighting a war a turning point by the time the slow moving burgoyne finally reached saratoga springs on the hudson river the area was swarming with militia.
although the rebels outnumbered his army burgoyne ordered an attack.
again and again the rebels beat back burgoyne s troops.
on october 17 1777 burgoyne accepted defeat.
burgoynes surrender marked a turning point in the war.
before the victory at saratoga most of the world believed that the american cause was hopeless.
now the americans had shown they could stand up to a british army and win.
not long after this victory france came into the war as an ally of the united states.
the french government sent money weapons troops and warships to the americans.
spain also entered the war against great britain.
the american cause no longer looked quite so hopeless.
george washington is shown at right with the marquis de lafayette at valley forge.
lafayette a frenchman who aided the americans described the american soldiers there as in want of everything they had neither coats nor hats nor shirts nor shoes their feet and their legs froze until they grew black.
winter at valley forge saratoga was a stunning victory but the war was far from over.
while general washingtons army roamed the countryside howes forces still occupied philadelphia.
late in 1777 congress declared a day of thanksgiving for the armys successes.
by this time washington and his army were on their way to valley forge pennsylvania to make camp for the winter.
joseph martin described the armys celebration we had nothing to eat for two or three days previous.
but we must now have what congress said a sumptuous lavish thanksgiving.
it gave each and every man a gill a few ounces of rice and a tablespoon of vinegar.
the army was now not only starved but naked.
the greatest part were not only shirtless and barefoot but destitute of without all other clothing especially blankets.
washingtons troops were hungry because many farmers preferred to sell food to the british.
the british paid them in gold whereas congress paid them in paper money.
as for uniforms and blankets merchants had raised the prices for these items sky high.
this desire for profits at the armys expense outraged washington.
no punishment he fumed is too great for the man who can build his greatness upon his countrys ruin to help lift his men from their misery washington put 126 chapter 7 baron friedrich von steuben free drik von stu bin in charge of training.
a military officer from prussia in modern day germany von steuben arrived in december 1777 and set to work turning the continental army into an organized fighting force.
the prussian s method wrote martin was continual drill it worked wonders.
the army grows stronger every day wrote one officer.
there is a spirit of discipline among the troops that is better than numbers another foreign volunteer the marquis de lafayette mar kee duh la fey et also helped raise the troops spirits.
although he was one of the richest men in france lafayette chose to share the hardships of valley forge.
he even used his own money to buy the men warm clothing.
the patient fortitude courage of the officers and soldiers lafayette wrote was a continual miracle when at last spring arrived washington received news that the british were about to abandon philadelphia.
the time had come to put his newly trained army to the test.
the battle of monmouth by this time sir henry clinton had replaced general howe as commander of the british forces in north america.
in clintons view taking over philadelphia had gained the british nothing.
he ordered his army to retreat to new york city where the royal navy could keep it supplied by sea.
now it was washingtons turn to chase an army across new jersey.
on june 28 1778 he caught up with the retreating british near monmouth new jersey.
in the battle that followed washington seemed to be everywhere constantly rallying his men to stand and fight.
cheering them by his voice and example wrote lafayette never had i beheld seen so superb a man late that night the british slipped across the hudson river to safety in new york city.
washington camped with his army nearby.
it was pleasing he wrote that after two years maneuvering both armies are brought back to the very point they set out from.
neither army knew it yet but the war in the north was over.
at the battle of monmouth in new jersey george washington led his troops in an attack on retreating british forces although the americans won the british were able to slip away during the night and sail safely to new york.
the american revolution 127 this engraving shows francis marion crossing the pee dee river in south carolina.
marion known as the swamp fox because of his tactic of ambushing the british from the marshes of the south never led a force of more than 70 men.
7 7 the war moves south after failing to conquer any state in the north the british changed strategies yet again.
their new plan was to move the war to the south.
there they believed thousands of loyalists were just waiting to join the kings cause.
clinton began his southern campaign with a successful attack on savannah georgia.
from georgia he moved north to take control of north and south carolina.
at that point clinton returned to new york city leaving lord charles cornwallis to control the war in the south.
saving the south cornwallis soon learned that he did not really control the carolinas after all.
guerrillas soldiers who are not part of a regular army kept the american cause alive.
one of them was francis marion who was also known as the swamp fox marions band of rebels harassed the british with hit and run raids.
they attacked and then faded into the swamps and forests like foxes.
late in 1780 washington sent general nathanael greene to slow the british advance through the south.
greenes army was too small to meet cornwallis in a major battle.
instead greene led cornwalliss troops on an exhausting chase through the southern backcountry.
he wrote of his strategy we fight get beat rise and fight again greenes strategy worked wonderfully.
in april 1781 cornwallis wrote that he was quite tired of marching about the country he moved his army to yorktown a sleepy tobacco port on chesapeake bay in virginia for a good rest.
er7 a trap at yorktown by the time cornwallis was settling into yorktown france had sent nearly 5 000 troops to join washingtons army in new york.
in august washington learned that another 3 000 troops were scheduled to arrive soon in 29 french warships.
washington used this information to set a trap for cornwallis.
secretly he moved his army south to virginia.
when they arrived they joined the french and surrounded yorktown on land with more than 16 000 troops.
meanwhile the french warships showed up just in time to seal off the entrance to chesapeake bay.
their appearance was crucial to the american victory.
now cornwallis was cut off from the british navy and any hope of rescue by sea.
the trap was sprung on october 6 1781.
joseph martin watched as a flag was raised to signal that american and french gunners should open fire on yorktown.
i confess i felt a secret pride swell in my heart he wrote when i saw the star spangled banner waving majestically the shelling went on for days until most of the guns in the enemys works were silenced three groups the british the americans and the french were involved in the battle of yorktown.
the americans with the aid of the french were able to surround the british by using forces on both land and sea.
battle of yorktown the american revolution 129 this painting by john trumbull shows the british surrender at yorktown.
at the center is general benjamin lincoln leading the british.
general washington is on the right in front of the american flag.
on the left are french polish and prussian soldiers.
cornwallis surrenders at first cornwallis clung to the hope that the british navy would come to his rescue even as yorktown was exploding around him.
when no ships arrived he finally agreed to surrender.
on october 19 1781 american and french troops formed two long lines that stretched for more than a mile along the road to yorktown the french on one side and the americans on the other.
the two lines could not have looked more different.
the french were dressed in elegant uniforms that gleamed with gold and silver braid in the afternoon sun.
the americans uniforms and not everyone even had uniforms were patched and faded.
behind the lines stood civilians who had traveled for miles to witness the surrender.
after hours of waiting the crowd watched as 8 000 british troops left yorktown to lay down their arms.
the defeated troops moved with slow and solemn step they were accompanied by a slow tune known as the world turned upside down this same sad tune had been played at saratoga after the british surrender.
cornwallis did not take part in this ceremony saying that he was ill.
in reality the british commander could not bear to surrender publicly to an army that he looked down on as a contemptible and undisciplined rabble mob while cornwallis sulked in his tent his men surrendered their arms.
many of them wept bitter tears.
to the watching americans there was nothing sad about that day.
it was a noble sight to us wrote martin and the more so as it seemed to promise a speedy conclusion to the contest 0 chapter 7 key battles of the american revolution this map shows key battles of the american revolution.
in the early part of the war major battles took place mostly in the new england colonies and the middle colonies in the north.
as the war continued battles moved southward.
in which colony and region did the battle of princeton take place.
in which colony and region did the battle of yorktown take place.
the american revolution 131 the ideals of the american revolution inspired calls for liberty equality and fraternity in france.
france s support forthe war deepened its national debt and caused suffering among its people.
in 1789 france s monarchy was overthrown.
this painting shows a violent clash between french commoners and king louis xvi s troops during the french revolution.
7 8 the war ends the conclusion of the war did not come as quickly as martin had hoped.
when lord north the british prime minister heard about cornwalliss defeat at yorktown he paced up and down the room repeating oh god.
it is all over when the british people heard about the defeat most of them accepted it.
the loss at yorktown drained any remaining support for the war.
still months dragged by before king george was finally forced to accept that the british had been defeated.
for most americans the end of the war was a time for joy and celebration.
they had gained the freedom to govern themselves and create their own future.
but liberty came at a high price.
at least 6 200 americans had been killed in combat.
an estimated 10 000 died in camp of diseases and another 8 500 died while in captivity as british prisoners.
as a proportion of the total population more americans died fighting in the american revolution than in any other conflict except the civil war in which americans fought one another.
the treaty of paris early in 1783 representatives of the united states and great britain signed a peace treaty in paris.
the treaty of paris had three important parts.
first great britain agreed to recognize the united states as an independent nation.
second great britain gave up its claims to all lands between the atlantic coast and the mississippi river from the border of canada south to florida.
third the united states agreed to return all rights and property taken from loyalists during the war.
many loyalists did not trust the treatys promise of fair treatment and for good reason.
during the war loyalists had been treated badly by patriots.
more than 80 000 loyalists both black and white left the united states to settle in british canada.
132 chapter 7 the impact of the american revolution the american revolution had a major impact in other parts of the world.
in europe it thrilled liberals who dreamed of creating their own democracies.
the american example was especially influential in france which soon had its own revolution.
as one frenchman wrote they americans are the hope of the human race they may well become its model indeed in the 1800s that model would help inspire revolts against european rule in south america.
j chapter summary in this chapter you read how the american colonies won their independence from great britain.
american strengths and weaknesses the continental army was short of men and few men were trained for battle.
the americans also lacked adequate weapons and food.
their strengths included patriotism support from france and washington as their military leader.
british strengths and weaknesses british troops greatly outnumbered american troops and were better trained and equipped.
sending troops and supplies to the colonies was slow and costly.
the british also had poor leadership and a lack of support from people at home.
great britain almost wins the war the british won a series of victories early in the war.
after the loss of new york city only washingtons leadership kept the colonists going.
a pep talk and surprising victories thomas paines the crisis encouraged americans to keep fighting.
colonial victories at trenton and princeton gave new hope for their cause.
the tide begins to turn the colonists victory in the battle of saratoga in 1777 marked a turning point in the war.
shortly afterward france and spain joined the colonies as allies.
the war goes south the british moved south into georgia and the carolinas but american troops slowed their advance.
the british surrendered after the battle of yorktown.
the war ends the conflict ended with the signing of the treaty of paris in 1783.
under the terms of the treaty great britain recognized the united states as an independent country.
the war officially ended with the signing of the treaty of paris in 1783.
british troops agreed to leave american soil with all convenient speed.
the american revolution 133 reading further george washington hated to leave his wife martha but he believed in the cause of freedom.
so he agreed to lead the colonial war effort.
george washington a warrior spirit and a caring heart everyone knows stories about george washington.
from chopping down the cherry tree to helping the nation win independence the stories make washington sound larger than life.
washington s writings reveal a more complex person.
behind his strong public presence was a man of many sentiments.
he balanced a deep love of his family with a commitment to fighting for his country.
he coupled bravery with concern caution and compassion.
in 1775 the continental congress asked george washington to lead the colonial army.
washington was living on his estate at mount vernon virginia at the time.
he had proven his military skills in the french and indian war.
and he had the added benefit of coming from the south.
if he were to command the army congress thought he might tie the southern colonies more firmly to the cause.
washington believed deeply in that cause.
still he had his doubts about taking on the important job congress offered.
young soldiers like joseph plumb martin a connecticut farm boy looked forward to going to war.
but washington was 43 years old and had fought in wars before.
he knew it would be hard to leave his home and family.
in a letter to his wife martha he said i should enjoy more real happiness in one month with you at home than i have the most distant prospect of finding abroad away from home if my stay were to be seven times seven years eventually washington did lead the colonists to victory but in 1775 he was not sure he would be able to do so.
he worried he would not be clever enough to ensure that the colonists would win the war.
he thanked congress for the honor of being asked to lead.
he told them about his concerns but said he would do everything he could to help the colonists reach their goal.
in a speech to congress he said i feel great distress from a consciousness that my abilities and military experience may not be equal to the extensive and important trust.
however as the congress desire it i will enter upon the momentous duty and exert every power i possess in their service and for the support of the glorious cause.
the man s compassion washington was a general but he understood the hardships his soldiers faced.
at the top of the list was low pay.
he felt bad that his men had to do so much hard work for so little money.
he also knew that low pay kept some men from enlisting.
a soldier cannot ruin himself and family to serve his country he told congress.
34 chapt er 7 washington witnessed the terrible shortages his soldiers lived with.
joseph plumb martin felt the sting of the shortages.
he went for days without food and made simple moccasins to keep his feet off the ice.
years later martin wrote in his a narrative of a revolutionary soldier 1830 that it was ironic that soldiers for a noble cause were so poorly equipped.
he described the soldiers marching through princeton new jersey.
the young ladies of the town had collected and were sitting in the stoops and at the windows to see the noble exhibition of a thousand half starved and three quarters naked soldiers pass in review before them.
the soldiers suffering upset washington.
he repeatedly asked for more supplies.
during the harsh winter at valley forge he wrote to congress.
in a letter dated december 23 1777 he accused the congressmen of not understanding what his soldiers went through.
1 can assure those gentlemen that it is a much easier and less distressing thing to draw remonstrances listen to protests in a comfortable room by a good fireside than to occupy a cold bleak hill and sleep under frost and snow without clothes or blankets.
however although they seem to have little feeling for the naked and distressed soldiers i feel superabundantly for them and from my soul i pity those miseries which it is neither in my power to relieve or prevent.
george washington cared about his soldiers suffering.
here he is shown visiting wounded men at valley forge during the winter of 1777 78.
the american revolution 135 washington expected his soldiers to fight well.
but early in the war he had to lead their retreat from a battle at long island new york.
the general s concerns george washington balanced sympathy for his soldiers with his responsibility as their leader.
for example he knew that soldiers did not want to leave home any more than he did.
but his sympathy only went so far.
when it came down to it washington worried that homesick men made poor soldiers.
they threatened his mission.
they threatened the colonists success.
men just dragged from the tender scenes of domestic life he wrote were easily scared by the hard life of a soldier.
such soldiers might desert the army and encourage others to desert too.
the compassionate washington wanted his soldiers to get paid more.
but he still expected them to fight and fight hard.
he scorned their lack of discipline.
he was horrified by what happened at the battle of new york in 1776.
i found the troops.
retreating las fast as possible and those ordered to support them flying in every direction and in the greatest confusion.
i used every means in my power to rally and get them into some order but my attempts were ineffectual on the appearance of a small party of the enemy their disorder increased and they ran away in the greatest confusion without firing a single shot.
the general knew that such chaos would never win the war.
he did everything he could to see to it that soldiers who neglected their duties were punished.
similarly while washington sympathized with his soldiers being hungry as general he prohibited them from stealing food.
his reason was practical as much as it was moral.
too often people killed soldiers who tried to steal from them.
he wrote to one of his colonels every attempt of the men to plunder houses orchards gardens etc should be discouraged not only for the preservation of property and sake of good order but for the prevention of those fatal consequences which usually follow such diabolical practices.
of course the generals rules were not always obeyed.
during the winter at valley forge an officer ordered joseph plumb martin to steal to help keep the soldiers from starving.
the work was not altogether unpleasant martin wrote in a narrative of a revolutionary soldier but it was definitely stealing.
he described it this way.
i had to travel far and near.
and at all times to run the risk of abuse if not injury from the inhabitants when plundering them of their property for i could not while in the very act of taking their cattle hay corn and grain from them against their wills consider it a whit better than plundering sheer privateering stealing under the authority of a government.
worry and praise courage and kindness george washington worried about his reputation.
he wanted people to respect him.
but if the colonies lost the war washington knew that people would think less of him.
that worry gave even the great general cause for concern.
he once wrote to his cousin that i never was in such an unhappy divided state since i was born to a confidant he wrote that his army service was one continued round of annoyance and fatigue nonetheless washington kept fighting for the cause of freedom.
as the war dragged on he praised his soldiers for putting up such a good fight against the british the most powerful army in the world.
in a letter he wrote without arrogance it may be said that no history can furnish an instance of an army s suffering such uncommon hardships as ours have done and bearing them with the same patience and fortitude.
when the war was over washington did everything he could to see that the soldiers received fair pay from the new government.
when he said goodbye to his officers george washington again balanced courage and kindness.
the commander in chief one general reported was suffused in tears he could not speak because he had such strong feelings for his men.
in the final goodbye washington revealed both his warrior spirit and his caring heart.
george washington bid an emotional farewell to his officers at fraunces tavern in new york in 1783.
the tavern owner samuel fraunces was a free black man of french and african descent.
he would become chief steward at president washington s house in philadelphia.
blk ijfc 1 ft 7 r a the granger collection newyork the american revolution 137 unit 2 timeline challenge revolution in the colonies 1754 1763 french and indian war this war between france and great britain results in a victory for great britain and a vastly expanded american empire.
1750 colonies meet to devise peaceful solutions to the conflicts with great britain.
1763 1767 colonial taxation british parliament passes a series of taxes on the colonies resulting in protests from many colonists.
1774 intolerable acts british parliament passes the intolerable acts to punish the colonists for their support of the boston tea party.
1770 boston massacre five bostonians are killed during a brawl between colonists and british soldiers.
the incident causes an outcry of injustice throughout the colonies.
1775 battles of lexington and concord lexington and concord become the first sites where the british army and colonial militias battle over control of the colonies.
the clashes mark the start of the warfor independence from great britain.
unit 2 1775 battle of bunker hill british troops invade colonial fortifications overlooking boston in the battle of bunker hill.
1790 1776 declaration of independence the declaration of independence is approved by the second continental congress and declares to the world that the british colonies are now a free and independent nation.
1776 common sense thomas paine writes common sense which persuades many colonists to support the idea that the colonies should be independent from great britain.
common sense to th inhabitant f america oa ihe faltonrieg iasr sut subje cts.
j ot tie origin and offige of gowimeal geaan.
dec 1776 jan 1777 battles of trenton and princeton american victories in these battles reenergize the continental army after it suffers many defeats in previous battles with the british army.
1781 battle of yorktown the british army surrenders at yorktown virginia after being trapped by american and french forces.
slltglllm nr 1783 treaty of paris the treaty of paris is signed formally ending the war fought between great britain and the united states during the american revolution.
revolution in the colonies 139 unit 3 setting the stage forming a new nation the 13 states that independence brought together to form the united states of america had very different physical and human geographic features.
most of the southern states were larger than most of the northern states.
however as the map on the opposite page shows a state s population often had little relation to its size.
for example the populations of tiny rhode island and the much larger georgia were close to the same.
for the colonists differences between the states geographic features raised basic questions about what form the nation s government should take.
should a large state like georgia have the same voice in government as a small state like connecticut which had a greater population.
should connecticut have as much power as new york which was larger and had more people too.
at first the answer to both questions was yes.
under the nation s first constitution called the articles of confederation each state had one vote in congress.
in time however some people began to question the fairness of this system.
yet basing a state s political power on its population raised other questions.
for example should a state with both slaves and free people have as much power as a state with no slaves and the same total population.
the populations of the southern states contained a high percentage of slaves as the maps on this page show.
the maps also show that counting only free people would drop most of these states in the population rankings compared to the northern states.
such geographic concerns arose in 1787 when representatives of 12 states met to write a new constitution for the united states.
in this unit you will learn how the delegates handled population related disputes and other issues in framing the form of government we have today.
forming a new nation 143 106 chapter 6 chapter 6 the declaration of independence what principles of government are expressed in the declaration of independence.
6 1 introduction the battles of lexington and concord marked the start of the fighting that would lead to independence from great britain.
the day after the clashes horseback riders galloped through the colonies with news of the barbarous murders of innocent militiamen.
most americans were deeply shocked.
more urgently than ever they debated what the colonies should do about the trouble with great britain.
the choices were clear enough.
the colonies could declare their independence.
or they could continue with protests and petitions or formal requests.
this second choice would keep the colonies at peace but at what cost to the colonists freedom.
no one was more outspoken in his support for independence than patrick henry of virginia.
after the passage of the intolerable acts henry delivered to the virginia house of burgesses one of the most famous speeches in american history.
there is no longer any room for hope he began.
if we wish to be free we must fight.
our chains are forged.
their clanking may be heard on the plains of boston.
the war is inevitable and let it come then henry spoke to those who treasured peace above freedom gentlemen may cry.
peace peace but there is no peace.
the war is actually begun.
the next gale that sweeps from the north will bring to our ears the clash of resounding arms.
what is it that gentlemen wish.
is life so dear or peace so sweet as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery.
forbid it almighty god.
i know not what course others may take but as for me give me liberty or give me death.
despite the passionate words of patriots like henry most colonists remained unsure about separating from great britain.
as you will read only after the fighting started did they decide to declare independence.
patrick henry of virginia gave a speech in may 1775 that helped lead the colonies closerto independence.
the declaration of independence was adopted on july 4 1776.
this painting shows the committee that drafted the declaration.
the declaration of independence 107 orderly rows of british soldiers marched up breed s hill and eventually defeated the american forces when the colonists ran out of gunpowder.
the fierce fighting proved the british would not easily defeat the colonists.
6 2 the colonists organize an army on may 10 1775 the second continental congress met in philadelphia.
by then new england militia had amassed around boston.
the first question facing congress was who should command this new england army the obvious answer was a new englander.
george washington and the continental army john adams of massachusetts had another idea.
he proposed that congress create a continental army made up of troops from all the colonies.
to lead this army adams nominated a gentleman whose skill and experience as an officer whose great talents and excellent universal character would unite the colonies better than any other person alive.
that man was george washington of virginia who had distinguished himself in the french and indian war.
the delegates agreed.
they unanimously elected washington to be commander in chief of the new continental army.
the battle of bunker hill meanwhile militiamen near boston made plans to fortify two hills that overlooked the city bunker hill and breed s hill.
on the night of june 16 1775 israel putnam led a few hundred men up breed s hill.
in four hours of furious digging they erected a crude fort on the top of the hill.
the fort worried british general william howe who had just arrived from england with fresh troops.
howe ordered an immediate attack.
under a hot june sun some 2 000 british troops formed two long lines at the base of breeds hill.
at howes order the redcoats marched up the slope.
as the lines moved ever closer putnam ordered his men dont fire until you see the whites of their eyes only when the british were almost on top of them did the militiamen pull their triggers.
the red lines broke and fell back in confusion.
the british regrouped and attacked again.
once more the americans stopped their advance.
on their third attack the redcoats finally 8 chapter 6 took the hill but only because the americans had used up all their gunpowder and pulled back.
this clash which became known as the battle of bunker hill was short but very bloody.
more than 1 000 british troops and nearly half that many americans were killed or wounded.
h george washington turned an undisciplined army composed of troops from all the colonies into an effective fighting force.
general washington takes command george washington took command of his new army shortly after the battle of bunker hill.
he found a mixed multitude of people.
under very little discipline order or government washington worked hard to impose order.
one man wrote everyone is made to know his place and keep in it.
it is surprising how much work has been done a month later however a dismayed washington learned that the army had only 36 barrels of gunpowder enough for each soldier to fire just nine shots.
to deceive the british washington started a rumor in boston that he had 1 800 barrels of gun powder more than he knew what to do with.
luckily the british believed the rumor.
meanwhile washington sent desperate letters to the colonies begging for gunpowder.
washington got his powder.
but he still did not dare attack the british forces in boston.
to do that he needed artillery heavy guns such as cannons to bombard their defenses.
in desperation washington sent a boston bookseller named henry knox to fort ticonderoga to round up some big guns.
ticonderoga was an old british fort located at the southern end of lake champlain in new york.
a few months earlier militiamen led by ethan allen and benedict arnold had seized the fort.
the americans had little use for the run down fort but its guns would prove priceless.
as winter set in knox loaded 59 cannons onto huge sleds and dragged them 300 miles to boston.
knoxs 42 sleds also carried 2 300 pounds of lead for making bullets.
boston was about to be under siege.
the british abandon boston on march 4 1776 the british soldiers in boston awoke to a frightening sight.
the night before the ridges of nearby dorchester heights had been bare.
now they bristled with cannons all aimed at the city.
rather than risk another battle general howe abandoned the city.
within days more than a hundred ships left boston harbor for canada.
the ships carried 9 000 british troops as well as 1 100 loyalists who preferred to leave their homes behind rather than live with rebels.
some americans hoped the war was over.
washington however knew it was only the beginning.
the declaration of independence 109 independence freedom from control by another government or country petition a formal written request made to an official person or organization common sense a pamphlet published in 1776 by thomas paine that persuaded many american colonists to support independence declaration of independence the document written to declare the american colonies as an independent nation free from british rule common sense addtcmcd to th inhabitants o f america on the following intert ng s u b j b c t s l of the origin and defign of government in general with concife remarks on the enghfli conoituuoa.
of monarchy and hereditary socceffion.
thoughts on the pnfent state of american affair iv.
of tho prefent ability of america with feme mif.
cellaneons refie ians.
man know no mafter fave owing hsav n.
or tbofe whoa choke and common good ordam.
philadelphia.
piiattd and sold by r bell in third sureet.
thomas paine published the pamphlet common senseto persuade colonists to support independence from great britain.
6 3 on the eve of independence nearly a year passed between the skirmishes at lexington and concord and the british retreat from boston.
during that time there was little talk of independence.
most colonists still considered themselves loyal british subjects.
their quarrel was not with great britain itself but with its policies toward the colonies.
the olive branch petition many americans pinned their hopes for peace on king george.
in july 1775 the second continental congress sent a petition to george iii asking him to end the quarrel.
john adams called the petition an olive branch olive tree branches are an ancient symbol of peace.
by the time the petition reached london however the king had declared the colonies to be in open and avowed rebellion he ordered his ministers to bring the traitors to justice being called a traitor was enough to change the mind of one of washingtons generals.
the general confessed that he had long looked with some degree of horror on the scheme of separation now he agreed with patrick henry that colonists must be independent or slaves common sense many colonists however still looked with horror at the idea of independence.
then early in 1776 a patriot named thomas paine published a fiery pamphlet entitled common sense.
paine scoffed at the idea that americans owed any loyalty to king george.
of more worth is one honest man to society he wrote than all the crowned ruffians who ever lived paine also attacked the argument that the colonies ties to great britain had benefited americans.
just the opposite was true he said.
american trade had suffered under british control.
americans had also been hurt by being dragged into great britains european wars.
paine ended with a vision of an independent america as a homeland of liberty.
ye that love mankind he urged.
ye that dare oppose not only the tyranny but the tyrant stand forth.
the sun never shined on a cause of greater worth within a few months more than 120 000 copies of common sense were printed in the colonies.
paines arguments helped persuade thousands of colonists that independence was not only sensible but that it was the key to a brighter future.
6 4 thomas jefferson drafts a declaration a few weeks after the british left boston the second continental congress appointed a committee to write a declaration or formal statement of independence.
the task of drafting the declaration of independence went to the committees youngest member 33 year old thomas jefferson of virginia.
a shy man jefferson said little in ongress but he stated his ideas brilliantly in writing.
110 chapter 6 jeffersons job was to explain to the world why the colonies were choosing to separate from britain.
when in the course of human events he began if one group of people finds it necessary to break its ties with another a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they explain their actions.
principles on which to base a new government jeffersons explanation was simple but revolutionary.
loyalists had argued that colonists had a duty to obey the king whose authority came from god.
jefferson reasoned quite differently.
he based his arguments on the principle of natural rights.
all people are born equal in gods sight he reasoned and all are entitled to the same basic rights.
in jeffersons eloquent words we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
governments are formed jefferson said to secure these rights their power to rule comes from the consent of the governed if a government fails to protect peoples fundamental rights it is the right of the people to alter or abolish it the people can then create a new government that will protect their safety and happiness.
after thomas jefferson wrote the first draft of the declaration of independence benjamin franklin and john adams suggested changes.
the king s crimes king george jefferson continued had shown no concern for the rights of colonists.
instead the king s policies had been aimed at establishing an absolute tyranny over these states the colonies.
as proof jefferson included a long list of the king s abuses.
in all these actions jefferson claimed george iii had shown he was unfit to be the ruler of a free people the time had come jefferson concluded for the colonies ties to great britain to be broken.
these united colonies are he declared and of right ought to be free and independent states.
natural rights rights common to everyone as opposed to those given by law the declaration of independence 111 6 5 the final break on july 1 1776 the second continental congress met in philadelphias state house to debate independence.
by noon the temperature outside had soared into the nineties and a thunderstorm was gathering.
inside the state house emotions were equally hot and stormy.
by the end of the day the issue was still undecided.
the next day was cooler and calmer.
on july 2 all but one of the 13 colonies voted for independence.
new york cast no vote.
no delegate was more excited about the colonies decision than john adams.
he wrote to his wife abigail the second day of july will be celebrated by succeeding generations with pomp and parade with shews shows games sports guns bells bonfires and illuminations from one end of this continent to the other from this time forward forever more any mention of slavery was removed from the declaration of independence because the slave trade was important to the economy of many colonies.
in the triangular trade shown here rum and iron were shipped from new england to africa.
in africa these products were exchanged for slaves.
the slaves were taken to the west indies where many were traded for molasses and sugar.
finally molasses sugar and remaining slaves were broughtto new england.
debate over slavery adams was wrong about the date that would be celebrated as americas birthday but only because congress decided to revise jeffersons declaration.
the delegates liked most of what they read except for a passage on slavery.
jefferson had charged king george with violating the sacred rights of life and liberty of a distant people by carrying them into slavery almost no one liked this passage.
southerners feared that it might lead to demands to free the slaves.
enslaved african americans provided much of the labor used on southern farms.
northerners worried that new england merchants who benefited from the slave trade might be offended.
even delegates who opposed slavery felt it was unfair to blame the king for enslaving africans.
the passage was removed.
triangular trade and the enslavement of africans 112 chapter 6 this poster shows the delegates leaving independence hall in philadelphia to announce the signing of the declaration of independence.
independence day on july 4 the delegates approved a final version of the declaration of independence.
when they signed the document they pledged to support independence with our lives our fortunes and our sacred honor this was a serious pledge.
every signer understood that he was committing an act of treason against great britain.
if the new nation failed to win its freedom each of them could very well end up swinging from a hangman s rope.
knowing this benjamin franklin told the delegates we must all hang together or assuredly we shall all hang separately chapter summary in this chapter you read how the american colonies took the dramatic step of declaring their independence.
the colonists organize an army george washington took command of the continental army after the battle of bunker hill.
the continental army used cannons brought from fort ticonderoga in new york to force the british to abandon boston in march 1776.
on the eve of independence the failure of the olive branch petition and the success of thomas paines pamphlet common sense moved the colonies closer to the decision to declare independence from great britain.
thomas jefferson drafts a declaration thomas jefferson a delegate to the second continental congress was selected to write the declaration of independence.
the final break on july 4 1776 the delegates approved the declaration of independence.
for the first time in history a government was being established on the principle of peoples natural rights and the duty of government to honor those rights.
the declaration of independence 113 reading further little in thomas paine s early life gave a hint of his future importance.
yet his pamphlet common sense would help stirthe fires of american independence.
the power of common sense in january 1776 the pamphlet common sense was published in philadelphia.
the document caused an immediate sensation.
in powerful language the writer thomas paine made a compelling case for separation from great britain.
paine had not been in the colonies for long.
but his call for an end to british rule would help pave the way for american independence.
on november 30 1774 the ship london packet arrived in the port of philadelphia.
on board was a 37 year old englishman named thomas paine.
paine was not even aware that he had landed in america.
he was burning up with fever and was barely conscious.
he had caught the deadly disease typhus which had already killed several people on board.
at the time disease was just one of the perils of travel across the atlantic.
violent storms collisions with icebergs and pirate attacks were other hazards.
one ship took so long to cross the ocean that the food ran out and many of the passengers starved to death.
paine was lucky to be alive but he was still very ill.
unable to walk he was carried ashore in a blanket.
a local doctor agreed to nurse him back to health.
it was not a promising start to life in america.
but then not very much in paines life had gone well.
he had held and lost a number of different jobs.
he had been a craftsman a teacher a tax collector and a shopkeeper.
in the end though he had little to show for his efforts.
he had no money and few prospects.
but he did have one important asset for his new life letters of introduction from benjamin franklin.
paine had met franklin in london and had impressed him with his sharp mind and his interest in science and politics.
franklin encouraged paine to move to pennsylvania and gave him letters of reference calling him an ingenious worthy young man these letters would help paine start a new life.
paine finds his calling paine had arrived in the largest and most prosperous city in colonial america.
philadelphia was a bustling place of around 30 000 people and the third largest port in the british empire.
set along the banks of the delaware river philadelphia was the financial and cultural capital of the colonies.
it was also a center of political activity.
in fact the continental congress had held its first meeting there not long before paines arrival.
the city was buzzing with talk of politics.
chapter 6 with the help of franklins introduction paine soon landed a job as the editor of a new magazine.
he had already done some writing in england.
but it was here that he discovered his true calling as a writer.
paine soon made his publication pennsylvania magazine the most widely read magazine in the colonies.
magazines were fairly new at the time.
but along with pamphlets they were becoming increasingly popular.
they were quicker and cheaper to publish than books and that kept their price low.
they also offered the space to cover issues in greater detail than newspapers could.
this made them appealing to a public that had a growing appetite for information.
at first paine wrote articles mainly about cultural and scientific subjects.
but he soon moved on to political topics.
paines years as a tax collector had left him with no love for the british government.
his articles criticized british officials and colonial rule.
these stories did not please the loyalist citizens of philadelphia who favored strong ties to great britain.
on the other hand they did appeal to readers with patriot sympathies.
one of these readers was benjamin rush a doctor who would later play a key role in the independence struggle.
rush encouraged paine to write a pamphlet on independence though he cautioned him not to use that word.
the idea of independence made many colonists uneasy.
they might complain about british rule but the prospect of separating from great britain scared them.
it did not scare paine though.
in october 1775 he began working on the essay he would call common sense.
philadelphia in the 1770s was a beautiful city with brick streets and fine buildings.
chestnut street shown here was atthe center of the city.
an appeal to common sense by december paine had finished his essay.
but he had trouble getting it published.
the subject of independence was just too hot for many publishers to handle.
as paine noted at the time colonists were so attached to great britain that it was a kind of treason to speak against it.
eventually however paine found a publisher who agreed to print a thousand copies as a pamphlet.
it was 46 pages long.
the pamphlet did not have paines name on the cover but simply said written by an englishman on january 10 1776 common sense appeared in bookstores.
what happened next was astonishing.
the first edition sold out in days.
paine had more copies printed and those sold out too.
within a few months readers had bought more than 120 000 copies of common sense.
by the end of the year 25 editions had been printed.
hundreds of thousands of copies were in circulation throughout the colonies.
it is estimated that as many as half of all colonial citizens had either read the pamphlet or had it read to them.
common sense was a runaway success.
and thomas paine was americas first bestselling author.
what explains this stunning result.
evidently paine had touched a nerve.
the public was not as resistant to the idea of independence as he and others had feared.
paines success lay in his ability to present separation as logical and reasonable as a matter of common sense.
he used language that was direct clear and powerful.
drawing on the shared experience of colonists he built a persuasive case for independence.
the sun never shined on a cause of greater worth he wrote.
tis not the affair of a city a country a province or a kingdom but of a continent tis not the concern of a day a year or an age now is the seed time of continental union faith and honor.
one reader in connecticut wrote you have declared the sentiments of millions we were blind but on reading these enlightening words the scales have fallen from our eyes printers like robert bell who first published common sense helped spread the message of independence.
bell and paine made money on the best seller.
but paine donated all of his profits to the continental army.
j6 chapter 6 paine recognized that the main obstacle to independence among colonists was their continued loyalty to the king and crown.
so he set out to demolish that loyalty.
as one paine biographer wrote common sense could be considered the first american self help book the help being for those who could never imagine life without a monarch paine began by ridiculing the notion that kings had some special god given right to rule over their subjects.
he called the king the royal brute of england and said even brutes do not devour their young nor savages make war upon their families he linked the problems of life in the colonies to the evils of british rule and argued that americans would be much better off on their own.
everything that is right or natural pleads for separation he declared.
the blood of the slain the weeping voice of nature cries tis time to part paine argued that the colonists should unite around a common goal to create a self governing nation based on principles of liberty.
we have it in our power to begin the world over again he wrote.
the birthday of a new world is at hand and in one stirring passage he called on america to make itself the refuge of freedom every spot of the old world is overrun with oppression.
freedom hath been hunted round the globe.
asia and africa have long expelled her.
europe regards her like a stranger and england hath given her warning to depart.
receive the fugitive and prepare in time an asylum for mankind.
the impact of common sense although paines words were powerful his ideas were not new.
many other colonial leaders such as benjamin franklin thomas jefferson and john adams had expressed similar thoughts.
but paine was able to put those ideas together in a single compelling argument that spoke to a mass audience.
as benjamin rush noted the ideas that paine put forth in common sense had previously lain like stones in a field useless til collected and arranged in a building.
common sense did not start the movement for independence.
that movement had been building for some time.
nor did it cause colonial leaders to declare independence.
another six months would pass before the declaration of independence was issued.
but paine s work opened up the debate on separation from great britain.
it helped many colonists see independence as a real possibility.
paines ideas on rights and liberty also had an influence on other countries particularly france.
in fact paine later moved to france to play a role in the french revolution.
he also wrote several books including the rights of man.
but none of his other works would have quite the impact as common sense the pamphlet that helped pave the way for american independence.
paine believed that his most important message was the attack on king george iii.
this painting from 1767 depicts the king in all his royal glory.
it shows a formality that had become foreign to his subjects in america.
the declaration of independence 117 chapter 5 toward independence when is it necessary for citizens to rebel against their government.
5 1 introduction an almost full moon cast a pale light over boston on april 18 1775.
but the night was anything but quiet.
mounted on brown beauty one of the fastest horses in massachusetts paul revere woke up the countryside with alarming news.
british troops stationed in boston were on the move.
they had orders to march to the nearby town of concord and seize weapons the colonists had stored there.
this was news patriots had been waiting for.
patriots also called whigs were americans who believed the colonies had the right to govern themselves.
on hearing reveres warning patriots around concord grabbed their muskets and prepared to meet the british troops.
the same news filled loyalists also called tories with dread.
loyalists were colonists who felt a deep loyalty to great britain.
they saw themselves as faithful subjects of the king.
they were horrified by the idea of taking up arms against british troops.
how did colonists come to be so divided in their feelings about the british.
most americans were content with british rule in the early 1700s.
in this chapter you will learn what happened to change the relationship between great britain and the colonies.
the story begins in the 1750s when great britain and the colonies fought a war against the french and their indian allies.
the french and indian war left great britain with huge debts and a vast new empire to protect.
to solve its problems the british government passed new laws that tightened its control of the colonies.
some of these laws also placed new taxes on the colonists.
colonists were stunned.
for the most part they had been able to make their own laws and determine their own taxes.
suddenly great britain was changing the rules.
it wasnt right the colonists protested.
in this chapter you will see how these feelings led many colonists to consider rebelling against their government.
why would some colonists have celebrated the dismantling of a statue of the british king.
bythe 1770s the colonists had become deeply divided in their loyalty to great britain.
here some colonists tear down a statue of king george.
toward independence 87 hl i.
before 1763 great britain had relatively little to do with the day to day lives of most colonists.
5 2 before 1763 by 1750 the american colonies were bursting with growth.
in just a century the population of the colonies had grown from 50 000 to more than a million people.
what brought about this rapid growth.
cheap land.
religious tolerance.
economic opportunity.
all of these were important in attracting people to the colonies.
but there was another reason.
for more than a century the british government had for the most part left the colonies alone to solve their own problems.
during this time americans had learned to govern themselves.
each colony elected its own assembly.
like the british parliament the assemblies had the power to pass laws and to create and collect taxes.
each assembly also decided how the colonys tax money should be spent.
americans had more freedom to run their own affairs than ordinary people in any country in europe.
self government also made the colonies attractive to settlers.
militia a small army made up of ordinary citizens who are trained to fight in an emergency conflict in the ohio valley as the colonies grew settlers began to dream of moving across the appalachian mountains and into the ohio valley the region between the ohio and mississippi rivers.
both great britain and france claimed this area.
in 1754 the french made good on their claim by building a fort where the city of pittsburgh stands today.
they called it fort duquesne du kane.
news of the fort alarmed the governor of virginia.
he ordered a small force of virginia militia to drive the french out of the ohio valley.
militias are small armies of citizens who are trained to fight in an emergency.
to head the militia the governor chose a 22 year old volunteer named george washington.
today americans remember george washington as a great patriot a military hero and the first president of the united states.
in 1754 however he was just an ambitious young man with no land or money.
washington believed that his best chance of getting ahead was to become an officer in the british army.
there was only one prob lem with his plan.
most british officers believed that colonists made terrible soldiers.
the expedition into the ohio valley gave washington a chance to prove them wrong.
near fort duquesne he came across a french scouting party that was camped in the woods.
washington ordered hi men to open fire.
it was an easy victory.
i heard the bullets whistle he wrote afterward.
and believe me there is something charming the sound 88 chapter 5 the french and indian war washingtons whistling bullets were the first shots in a conflict known as the french and indian war.
this war was part of a long struggle between france and great britain for territory and power.
because many american indians fought with france in this latest conflict the colonists called it the french and indian war.
in 1755 great britain sent 1 400 british soldiers to virginia to finish the job that washington had begun.
they were led by a general named edward braddock.
the soldiers job was to clear the french out of the ohio valley.
washington joined the army as a volunteer hoping to make a good impression on general braddock.
braddocks march into the ohio valley was a disaster.
the troops bright red uniforms made them perfect targets for french sharpshooters and their indian allies.
two thirds of the soldiers were killed.
washington himself narrowly escaped death.
i had four bullets through my coat and two horses shot under me he wrote in a letter.
showing great courage washington led the survivors back to virginia.
there he was greeted as a hero.
the french and indian war raged for seven long years.
the turning point came in 1759 when british troops captured canada.
in 1763 great britain and france signed a peace treaty or agreement ending the war.
in this treaty france ceded or gave canada to great britain.
americans were thrilled with this victory.
great britain now controlled a vastly expanded american empire.
never before had the colonists felt so proud of being british.
and never before had the future of the colonies looked so bright.
is here george washington tips his hat to the british flag at fort duquesne.
the british captured the fort from the french in 1758 during the french and indian war.
it was rebuilt and called fort pitt.
the city of pittsburgh was later built here.
new york toward independence 89 tyranny the unjust use of government power.
a ruler who uses power in this way is called a tyrant.
5 3 early british actions in the colonies changes that were taking place in great britain soon clouded the colonists bright future.
a new king george iii had been crowned in 1760.
he was not regarded as a bright man.
one historian wrote that he was very stupid really stupid he was also known for being proud and stubborn.
he was determined to be a take charge kind of ruler especially in the colonies.
ihe people george iii chose to help him knew very little about conditions in north america.
before long they were taking actions that enraged the colonists.
the proclamation of 1763 the british government faced a number of problems after the french and indian war.
one was how to keep colonists and american indians from killing each other as settlers pushed westward.
simply draw a line down the crest of the appalachian mountains said george iii.
tell settlers to stay east of that line and indians to stay west of it.
this was what the king ordered in his proclamation of 1763.
to americans the kings order suggested tyranny or the unjust use of government power.
they argued that the lands east of the appalachians were already mostly settled.
the only place that farmers could the proclamation of 1763 prohibited available land was west of the mountains.
besides the proda settlers from moving west of the mation was too late.
settlers were already crossing the mountains.
appalachians.
king george ill hoped the british government ignored these arguments.
to keep peace this would prevent conflict between on the frontier it decided to expand the british army in america to colonists and american indians.
0 chapter 5 13 colonies proclamation line of 1763 0 500 1 000 miles 1 j 6 500 1 000 kilometers lambert azimuthal equal area projection i i.
a a t i oceax idies s i h h c u r s vv the stamp act the british government had other problems besides keeping colonists and american indians from fighting each other.
one problem was how to pay off the large debt from the french and indian war.
the solution seemed obvious to prime minister george grenville the leader of the british government.
people in great britain were already paying taxes on everything from windows to salt.
in contrast americans were probably the most lightly taxed people in the british empire.
it was time said grenville for the colonists to pay their fair share of the cost of protecting them from indians.
in 1765 grenville proposed a new act or law called the stamp act.
this law required colonists to buy a stamp for every piece of paper they used.
newspapers had to be printed on stamped paper.
wills licenses and even playing cards had to have stamps.
once again the colonists sensed tyranny.
one newspaper the pennsylvania journal said that as soon as this shocking act was known it filled all british america from one end to the other with astonishment and grief it wasnt just the idea of higher taxes that upset the colonists.
they were willing to pay taxes passed by their own assemblies where their representatives could vote on them.
but the colonists had no representatives in parliament.
for this reason they argued parliament had no right to tax them.
they saw the stamp act as a violation of their rights as british subjects.
no taxation without representation they declared.
some colonists protested the stamp act by sending messages to parliament.
loyalists simply refused to buy stamps.
patriots however took more violent action.
mobs calling themselves sons of liberty attacked tax collectors homes.
protesters in connecticut even started to bury one tax collector alive.
only when he heard dirt being shoveled onto his coffin did the terrified tax collector agree to resign from his post.
after months of protest parliament repealed or canceled the stamp act.
americans greeted the news with great celebration.
church bells rang bands played and everyone hoped the troubles with great britain were over.
the stamp act required colonists to buy stamps like this one for all paper products.
the colonists reacted angrily to the act.
this illustration shows them hanging effigies or dummies of british officials.
the colonists protests forced parliamentto repeal the act.
repeal to take back or to cancel a law toward independence 91 boycott to refuse to buy one or more goods from a certain source.
an organized refusal by many people is also called a boycott.
the quartering act as anger over the stamp act began to fade americans noticed another law passed by parliament in 1765.
called the quartering act this law ordered colonial assemblies to provide british troops with quarters or housing.
the colonists were also told to furnish the soldiers with candles firing bedding cooking utensils salt vinegar and beer or cider of course providing for the soldiers cost money.
new jersey protested that the new law was as much an act for laying taxes on the colonists as the stamp act.
new yorkers asked why they should pay to keep troops in their colony.
after all they said the soldiers just took up space and did nothing.
in 1767 the new york assembly decided not to approve any funds for salt vinegar and liquor for the troops.
the british government reacted by refusing to let the assembly meet until it agreed to obey the quartering act.
once again tempers began to rise on both sides of the atlantic.
5 4 the townshend acts the next british leader to face the challenge of taxing the colonies was charles townshend.
he was known as champagne charlie because of his habit of making speeches in parliament after drinking champagne.
townshend believed that the colonists bad behavior made it even more important to retain an army in the british colonies.
once he was asked in parliament whether he would dare to make the colonists pay for that army.
stamping his foot townshend shouted i will i will townshend kept his promise.
in 1767 he persuaded parliament to pass the townshend acts.
the new laws placed a duty or tax on certain goods the colonies imported from great britain.
these goods included such popular items as glass paint paper and tea.
a boycott of british goods to many colonists the townshend duties were unacceptable.
once again colonists were determined not to pay taxes that their assemblies had not voted on.
a boston patriot named samuel adams led the opposition to the townshend acts.
adams was not an attractive man and he was a failure at business.
but he was gifted at stirring up protests through his speeches and writing.
the governor of massachusetts once complained every dip of his pen stung like a horned snake adams wrote a letter protesting the townshend acts that was sent to every colony.
the letter argued that the new duties violated the colonists rights as british citizens.
to protect those rights the colonies decided to boycott british goods.
this was a peaceful form of protest that even loyalists could support.
one by one all of the colonies agreed to support the boycott.
women were very important in making the boycott work since t ey did most of the shopping.
the virginia gazette wrote that one woman could do more for the good of her country than five hundred ter 5 i noisy sons of liberty with all their mobs and riots women found many ways to avoid buying british imports.
they sewed dresses out of homespun cloth brewed tea from pine needles and bought only american made goods.
in 1768 the british government sent soldiers to boston to enforce the townshend acts.
this engraving made by paul revere shows the troops landing.
repeal of the townshend acts meanwhile a new leader named lord north became head of the british government.
described by townshend as a great heavy booby looking man lord north embarrassed his supporters by taking naps in parliament.
but he was good with numbers and he could see that the townshend duties were a big money loser.
the duties didnt begin to make up for all the money british merchants were losing because of the boycott.
early in 1770 north persuaded parliament to repeal all of the townshend duties except for one the tax on tea.
some members of parliament argued that keeping the duty on tea was asking for more trouble.
but king george wasnt ready to give up on the idea of taxing americans.
i am clear that there must always be one tax to keep up the right the king said.
and as such i approve the tea duty 5 5 the boston massacre on the same day that parliament repealed most of the townshend duties a fight broke out between soldiers and colonists in boston.
when the dust cleared five bostonians were dead and ten were injured.
patriots called this incident the boston massacre.
a massacre is the killing of defenseless people.
what really happened was a small riot.
toward independence 93 trouble had been brewing in boston for months before the riot.
to the british boston patriots were the worst troublemakers in the colonies.
in 1768 the british government had sent four regiments of troops to keep order in boston.
bostonians resented the british soldiers.
they made fun of their red uniforms by calling them lobsterbacks samuel adams even taught his dog to nip at soldiers heels.
despite such insults the troops were forbidden to fire on citizens.
knowing this only made bostonians bolder in their attacks.
general thomas gage the commander of the british army in america wrote that the people were as lawless after the troops arrived as they were before paul revere s famous engraving of the boston massacre stirred up deep colonial resentment against great britain.
mob violence breaks out on march 5 1770 a noisy mob began throwing rocks and ice balls at troops guarding the boston customs house.
come on you rascals you bloody backs they shouted.
fire if you dare some patriot leaders tried to persuade the crowd to go home.
so did captain thomas preston the commander of the soldiers.
but their pleas had no effect.
as the mob pressed forward someone knocked a soldier to the ground.
the troops panicked and opened fire.
two bullets struck crispus attucks a black man at the front of the crowd.
he was the first to die but not the last.
the enraged crowd went home only after receiving a promise that the troops would be tried for murder.
massacre or self defense.
samuel adams saw this event as a perfect opportunity to whip up anti british feeling.
he called the riot a horrid massacre and had paul revere a local silversmith engrave a picture of it.
reveres engraving shows soldiers firing at peaceful unarmed citizens.
prints of reveres engraving were distributed throughout the colonies.
patriots saw the boston massacre as proof that the british should remove all of their troops chapter 5 from the colonies.
loyalists saw the tragedy as proof that troops were needed more than ever if only to control patriot hotheads.
one hero came out of this sad event.
he was a boston lawyer named john adams.
like his cousin samuel john adams was a patriot.
but he also believed that every person even the british soldiers had the right to a fair trial.
adams agreed to defend the soldiers even though he knew that his action would cost him friends and clients.
at the murder trial adams argued that the troops had acted in self defense.
the jury found six of the soldiers not guilty.
two of them were found guilty only of manslaughter or causing death without meaning to.
throughout his long life john adams remained proud of his defense of the british soldiers.
he said that upholding the law in this case was one of the best pieces of service i ever rendered to my country paul revere s engraving of five coffins showing the victims of the boston massacre appeared on flyers to remind colonists of british brutality.
5 6 the boston tea party despite the hopes of patriots like sam adams the boston massacre did not spark new protests against british rule.
instead the repeal of the townshend duties led to a period of calm.
true there was still a small duty on tea.
but the tax didnt seem to bother loyalists very much.
patriots knew they could always drink dutch tea that had been smuggled into the colonies without paying duties.
things did not stay peaceful however.
in 1773 a new law called the tea act prompted more protests.
one of them was the incident that became known as the boston tea party.
the tea act the tea act was lord norths attempt to rescue the british east india company.
this large trading company controlled all the trade between great britain and asia.
for years it had been a moneymaker for great britain.
but the american boycott of british tea hurt the company badly.
by 1773 the tea company was in danger of going broke unless it could sell off the 17 million pounds of tea that were sitting in its london warehouses.
the tea act lowered the cost of tea that was sold by the british east india company in the colonies.
as a result even taxed british tea became cheaper than smuggled dutch tea.
the tea act also gave the british east india company a monopoly or complete control over tea sales in the colonies.
from now on the only merchants who could sell the bargain priced tea were those chosen by the company.
lord north may have thought he could persuade americans to buy taxed tea by making it so cheap but colonists weren t fooled.
they saw the tea act as still another attempt to tax them without their consent.
toward independence 95 in addition many merchants were alarmed by the east india companys monopoly over the tea trade.
they wondered what the british government might try to control next.
would there be a monopoly on cloth.
nervous merchants wondered what would happen to their businesses if other goods were also restricted.
tea ships arrive when the british east india companys tea ships sailed into american ports angry protesters kept them from unloading their cargoes.
more than one ship turned back for england still filled with tea.
in boston however the royal governor ordered the british navy to block the exit from boston harbor.
he insisted that three tea ships would not leave until all their tea was unloaded.
on december 16 1773 the sons of liberty decided to unload the tea but not in the way the governor had in mind.
rlhat night about 50 men dressed as mohawk indians boarded the three ships.
one of them george hewes described what happened to protest the tax on tea patriots disguised as american indians threw 342 chests of tea overboard from three british ships.
colonists later called this the boston tea party.
we then were ordered by our commander to open the hatches and take out all the chests of tea and throw them overboard and we immediately proceeded to execute his orders first cutting and splitting the chests with our tomahawks.
in about three hours from the time we went on board we had thus broken and thrown overboard every tea chest to be found on the ship we were surrounded by british armed ships but no attempt was made to resist us.
6 chapter 5 about 90 000 pounds of tea were dumped into the sea that night.
nothing else on the ships was touched.
news of the boston tea party excited patriots throughout the colonies.
this is the most magnificent moment of all wrote john adams in his journal the next day.
this destruction of the tea is so bold so daring so firm it must have important consequences he was right.
5 7 the intolerable acts lord north was stunned by news of the boston tea party.
as he saw it he had tried to help the colonists by sending them cheap tea.
and what did they do.
they threw it in the sea.
this time they had gone too far.
king george agreed.
to him the issue was no longer about taxes.
it was about great britains control over the colonies.
we must master them totally he declared or leave them to themselves the king wasnt about to leave the colonies to themselves however.
great britains anger led parliament to pass a new series of laws in 1774.
these laws were so harsh that many colonists called them intolerable or unacceptable.
throughout the colonies they became known as the intolerable acts.
parliament punishes massachusetts the intolerable acts were designed to punish massachusetts for the boston tea party.
the first law closed boston harbor to all shipping until the ruined tea was paid for.
the second law placed the government of massachusetts firmly under british control.
colonists in massachusetts could not even hold a town meeting without the colonial governors permission.
the third law said that british soldiers who were accused of murder would be tried in england not in the colonies.
finally more troops were sent to boston to enforce the new laws.
a few british leaders worried that the intolerable acts might push the colonies into rebellion.
but george iii was sure they would force the colonists to give in to british authority.
the first of the intolerable acts punished massachusetts for the boston tea party.
it closed boston harbor to all shipping until the destroyed tea was paid for.
as a result sailors and dockworkers lost their jobs and stores closed for lack of goods to sell.
the colonies begin to unite in fact the intolerable acts did not force the colonists to give in.
boston patriots declared they would abandon their city to flames before paying a penny for the lost tea.
merchants in other cities showed their support by closing their shops.
many colonies sent food and money to boston so that its citizens would not starve.
toward independence 97 in virginia lawmakers drafted a resolution in support of massachusetts.
the virginians said that everyone s rights were at stake.
an attack made on one of our sister colonies they declared is an attack made on all british america.
the virginians also called for a congress or meeting of delegates from all the colonies.
the purpose of the congress would be to find a peaceful solution to the conflicts with great britain.
not all americans agreed with this plan.
in every colony there were loyalists who thought that bostonians had gone too far and should pay for the tea.
if they were forced to choose they would side with the king against sam adams and his sons of liberty.
in their view it was the misguided patriots who were causing all the trouble.
delegates from the colonies met in philadelphia atthe first continental congress in 1774.
patrick henry of virginia urged the colonists to unite as americans not as citizens of separate colonies.
the granger collection newyork the first continental congress in september 1774 some 50 leaders from 12 colonies met in philadelphia.
the meeting brought together delegates from most of the british colonies on the north american continent so it was called the first continental congress.
the delegates were used to thinking of themselves as citizens of their own colonies.
patrick henry a leader from virginia urged them to come together as one people.
i am not a virginian he declared but an american but only strong patriots like sam and john adams were ready to think of themselves this way.
many delegates were strong loyalists who still thought of themselves as british.
still others like george washington were somewhere in between.
only one thing united the delegates their love of liberty and hatred of tyranny.
in spite of their differences the delegates agreed to send a respectful message to king george.
the message urged the king to consider their complaints and to recognize their rights.
the delegates also called for a new boycott of british goods until parliament repealed the intolerable acts.
finally they agreed to meet again the following may if the boycott didnt work.
the colonies form militias in towns and cities throughout the colonies patriots appointed committees to enforce the boycott.
in case the boycott didnt work they also organized local militias.
in new england the volunteers called themselves minutemen because they could be ready to fight in 60 seconds.
across the colonies militias marched and drilled.
in new hampshire unknown persons stole 100 barrels of gunpowder and 16 cannons from a british fort.
similar thefts occurred in other colonies.
rather than forcing the colonies to give in the intolerable acts had brought the two sides to the brink of war.
chapter 5 5 8 lexington and concord king george had made many mistakes in his decisions about the colonies.
the first continental congress listed all these mistakes in its message to the king.
now he made another one.
rather than consider the colonists complaints king george refused even to answer their message.
the new england governments are in a state of rebellion he said.
blows must decide whether they are to be subject to this country or independent in boston general gage the kings commander of british troops in america got ready to deliver those blows.
this hand colored engraving by connecticut engraver amos doolittle shows the british firing upon the minutemen who are gathered at lexington this was the first battle in the war for independence from great britain.
the first blow at lexington in april 1775 a spy told general gage that the colonists were hiding a large supply of gunpowder and weapons in the nearby village of concord.
general gage decided to strike at once.
the general ordered 700 of his best troops to march to concord and seize the weapons.
to keep the colonists from moving the weapons the attack had to be a surprise.
so gage had his troops march the 20 miles to concord at night.
the colonists had their own spies.
when gages troops slipped out of boston on april 18 1775 patriots were watching their every move.
soon paul revere and others were galloping through the countryside warning colonists that the british soldiers were coming.
the news reached lexington a town on the road to concord in the early hours of april 19.
led by captain john parker a small band of minutemen gathered nervously in the chilly night air.
toward independence 99 at the north bridge in concord the minutemen fired upon british troops who had occupied the town.
surprised by the fury of the colonial attack the british fled in panic.
the amos doolittle engraving above shows the bridge at the time of the battle.
the photograph shows the bridge today.
at dawn the british troops reached the town green.
stand your ground ordered parker.
dont fire unless fired upon but if they mean to have a war let it begin here as the minuteman faced the british troops a shot rang out from where no one knew for certain.
without orders the soldiers rushed forward shooting wildly.
a few minutemen managed to return fire.
when the firing stopped eight colonists lay dead or dying.
another ten were limping to safety with painful wounds.
the british troops gave three cheers for victory and marched on to concord.
the second blow at concord by breakfast time the british were in concord searching for gunpowder and weapons.
but the colonists had hidden them.
in frustration the soldiers piled up a few wooden tools tents and gun carriages and set them on fire.
on a ridge outside the city militiamen from the surrounding countryside watched the smoke rise.
will you let them burn the town down shouted one man.
captain isaac davis replied i havent a man thats afraid to go davis marched his volunteers down the hill.
as they approached concords north bridge the british troops opened fire.
davis fell dead a bullet through his heart.
the british expected the americans to break and run.
to their surprise the minutemen stood their ground and fired back.
two minutes later it was the redcoats who were running away in panic.
the retreat back to boston was a nightmare for the british.
more than 4 000 armed and angry minutemen lined their route shooting at every redcoat they saw.
by the end of the day 74 british soldiers were dead and another 200 were wounded or missing.
the colonists counted their own losses as 49 dead and 41 wounded.
a british officer chapter 5.
described what it was like to face the colonists fury that day.
whoever looks upon them as an irregular mob the officer said will find himself much mistaken indeed since the french and indian war the british had been mistaken about the colonists again and again.
their biggest mistake was in thinking that ordinary people farmers merchants workers and housewives would not fight for the rights that they held dear.
at lexington and concord americans proved they were not only willing to fight for their rights.
they were even willing to die for them.
chapter summary in this chapter you read about tensions between the colonies and great britain in the mid 1700s.
before 1763 during the french and indian war 1754 1763 great britain and france fought for territory and power.
when the war ended france gave up canada to great britain.
great britain now had a much larger american empire to control.
early british actions in the colonies the war left great britain with huge debts.
to raise money parliament passed the stamp act in 1765.
colonists protested the stamp act because it was passed without colonial representation.
colonists also protested the quartering act which required them to house british troops at the colonies expense.
the townshend acts and the boston massacre the townshend acts imposed more taxes on the colonies which divided many colonists into opposing camps.
loyalists urged obedience to great britain but patriots resisted taxation without representation through protests boycotts and riots.
tensions in boston erupted into violence in 1770 when british troops fired into a crowd of colonists in what become known as the boston massacre.
the boston tea party and the intolerable acts when patriots protested a new tax on tea by throwing tea into boston harbor in 1773 great britain responded by passing the intolerable acts to force the colonies to give in to british authority.
patriots responded by forming the first continental congress and organizing colonial militias.
lexington and concord fighting between patriots and british troops at lexington and concord in 1775 showed that colonists would not only fight for their rights but were willing to die for them.
this stone marks the line where minutemen faced british troops at the battle of lexington.
the stone is inscribed with the words of john parker captain of the lexington minutemen.
toward independence 101 reading further poet henry wadsworth longfellow i love the story of paul revere whether he rode or not so said president warren g harding in 1923.
like most americans at that time harding probably learned about revere as a schoolboy when he read a poem by henry wadsworth longfellow.
later when a skeptic claimed the story of revere s ride never happened harding sprang to the poet s defense.
but was revere the hero longfellow made him out to be.
in 1860 the young nation whose fight for freedom began at lexington and concord was in danger of falling apart.
war clouds gathered as americans debated the issues of slavery and states rights.
the south which had grown prosperous with slave labor vigorously defended its way of life.
the north which had grown even more prosperous without slave labor condemned slavery as morally wrong.
americans had never been so divided or so close to civil war.
henry wadsworth longfellow was then the nations most popular poet.
he was also a northerner who opposed slavery.
as he watched the nation move toward war longfellow began thinking about a new poem.
he wanted it to be a call to arms for all who loved liberty in such a time of peril.
one day in april 1860 longfellow took a walk with a friend in boston.
his companion told him a story that took place on another april day some 85 years earlier.
it was the tale of a midnight ride made by a silversmith named paul revere to alert the countryside to coming danger.
longfellow was inspired.
like paul revere s ride the poem he planned would be a cry of alarm to awaken a sleeping nation.
longfellow set to work at once.
his finished work titled paul revere s ride was published in 1861.
over the next century generations of schoolchildren would read and memorize its stirring lines.
as you read the excerpt that follows can you see why the poem captured americans imaginations.
paul revere s ride tells the story of revere s mission to warn the minutemen.
this minuteman statue stands atthe site of the battle in concord massachusetts.
an excerpt from listen my children and you shall hear of the midnight ride of paul revere on the eighteenth of april in seventy five hardly a man is now alive who remembers that famous day and year.
he said to his friend if the british march by land or sea from the town to night hang a lantern aloft in the belfry arch of the north church tower as a signal light one if by land and two if by sea and i on the opposite shore will be ready to ride and spread the alarm through every middlesex village and farm for the country folk to be up and to arm then he said good night and with muffled oar silently rowed to the charlestown shore and lo.
as he looks on the belfrys height a glimmer and then a gleam of light.
he springs to the saddle the bridle he turns but lingers and gazes till full on his sight a second lamp in the belfry burns.
a hurry of hoofs in a village street a shape in the moonlight a bulk in the dark and beneath from the pebbles in passing a spark struck out by a steed flying fearless and fleet that was all.
and yet through the gloom and the light the fate of a nation was riding that night and the spark struck out by that steed in his flight kindled the land into flame with its heat.
it was one by the village clock when he galloped into lexington.
he saw the gilded weathercock swim in the moonlight as he passed and the meeting house windows blank and bare gaze at him with a spectral glare as if they already stood aghast at the bloody work they would look upon.
this sheet music for a song inspired by longfellow s poem was written in the early 1900s.
it was two by the village clock when he came to the bridge in concord town.
he heard the bleating of the flock and one was safe and asleep in his bed who at the bridge would be first to fall who that day would be lying dead pierced by a british musket ball.
you know the rest.
in the books you have read how the british regulars fired and fled how the farmers gave them ball for ball from behind each fence and farm yard wall chasing the red coats down the lane.
so through the night rode paul revere and so through the night went his cry of alarm to every middlesex village and farm a cry of defiance and not of fear a voice in the darkness a knock at the door and a word that shall echo forevermore.
for borne on the night wind of the past through all our history to the last in the hour of darkness and peril and need the people will waken and listen to hear the hurrying hoof beats of that steed and the midnight message of paul revere.
toward independence 103 over the years american artists were drawn to the legend of paul revere.
most works like this 19th century painting show revere as a lone rider.
longfellow creates a legend the lone hero longfellow had set out to create a dramatic tale that would make patriotic hearts beat faster.
in the process he transformed paul revere from a local folk hero into a national legend.
even today millions of americans know the opening lines of longfellows poem.
listen my children and you shall hear of the midnight ride of paul revere when we think of the events that launched the american revolution we can picture them clearly.
revere asks a friend to send a signal from bostons old north church when the british troops quartered there begin to move out.
one if by land and two if by sea and i on the opposite shore will be the signal comes and revere gallops into the night waking the countryside with the news that the british are coming.
so through the night rode paul revere and so through the night went his cry of alarm to every middlesex village and farm a cry of defiance and not of fear a voice in the darkness a knock at the door and a word that shall echo forevermore.
alerted by our lone hero the colonists homes and liberties.
rise up to defend their you know the rest.
in the books you have read how the british regulars fired and fled how the farmers gave them ball for ball from behind each fence and farm yard wall.
the rest as they say is history.
104 chapter 5 skeptics raise doubts did revere really ride.
historians were quick to point out many inaccuracies in longfellows telling.
for example the poet omitted the fact that during his ride revere was captured by british troops.
longfellow also left out the names of other messengers who rode that night such as william dawes and samuel prescott.
as doubts about the poem multiplied skeptics began to question the entire story.
some said reveres ride didnt happen at all.
or if it did revere was captured before he could warn many patriots.
such talk annoyed president harding.
somebody made the ride and stirred the minutemen in the colonies to fight the battle of lexington he said.
i love the story of paul revere whether he rode or not as time passed some doubters threw cold water on the idea that revere was a hero.
one skeptic said that revere set out with two other guys for money when the three were arrested he turned stool pigeon and betrayed his two companions is this true.
was revere a traitor to his cause.
the granger collection newyork historians weigh in the real meaning of revere s ride modern historians find no evidence that revere was paid to ride or that he became an informer when he was captured.
but they also remind us that revere was not the only hero of that momentous night within hours of his ride 122 colonists had lost their lives and many more lay wounded.
as one historian writes reveres ride was not the major event that day nor was reveres warning so critical in triggering the bloodbath.
patriotic farmers had been preparing to oppose the british for the better part of a year his ride to lexington took on meaning only because numerous other political activists had like revere dedicated themselves to the cause.
ray raphael founding myths stories that hide our patriotic past 2004 paul revere was well known as a silversmith and a patriot.
when revere satforthis painting by john singleton copley he chose to hold one of the teapots he had designed.
just five years later he was one of the sons of liberty atthe boston tea party.
the real meaning of reveres ride is what it tells us about these unsung heroes.
on hearing that the british soldiers were coming those patriotic farmers had a choice.
they could remain safe in their beds or rise up to defend their rights.
looking at their response historian david hackett fischer writes the history of a free people is the history of hard choices.
in that respect when paul revere alarmed the massachusetts countryside he was carrying a message for us toward independence 105 chapter 8 creating the constitution what compromises emerged from the constitutional convention.
8 1 introduction when the american war for independence ended no one was happier than a serious virginia patriot named james madison.
and no one was more worried about the future of the united states.
while serving in congress during the war madison had tried and failed to get the states to work easily together.
he doubted that things would improve now that the war was over.
after declaring independence in 1776 congress had tried to unite the states under one national government.
this proved to be a difficult task.
most members of congress were nervous about creating a strong central government.
they feared that such a government would trample the very rights they were fighting to preserve.
their solution was a plan of government known as the articles of confederation.
the articles created a firm league of friendship in which each state retains its sovereignty freedom and independence this league of friendship was a loose union in which the 13 states cooperated for common purposes.
it was run by congress in which each state had one vote.
on paper the articles of confederation gave congress several important powers.
it could declare war raise an army and a navy print money and set up a postal system.
in reality however these powers were limited by the inability of congress to impose taxes.
instead congress had to ask the states for funds to do anything.
all too often the states ignored congresss humble requests the result said madison was that the articles were no more effective at binding the states into a nation than a rope of sand.
in this chapter you will read about the new nation s shaky start under the articles of confederation.
you will also learn how madison and other leaders met in 1787 to revise the articles and ended up compromising to form a more perfect union.
the granger collection newyork because of his important role in the creation of the document that would give the new nation a plan for government james madison is known as the father of the constitution.
the constitution was signed in philadelphia on september 17 1787.
creating the constitution 145 articles of confederation the first written plan of government for the united states.
a confederation is an association of states that cooperate for a common purpose.
northwest territory a region of the united states bounded by the ohio and mississippi rivers and the great lakes.
the region was given to the united states by the treaty of paris in 1783.
northwest ordinance a law passed by congress in 1787 that specified how western lands would be governed the land ordinance of 1785 organized the northwest territory into townships the northwest ordinance of 1787 set rules for how western lands would be governed.
within a half century of its passage enough people had settled in the northwest territory to create five new states.
8 2 early quarrels and accomplishments even before the american revolution was over the states began quarreling among themselves.
many of their quarrels were about taxes on goods that crossed state borders.
new york for example taxed firewood from connecticut and cabbages from new jersey.
the states also disagreed over boundaries.
the inability of congress to end such disagreements was one of the key weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
developing western lands congress did get the states to agree on one important issue how to develop the western lands acquired in the treaty of paris.
at that time there was no orderly way to divide up and sell these lands.
settlers walked into the wilderness and claimed the land they liked.
disputes over who owned what clogged the courts.
to end this confusion congress passed the land ordinance of 1785.
under this law western lands were divided into six mile squares called townships.
each township was then divided into 36 sections of 640 acres each.
one section of each township was set aside to support the townships public schools.
the other sections were to be sold to settlers.
surveyors proceeded to lay out townships in the ohio valley then known as the northwest territory.
by 1787 the government was ready to sell sections to settlers.
this raised the question of how these areas should be governed.
were they to be u s colonies or new states.
the northwest ordinance congress answered this question in the northwest ordinance of 1787.
this law divided the northwest territory into smaller territories each governed by a territorial governor.
as soon as a territory had 5 000 free adult males it could elect its own legislature or lawmaking body.
when the population reached 60 000 a territory could apply to congress to become a state.
the northwest territory and the land ordinance survey system 1785 each township is 6 miles by 6 miles and contains 36 sections.
400 miles illinois indiana ohio hk ivii 118181 18161 118031 s u y atde area 1785 7 ky va x nc.
a xi ociai 0 200 400 kilometers albers equal area projection j 46 chapter 8 the northwest ordinance included a list of rights that gave settlers the same privileges as other citizens except for one.
slavery was banned in the northwest territory.
this system of settlement served the nation well.
over time the united states would continue to establish territories as it spread to the shores of the pacific ocean and beyond.
8 3 shays s rebellion and the need for change under the articles of confederation the new nation had serious money problems.
the paper money printed by congress during the war was worthless.
congress had the power to make coins that would not lose their value.
but it lacked gold or silver to mint into coins.
the states reacted to the money shortage by printing their own paper currency.
before long bills of different sizes and colors were distributed from state to state.
no one knew what any of these currencies was worth but most agreed they were not worth much.
massachusetts farmers rebel the money shortage was particularly hard on farmers who could not earn enough to pay their debts and taxes.
in massachusetts judges ordered farmers to sell their land and livestock to pay off their debts.
led by daniel shays a hero of the battle of bunker hill massachusetts farmers rebelled.
in 1786 shays and his followers closed down courthouses to keep judges from taking their farms.
then they marched on the national arsenal at springfield to seize the weapons stored there.
having disbanded the continental army congress was unable to stop them.
the massachusetts government ended shayss rebellion in early 1787 by sending militia troops to springfield to restore order.
to many americans however the uprising was a disturbing sign that the nation they had fought so hard to create was falling apart.
no respect is paid to the federal national authority james madison wrote to a friend.
it is not possible that a government can last long under these circumstances daniel shays atthe top right and his followers closed down courthouses in massachusetts to prevent judges from seizing farmers land when the farmers could not pay their debts.
a call for a convention shayss rebellion shocked congress into calling for a convention to consider the situation of the united states each state was invited to send delegates to philadelphia in may 1787 for the sole and express purpose of revising the articles of confederation madison was ready.
for the past year he had devoted himself to the study of governments both ancient and modern.
the lesson of the past was always the same.
a nation that was made up of many groups needed a strong central government or it would soon be torn apart by quarrels.
the question was would americans heed this lesson.
creating the constitution 147 constitutional convention a meeting held in philadelphia in 1787 at which delegates from the states wrote the u s constitution the delegates to the constitutional convention met on may 25 1787 in the same hall where the declaration of independence was signed.
today the building is called independence hall.
8 4 opening the constitutional convention philadelphia was already hot and humid when delegates began drifting into the city.
on may 25 1787 the constitutional convention met for the first time in the east room of the pennsylvania state house now known as independence hall.
the declaration of independence had been debated in this very room just 11 years earlier.
the delegates would meet in the east room all summer.
on some days temperatures rose well into the nineties.
the delegates first action was to elect george washington president of the convention.
no man was more admired and respected than the former commander in chief of the continental army.
when the war ended washington could have used his power and popularity to make himself a king.
instead he went home to virginia to resume his life as an ordinary citizen.
but despite his reluctance to return to public life washington would play a key role by presiding over the convention and lending it his prestige.
the delegates fifty five delegates from 12 states attended the constitutional convention.
rhode island which prided itself as the home of the otherwise minded and feared a strong national government boycotted the meeting.
some leaders of the revolution were missing.
john adams and thomas jefferson were representing the united states in great britain and france respectively.
others who did not attend included sam adams john hancock and patrick henry.
they feared that a strong national government would endanger the rights of states.
as a group the delegates were in the words of a modern historian the well bred the well fed the well read and the well wed their average age was 42.
at 81 benjamin franklin of pennsylvania was the oldest.
he arrived at the convention each day in a sedan chair carried by four good natured prisoners from a nearby jail.
most of the delegates brought extensive political experience to the meeting.
more than two thirds were lawyers.
most had served in their state legislatures or held a state office.
thomas jefferson was so impressed by the ability and experience of these men that he called the convention an assembly of demi gods the father of the constitution the best prepared of the delegates was james madison of virginia.
one delegate wrote of madison in the management of every great question he evidently took the lead in the convention indeed madisons influence was so great that later he would be called the father of the constitution madison addressed the convention numerous times.
when he was not speaking he took notes.
sitting near the front of the room so that he could hear everything that was said madison wrote down nearly every word.
all together his notes covered more than 600 printed pages.
from this remarkable record we know what went on inside the convention day by day.
benjamin franklin the oldest delegate to the constitutional convention had doubts about the drafting of the constitution.
however he said the older i grow the more apt i am to doubt my own judgment and pay more respectto the judgment of others.
the rule of secrecy at the time however no one outside the convention knew what was happening.
after choosing a president the delegates voted on rules for the convention.
the most important of these was the rule of secrecy.
the delegates wanted to feel free to speak their minds without causing alarm or opposition among the general public.
they agreed to keep secret whatever was said in the meeting room until their work was done.
one day washington was handed some notes that had been dropped in the hall outside the east room.
washington pocketed the paper until the end of debate the next day.
then in his sternest voice he lectured the delegates on the importance of secrecy.
i know not whose paper it is washington said as he flung the notes on his desk.
but there it is let him who owns it take it the notes were never claimed.
instead they lay on washingtons desk for days.
like washington the delegates took the rule of secrecy seriously.
during that long summer not a single word about the convention debates appeared in any newspaper.
shared beliefs and clashing views once the convention was organized the delegates got down to business.
as a group the delegates had much in common.
but they also had very different views on many issues facing the new nation.
creating the constitution 149 enlightenment the age of reason in 17th and 18th century europe.
enlightenment thinkers emphasized using rational thought to discover truths about nature and society.
republic a country governed by elected representatives constitution a written plan that provides the basic framework of a government enlightenment the age of reason in 17th and 18th century europe.
enlightenment thinkers emphasized using rational thought to discover truths about nature and society.
republic a country governed by elected representatives constitution a written plan that provides the basic framework of a government to be sure all the delegates were committed to the ideals of the declaration of independence.
the basic purpose of government they believed was to protect the rights to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness and they agreed in the words of the declaration that the just powers of governments came from the consent of the governed in part these beliefs reflected the ideas of enlightenment thinkers like englands john locke.
human institutions these liberal thinkers had argued should be based on laws of nature.
among these laws were the rights to liberty and equality.
the best way to protect these rights the delegates agreed was through some form of republic.
from new englands town meetings to lawmaking bodies like the virginia house of burgesses americans had a long tradition of participating in their own government.
after the american revolution all the states had adopted constitutions that embraced republican ideals.
despite many differences in details every state had some form of representative government.
states had also expanded the rights to vote and to hold office.
the state constitutions helped to shape the delegates thinking.
despite the delegates broad agreement on a government of the people many questions were left unanswered.
for example who exactly should have a say in a truly representative government.
even in liberal pennsylvania only free white males could vote.
some states allowed only wealthier citizens to vote or hold office.
women could not vote in any state except new jersey.
new jersey women would lose the right to vote in 1807.
perhaps the most troubling question of all was how powerful the national government should be.
many delegates wanted to keep government close to the people by preserving the rights of the states.
they feared that a strong national government would threaten individual liberty.
others including madison argued just the opposite.
look at what has happened under the articles of confederation they said referring to events like shayss rebellion.
if the central government is too weak it cannot do its job of protecting liberty and property.
as they met behind closed doors the delegates wrestled with these and other issues.
tempers often flared.
several times it seemed the convention might collapse in failure.
but in the end the delegates found ways to save the convention and the nation.
50 chapt er 8 delegates with opposing views were pennsylvania s james wilson left and new jersey s william paterson right.
wilson one of the most vocal delegates at the convention argued for a strong national government.
paterson tried to protect the rights of the states.
many delegates of small states shared his fear of being swallowed up by the larger states.
delegates with opposing views were pennsylvania s james wilson left and new jersey s william paterson right.
wilson one of the most vocal delegates atthe convention argued for a strong national government.
paterson tried to protectthe rights of the states.
many delegates of small states shared his fear of being swallowed up by the larger states.
8 5 issue how should states be represented in the new government.
when the convention began most delegates believed that their task was to revise the articles of confederation.
to their surprise the virginia delegation presented them with a completely new plan of government.
after a lengthy debate the delegates made a bold move.
they agreed to throw out the articles of confederation and write a new constitution.
while the delegates later known as the framers agreed to design a new framework of government they were divided on a key issue.
where should the governments power to rule come from.
from the states.
or from the people.
under the articles of confederation the answer was the states.
james madisons answer was that the governments power should come directly from the people.
populations of u s states 1790 population the virginia plan drafted by james madison and proposed by edmund randolph the virginia plan called for a strong national government with three branches or parts.
a legislative branch would make laws.
an executive branch would carry out or execute the laws.
a judicial branch or system of courts would apply and inter pret the laws.
under the virginia plan congress was to be made up of two houses the house of representatives and the senate.
the number of lawmakers that a state could send to congress depended on the states population.
states with large populations would have more representatives than smaller states would have.
delegates from virginia pennsylvania and other large states liked the virginia plan.
having the new government represent people not states would give them more representatives and more power in both houses of congress.
source u s census bureau the new jersey plan not surprisingly delegates from the small states disliked the virginia plan.
just as the convention was about to vote on it william paterson of new jersey introduced a rival proposal.
like the virginia plan the new jersey plan called for a government with three branches.
however the legislative branch would have just one house not two.
each state would have an equal vote in congress no matter how big or small.
this plan paterson argued would keep the small states from being swallowed up by their more populous neighbors.
a major issue confronting the constitutional convention was whether to give each state the same number of representatives or to base representation on population.
based on this graph which states do you think would want equal representation for each state.
creating the constitution 151 great compromise the plan of government adopted at the constitutional convention that established a two house congress.
in the house of representatives representation from each state is based on state population.
in the senate each state is represented by two senators.
8 6 resolution the great compromise the new jersey plan was warmly received by delegates from small states.
the majority of delegates however saw william patersons plan as offering little improvement over the articles of confederation and rejected it.
but they could not agree on what should replace it.
tempers rise the debate over representation in congress continued into july with tempers rising day by day.
to most delegates from large states representation based on population seemed both logical and fair.
can we forget for whom we are forming a government asked james wilson of pennsylvania.
is it for men or for the imagi nary beings called states to wilson the answer was obvious.
but his logic could not overcome the fears of small state delegates.
one hot saturday afternoon gunning bedford of delaware tore into the delegates from large states.
they insist he said they will never hurt or injure the lesser states his reply to his own concern was straightforward.
i do not gentlemen trust you if the large states continued in their efforts to crush the smaller states bedford warned the small ones will find some foreign ally of more honor and good faith who will take them by the hand and do them justice rufus king of massachusetts was shocked at this reference to foreign powers.
he said that he was grieved that such a thought had entered his heart still every delegate knew that great britain france and spain were just waiting for the united states to fall apart so they could pick up the pieces.
a compromise is reached finally a com promise was proposed based on a plan put forward earlier by roger sherman of connecticut.
the compromise plan kept a two house congress.
the first house the house of representatives would represent the people.
in this house the number of representatives from each state would be based on the state s population.
the second house the senate would represent the states.
each state would have two senators to be elected by their state legislatures.
the vote was very close but the compromise plan was approved.
this plan saved the convention and became known as the great compromise.
2 chapter 8 roger sherman a signer of the declaration of independence helped construct the great compromise that called for a congress with two houses.
total populations of southern states 1790 georgia maryland north carolina south carolina virginia 0 100 000 200 000 300 000 400 000 500 000 600 000 700 000 800 000 population how do you think delegates from each of the states shown in this graph would want slaves to be counted.
would they want the slave population to be considered when determining representation in congress or would they want slaves to be counted as property that could be taxed.
source u s census bureau 8 7 issue how should slaves be counted.
the great compromise kept the framers working together.
but having agreed to base representation in one house of congress on state population they faced a new and difficult question.
as gouverneur morris of pennsylvania put it upon what principle shall slaves be computed in the representation people or property.
by the time of the convention nine tenths of the slaves in the united states lived in the south.
like everyone else southerners wanted as many representatives in the house as possible.
they argued that slaves should be counted the same as any other people in determining representation.
delegates from the north challenged this idea.
were slaves to be considered people with a right to be represented in congress.
or were they property.
blacks are property and are used to the southward as horses and cattle to the northward argued elbridge gerry of massachusetts.
most northern delegates agreed.
slaves should be counted only as property that could be taxed like any other property.
if slaves were to be counted as people in determining representation in congress said morris then make them citizens and let them vote new thinking on slavery this argument signaled a growing division among white americans.
the declaration of independence and the american revolution forced many whites to reexamine their views on slavery.
some became active in trying to end what they now saw as a great evil.
benjamin franklin for example became president of an antislavery society in 1787.
in the north this new thinking led one state after another to pass laws ending slavery.
although many southerners were uneasy about slavery they were not yet ready to abolish it.
the souths economy was still very dependent on the labor of enslaved african americans.
but some southern states did pass laws making it easier for owners to free their slaves.
creating the constitution 153 three fifths compromise an agreement made at the constitutional convention stating that enslaved persons would be counted as three fifths of a person when determining a states population for representation in the house of representatives this sketch shows a slave auction in virginia in the 1850s.
southern delegates to the convention were afraid that if congress outlawed the slave trade the south would suffer economically.
8 8 resolution the three fifths compromise after a bitter debate madison proposed a compromise.
count each slave as three fifths of a person he suggested when determining a states population for representation in the house of representatives.
the delegates approved this idea which became known as the three fifths compromise because it seemed the only way to keep the convention moving forward.
another slavery issue a dispute over trade raised another issue about slavery.
to help business in the north northern delegates favored giving congress broad power to control trade between the states and other countries.
this proposal made southern delegates nervous.
they worried that congress might try to tax southern export crops such as rice and tobacco.
southerners also worried that congress would use its power over trade to outlaw the slave trade the importing of slaves from africa.
southerners had reason to be fearful.
by 1787 several states had outlawed the slave trade within their boundaries.
a majority of the conventions delegates favored ending the slave trade completely.
south carolina and georgia however objected that their economies would collapse without a constant supply of new slaves.
neither state would agree to any constitution that threatened to end the slave trade.
more compromises on slavery again the delegates settled on a compromise.
congress would have the power to control trade but with two limitations.
first congress could not place any tax on exports to other countries.
second congress could not interfere with the slave trade for 20 years or until 1808.
to satisfy southerners the delegates also agreed to a provision known as the fugitive slave clause.
this clause said that escaped slaves had to be returned to their owners even if they were caught in a free state.
without such compromises the states might never have come together in a single union.
still the compromises only postponed the day when americans would have to resolve the terrible contradiction between slavery and the ideals of liberty and equality.
meanwhile generations of african americans would spend their lives in bondage.
l54 chapt er 8 8 9 issue how should the chief executive be elected.
another major question facing the delegates concerned who would head the new government s executive branch.
early in the convention charles pinckney urged the creation of a vigorous executive james wilson followed with a proposal that a single person serve as the chief executive.
a sudden silence fell over the convention.
a single executive.
the very idea brought to mind unhappy memories of king george iii.
wilson broke the silence by explaining that good government depends on clear timely and responsible leadership.
such leadership he said is most likely to be found in a single person.
one executive or three.
edmund randolph of virginia disliked this proposal.
he preferred a three member executive drawn from different parts of the country.
three people he argued could lead the country better than one.
benjamin franklin opposed a single executive for different reasons.
the first man put at the helm will be a good one said franklin thinking of george washington.
nobody knows what sort may come afterwards the next chief executive he warned might be overly ambitious or too fond of war in spite of these objections the framers agreed to a single executive to be called the president.
to keep this leader from becoming too king like they limited the presidents term to four years.
a vice president was also to be elected to fill that term if the president died in office.
choosing the chief executive equally troubling was the issue of how to choose the chief executive.
some delegates wanted congress to appoint the president.
gouverneur morris objected.
the president must not be made the flunky of the congress he argued.
it must not be able to say to him you owe your appointment to us several delegates thought that the people should elect the president.
madison however argued that voters would naturally vote for someone from their own state.
as a result this method would not be fair to candidates from small states.
still others suggested that the president be elected by a specially chosen group of electors from each state.
such a group they felt would be able to look beyond state interests to make a wise choice for the entire country.
many delegates felt that ordinary citizens such as those pictured here were not suited to electthe president.
roger sherman stated the people should have as little to do as may be about the government.
they want information and are constantly liable to be misled.
creating the constitution 155 electoral college the group established by the constitution to elect the president and vice president.
voters in each state choose their electors.
this is a copy of the electoral college vote forthe election of 1789.
atthat time which states had the most electoral votes.
8 10 resolution the electoral college after some 60 votes on the issue of how to elect the president the framers reached another compromise.
neither congress nor the people they decided should choose the president and vice president.
instead a special body called the electoral college would elect the governments leaders.
the electoral college system the electoral college is made up of electors who cast votes to elect the president and vice president every four years.
each state has as many electors in the electoral college as the number of senators and representatives it sends to congress.
the votes cast by electors are called electoral votes.
the delegates left the method of choosing electors up to each state.
before 1820 state legislatures chose electors in most states.
today the people choose their states electors when they vote in presidential elections.
the electors then cast their ballots for president and vice president on a date chosen by congress.
originally the electors voted for two candidates without saying which one they preferred for president or vice president.
the candidate receiving the most votes became president.
the runner up became vice president.
this system caused great confusion in the election of 1800 and was later changed.
p t r ff i.
v 4zr zz political parties and elections the electoral college system seems very odd to most americans today.
in our age of instant communication it is hard to appreciate the framers concern that voters would not know enough about candidates outside their own state to choose a president wisely.
the delegates could not have predicted how quickly communications would improve in the united states.
nor could they foresee the rise of national political parties.
within a few years of the convention political parties were nominating candidates for president and educating voters in every state about those candidates.
the electoral college system still affects presidential elections today.
in most states the candidate who gets the most votes even if less than a majority wins all of that states electoral votes.
as a result a candidate can win a majority in the electoral college without necessarily winning a majority of the votes cast across the country.
in the presidential election of 2000 george w bush won the presidency over a1 gore by getting the most electoral college votes even though gore received more votes than bush in the popular election.
56 chapt er 8 only 39 of the original 55 delegates signed the constitution on september 17 1787.
thirteen delegates had returned home before the conclusion of the convention and three others refused to sign.
8 11 the convention ends by the end of summer the hard work of designing the constitution was finished.
but the new plan still had to be approved by the states.
approving the constitution the first question before the framers was how many states would have to ratify or approve the constitution before it could go into effect.
should ratification require approval by all 13 states.
by a majority of 7 states.
the framers compromised on 9 states.
the second question was who should ratify the constitution the people or the state legislatures.
ratification by state legislatures would be faster and easier.
james madison however argued strongly that the people were the fountain of all power and should decide.
the majority of delegates agreed.
after the delegates signed the constitution the document was later ratified at special conventions by delegates elected by the people in each state.
however ratification did not come without difficulty.
signing the constitution on september 17 1787 the delegates declared the constitution complete.
as this last meeting began franklin shared his final thoughts which would be printed in more than 50 newspapers.
i confess that i do not entirely approve of this constitution franklin began.
then he pointed out that no convention could produce a perfect plan.
it therefore astonishes me franklin continued to find this system approaching so near to perfection and i think it will astonish our enemies franklin added that he approved the final plan because i expect no better and because i am not sure that it is not the best he urged every member of the convention to put his name to this instrument not everyone was won over by franklin s words.
thirteen delegates left the convention before it ended and so did not sign the constitution.
ratify to formally approve a plan or an agreement.
the process of approval is called ratification.
creating the constitution 157 the federalist papers a series of essays written by james madison alexander hamilton and john jay in support of the ratification of the constitution by the states three other delegates edmund randolph and george mason both of virginia and elbridge gerry of massachusetts also did not sign.
mason believed it gave too much power to the national government.
gerry refused to sign because he believed the new plan did not protect the rights of the people.
when the signing was over franklin confessed that he had often looked at the sun carved on the back of george washingtons chair and wondered whether it was about to rise or set.
but now he said i have the happiness to know that it is a rising and not a setting sun a new day was dawning for the united states.
8 12 the constitution goes to the states newspapers in every state printed the constitution as soon as they could get it.
what readers found was a plan that would create a federal system of government in which a strong national government shared power with the states.
before long the entire country was debating the same issues that had kept the convention in session for four long months.
the constitution had to be approved by nine states.
this political cartoon shows 11 states pictured as columns supporting the constitution while two states are hesitating.
xs eastr satuiim qifthe erebion of the eleventh pillar of the ere at i aonioomsivittaghtvimffi umfy n f haiti oun dear couht r 5 t e fsi fisfalien good it may it saved.
tit eederjtl edifice.
eleven stars.
ip quick i acccwtin rife eleven columns ftrike our wiring ever be u us come cth fl b aibolu7 scn.
i retl om 5 luow d hoke.
ab aoricul rbs gl nou.
religic iwszr j.
liic stsparetn god j the federalists supporters of the constitution called themselves federalists.
the federalists argued that the constitution would create a national government that was strong enough to unite the quarreling states into a single republic.
james madison alexander hamilton and john jay led the federalist campaign for ratification.
in a series of newspaper essays they recalled the weaknesses of the government under the articles of confederation.
they showed how the constitution would remedy those weaknesses by creating a stronger more effective union of the states.
the federalist leaders also addressed the fears of many americans that a strong government would threaten their freedom or take away their rights.
the powers given to the government they pointed out were strictly limited.
in addition those powers were divided among three branches so that no one branch could become too powerful.
the influential articles written by madison hamilton and jay were later collected and published as the federalist papers.
the anti federalists opponents of the constitution were known as anti federalists.
they found much to dislike about the new plan.
congress they feared would burden the country with taxes.
they claimed the president had power enough to rule like a king.
the judicial branch they said would overpower state courts.
the anti federalists also complained about what was missing from the plan.
their main complaint was that the plan listed the powers of the government but not the rights of the people.
most of all the anti federalists feared change.
the idea of giving up any state power to form a stronger union made them uneasy.
after listening to the arguments madison wrote that the question facing the nation was whether the union shall or shall not be continued.
there is in my opinion no middle ground to be taken in this chapter you read about the constitutional convention the historic meeting that replaced the articles of confederation with a new plan of government.
early quarrels and accomplishments under the articles of confederation congress did not have the power to solve disagreements among states over such issues as taxes.
congress passed laws on how to settle the northwest territory.
shayss rebellion shayss rebellion showed that under the articles of confederation the government was too weak to keep order.
the great compromise in 1787 delegates met at the constitutional convention and agreed to revise the articles.
the great compromise established how states were to be represented in the legislative branch of government.
the three fifths compromise the three fifths compromise settled the question of how slaves were to be counted in determining a states population.
the electoral college a third compromise created a single chief executive to be chosen by the electoral college.
the constitution delegates signed the constitution in september 1787.
they agreed that 9 of the 13 states had to ratify the constitution before it could go into effect.
during the convention benjamin franklin wondered whetherthe sun decorating george washington s chair was rising or setting.
atthe conclusion of the convention franklin optimistically concluded it was a rising sun.
58 chapter 8 creating the constitution 159 reading further the scholarly james madison finished college in two years and then studied law.
by the time he arrived atthe constitutional convention he was experienced in state and national politics.
james madison and the long hot summer of 1787 james madison is often called the father of the constitution.
although many people had a hand in shaping the constitution most scholars agree that madison was the main driving force behind the document s creation.
it was a process that took more than 100 days of complex negotiation and compromise.
even so it did not turn out quite as madison had wanted.
in the first week of may 1787 james madison stood alone in the east room of the pennsylvania state house.
within a few weeks many of the nations political leaders would gather there.
although few of them knew it at the time their task would be to create a new plan of government for the united states.
madison knew it though and he wanted to be ready.
madison had thought long and hard about the great challenges facing the nation.
under the articles of confederation the united states was floundering.
madison believed that a stronger national government was needed to keep the country on course.
other leaders also agreed on the need for reform.
however many of them had fears of a strong central government.
madison would have to work hard to change those ideas.
madison had arrived early in philadelphia to prepare for the convention.
he had checked in to one of the citys finest boarding houses run by mrs mary house.
soon most of his fellow delegates from virginia would be there also.
that would give them a chance to make plans before the convention began.
unfortunately it was not a fine time to be in philadelphia.
it had been a wet and rainy spring.
now as summer neared it was becoming increasingly hot and humid.
to make matters worse the city was plagued with dense clouds of black flies.
residents had to sleep with their windows closed or be tormented by swarms of buzzing biting insects.
shutting their windows however meant they had to spend their nights sweltering in the heat.
madison had bigger concerns though.
as he looked around the east room of the state house he imagined the events that would soon unfold there.
the room was large with a 20 foot high ceiling and tall windows.
but it would be crowded once all the delegates were seated.
madison decided to sit up front where he could get a clear view of the proceedings.
he planned to take notes and wanted to be able to see and hear everything that took place at the convention.
er 8 madison leads the way madison was 36 years old at the time of the convention.
he was a small man just five and a half feet tall with pale skin and thinning hair.
he typically dressed in black.
he was shy and spoke in a soft voice that was often hard to hear.
nevertheless he had great energy.
he walked with a bounce in his step and could get by on just a few hours of sleep a night.
although he rarely showed personal warmth or charm he was a brilliant conversationalist who knew how to win others to his side.
madison was well prepared to play a leading role at the convention.
he had spent several years as a member of congress.
he had studied the writings of great political thinkers and understood how political systems worked.
he had also helped write the virginia constitution of 1776.
this document established a state government with separation of powers and a two house legislature.
it was an important model of democratic government.
madison would bring all this past experience to bear at the convention.
over the next two weeks the other delegates began to arrive.
they were all wealthy educated white men.
most were lawyers or large land owners.
there were no workers or tradesmen.
there were also no women african americans or american indians.
the delegates took rooms at various boarding houses and inns.
one of these inns the indian queen was the largest in the city.
soon it would be filled with leaders from around the nation.
here they would gather to eat drink and swap stories.
it was a center of social activity during the convention.
by mid may most of the virginia delegation had arrived.
this group included three major political figures george washington george mason and edmund randolph.
these men met with madison late into the night.
together they came up with a plan for a new government a set of 15 proposals now known as the virginia plan.
this plan embodied madisons ideas on the kind of government the nation needed.
with a population of more than 40 000 in 1787 philadelphia was the nation s largest city.
it was filled with inns and taverns like the city tavern the unofficial meeting place forthe convention.
now called independence hall this philadelphia building is the birthplace of our nation s independence.
the declaration of independence was signed here in 1776.
the articles of confederation were adopted here in 1781.
and the u s constitution was created here in 1787.
the convention begins on may 14 the convention was due to begin but many delegates had still not arrived.
travel was difficult in those days.
the roads were bad and coaches often got stuck in the mud or broke an axle.
a trip that normally took a week might take much longer because of problems on the road.
finally on may 25 the convention got underway.
for the next four months the delegates would gather in the east room to debate the issues.
to maintain secrecy they agreed to bolt the doors and shut the windows.
as the summer wore on the heat increased.
many of the men wore wigs and wool suits and with the doors and windows closed the room was stifling.
in this hothouse atmosphere arguments were often intense.
through it all madison sat at his table near the front scribbling away at his notes.
in the evening he took these notes back to his room and laboriously copied them out word for word.
it was an ordeal that almost killed him he said.
but he was determined to keep a complete and accurate record of the convention.
debating the virginia plan from the start the convention focused much of its attention on the virginia plan.
on may 29 edmund randolph presented the various points of the plan.
the next day he summed up its main idea in a bold proposal that a national government ought to be established consisting of a supreme legislative executive judiciary amazingly randolph s proposal was approved with little debate.
madison had j 62 chapter 8 achieved his first major goal without a struggle.
the convention had agreed to form a new government.
but winning support for the plans details would prove much more difficult.
the toughest issues involved the national legislature.
the delegates all agreed that congress was a key part of government.
but they disagreed on how the people and the states should be represented in congress.
convention leaders like madison knew that this dispute could derail the convention.
so they focused on what they thought would be a simpler issue the executive branch.
but this turned out to be a tough issue too.
should there be one executive or three.
how long should the executive serve.
should the executive be elected or appointed.
for a week the debate circled around and around these questions.
delegates would vote on a question discuss it some more and vote again.
crafting a final document frustrated by this seemingly endless debate on june 9 the delegates decided to tackle the thorny problem of representation in the legislature.
the month long debate was so fierce that at times it looked like the convention would fall apart.
but the delegates always pulled back from the brink.
finally on july 16 they approved the great compromise which set different forms of representation for the two houses of congress.
depressed madison realized that he had lost his battle for a legislature based solely on representing the people rather than the states.
but with the greatest battle behind them the framers could work toward a final plan for the new government.
by late august the delegates formed the committee on postponed matters to take up the few issues that remained to be resolved.
a few days later the committee reported back with its findings.
more debate followed.
but by early september a committee on style consisting of madison and four others was formed to prepare a final draft to present to the full convention.
ever mindful of the importance of this plan for the nation the delegates made a few more changes.
finally gouverneur morris of new jersey handwrote the final document 4 300 words in all.
on the question to agree to the constitution as amended madison recorded in his notes all the states ay yes and so at last on september 17 1787 most of the delegates signed the constitution.
it was ready to go to the states for ratification.
the exhausted delegates had finally completed their monumental task.
the constitution was not everything james madison had hoped for.
in his view it left too much power in the hands of the states.
but he had done what he could and was prepared to live with the outcome.
now he would turn to the fight for ratification and the task of creating a new government.
visitors to the national constitution center in philadelphia can make a choice the framers once made to sign or not to sign a copy of the constitution.
in signers half bronze statues of the framers stand together.
visitors are encouraged to consider the choices that each man made in 1787.
creating the constitution 163 chapter 9 the constitution a more perfect union how has the constitution created a more perfect union.
9 1 introduction when the delegates left independence hall in september 1787 they each carried a copy of the constitution.
their task now was to convince their states to approve the document they had worked so hard to write.
writing the constitution involved many compromises.
most of all the framers wanted to create a central government that would be strong and lasting but not so strong that it endangered citizens freedoms.
in this chapter you will see how the constitution met these goals.
the delegates wanted ordinary citizens to understand and support the constitution.
for this reason they organized its contents very clearly.
after a short introduction they divided the constitution into parts called articles.
then they split each article into numbered sections that present topics in a careful order.
this structure can help you find information in the constitution.
for instance the first section in the article on the president describes how the president is chosen.
the second section lists the presidents powers.
the third section lists presidential duties and the fourth explains how the president can be removed from office.
one of the marvels of the constitution is the way it combines flexibility with a strong framework for the government.
in general the delegates allowed congress the president and the courts to add details to the basic framework.
they also included procedures for changing the constitution.
this combination of strength and flexibility makes the constitution an enduring document.
the constitution keeps its basic nature yet the framers created it so it could also change with the times.
in this chapter you will learn more about the enduring quality of this ingenious document.
more than 200 years after the constitution was created for a new nation a vastly different united states is still governed by this document.
life size bronze statues atthe national constitution center commemorate the drafting of the constitution.
the constitution a more perfect union 165 popular sovereignty the idea that the governments authority comes from the people 9 2 the preamble tells the goals of government the delegates who crafted the constitution chose each word carefully some of their best known words are in the introduction which is called the preamble.
the preamble explains the reasons for the new government.
the constitution begins with the memorable phrase we the people with these words the delegates announced that the constitution based its authority on the people themselves.
the power to form the government did not come from the states or the existing government.
it did not come from a sovereign ruler appointed by god.
instead the power came from ordinary americans.
this concept is known as popular sovereignty.
the preamble then lists the goals of the new government.
first the delegates wanted to form a more perfect union what did the delegates mean by this.
they wanted the states to cooperate with each other.
they also wanted to create a strong relationship between the states and the national government.
the constitution also aims to establish justice americans wanted to be ruled by laws not by the might of soldiers or the decisions of kings.
the same laws would apply to all people.
the delegates hoped that the new government would insure domestic tranquility by domestic they meant within the country.
by tranquility they meant peace and order.
it was the governments job to keep peace and maintain order within the country.
the new government would provide for the common defence in other words the national government would be responsible for protecting the nation against foreign enemies.
this would allow for stronger protection than would be possible if each state had its own army and navy.
the delegates wanted the new government to promote the general welfare this meant that the government could support an economy and a society in which people could prosper.
finally the delegates hoped to secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity by posterity the delegates meant the generations that would come after them.
they wanted the government to protect the freedoms gained in the american revolution and preserve them for americans to enjoy in the future.
the delegates knew that these goals required a national government.
however based on their experience with a king many people were suspicious of a strong central government.
for this reason the delegates tried to create a balanced framework that people could trust.
visitors can viewthe constitution at the national archives in washington d c where it is permanently on display.
16 chapter 9 9 3 the legislative branch makes laws for the framers of the constitution the first step in building a trusted government was to create a fair way to make laws.
article i of the constitution gives the power to make laws to the legislative branch of government.
the structure of congress the constitution creates a bicameral or two part national legislature called congress.
the two parts or houses of congress are the house of representatives and the senate.
members of the senate serve six year terms so that they can enjoy some independence from the day to day opinions of voters.
in contrast members of the house serve two year terms.
as a result they have to face the voters much more often.
in this way the framers tried to balance the independence and thoughtfulness of the senate with the house s responsiveness to the changing wishes of the voters.
the framers also designed congress to balance the rights of large and small states.
thus while every state gets two senators representation in the house is based on population.
states with more people have more representatives in the house.
to determine the number of representatives for each state the constitution calls for a census a count of the population to be conducted every ten years.
in time the number of representatives in the house was set at 435 divided among the states based on their population.
the framers considered the senate to be the upper house of the legislature.
its members are supposed to be wiser and more experienced than members of the lower house senators must be at least 30 years old while house members must be 25.
senators must have been citizens for nine years house members for just seven years.
senators and members of congress listen to a speech given by president barack obama in the chambers of the house of representatives.
the president must get congressional approval for his ideas before they become law.
legislative branch the lawmaking part of government called the legislature.
to legislate is to make a law.
the constitution a more perfect union 167 popular sovereignty the idea that the governments authority comes from the people 9 2 the preamble tells the goals of government the delegates who crafted the constitution chose each word carefully.
some of their best known words are in the introduction which is called the preamble.
the preamble explains the reasons for the new government.
the constitution begins with the memorable phrase we the peo visitors can view the constitution atthe national archives in washington d c where it is permanently on display.
pie with these words the delegates announced that the constitution based its authority on the people themselves.
the power to form the government did not come from the states or the existing government.
it did not come from a sovereign ruler appointed by god.
instead the power came from ordinary americans.
this concept is known as popular sovereignty.
the preamble then lists the goals of the new government.
first the delegates wanted to form a more perfect union.
what did the delegates mean by this.
they wanted the states to cooperate with each other.
they also wanted to create a strong relationship between the states and the national government.
the constitution also aims to establish justice americans wanted to be ruled by laws not by the might of soldiers or the decisions of kings.
the same laws would apply to all people.
the delegates hoped that the new government would insure domestic tranquility by domestic they meant within the country.
by tranquility they meant peace and order.
it was the governments job to keep peace and maintain order within the country.
the new government would provide for the common defence in other words the national government would be responsible for protecting the nation against foreign enemies.
this would allow for stronger protection than would be possible if each state had its own army and navy.
the delegates wanted the new government to promote the general welfare this meant that the government could support an economy and a society in which people could prosper.
finally the delegates hoped to secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity by posterity the delegates meant the generations that would come after them.
they wanted the government to protect the freedoms gained in the american revolution and preserve them for americans to enjoy in the future.
the delegates knew that these goals required a national government.
however based on their experience with a king many people were suspicious of a strong central government.
for this reason the delegates tried to create a balanced framework that people could trust.
6 er 9 9 3 the legislative branch makes laws for the framers of the constitution the first step in building a trusted government was to create a fair way to make laws.
article i of the constitution gives the power to make laws to the legislative branch of government.
the structure of congress the constitution creates a bicameral or two part national legislature called congress.
the two parts or houses of congress are the house of representatives and the senate.
members of the senate serve six year terms so that they can enjoy some independence from the day to day opinions of voters.
in contrast members of the house serve two year terms.
as a result they have to face the voters much more often.
in this way the framers tried to balance the independence and thoughtfulness of the senate with the houses responsiveness to the changing wishes of the voters.
the framers also designed congress to balance the rights of large and small states.
thus while every state gets two senators representation in the house is based on population.
states with more people have more representatives in the house.
to determine the number of representatives for each state the constitution calls for a census a count of the population to be conducted every ten years.
in time the number of representatives in the house was set at 435 divided among the states based on their population.
the framers considered the senate to be the upper house of the legislature.
its members are supposed to be wiser and more experienced than members of the lower house senators must be at least 30 years old while house members must be 25.
senators must have been citizens for nine years house members for just seven years.
senators and members of congress listen to a speech given by president barack obama in the chambers of the house of representatives.
the president must get congressional approval for his ideas before they become law.
legislative branch the lawmaking part of government called the legislature.
to legislate is to make a law.
the constitution a more perfect union 167 originally the constitution allowed state legislatures to choose the two senators to represent their state.
today however senators are elected by popular vote direct vote by the people.
how congress makes laws the primary job of congress is to make laws.
any member of the house or senate can submit a proposal for a new law called a bill.
however only the house can propose new taxes.
if a majority in one house votes in favor of the bill it is sent to the other house for debate.
if both houses approve the bill it goes to the president.
the bill becomes a law if the president signs it.
the president can veto any proposed law.
congress can override the president s veto which means passing the bill over the presidents objections.
but to do so requires a two thirds majority in both houses.
the constitution establishes a government of three branches with separate powers for each branch.
by dividing power the framers hoped to ensure that no single branch would become too powerful.
the powers of congress article i spells out other powers of congress.
for example only congress can decide how to spend the money raised through taxes.
other congressional powers include the power to raise an army and navy to declare war to pay government debts and to grant citizenship.
in addition congress may make all laws which shall be necessary and proper to carry out its other powers.
this power known as the elastic clause gives congress the flexibility needed to do its job.
over the years the elastic clause has been stretched to allow congress to do many things that were never listed among its powers in the constitution.
powers of the three branches of government legislative branch makes the laws appropriates funds for laws and programs approves treaties and executive appointments establishes federal courts executive branch enforces the laws acts as commander in chief of military negotiates treaties appoints federal judges and other top officials judicial branch interprets the laws reviews lower court decisions judges whether laws and exec utive actions are constitutional rules on cases between states j 68 chapter 9 9 4 the executive branch carries out the laws a government needs people to carry out or execute the laws passed by the legislature.
for instance when congress approves a tax someone must collect the money.
when congress appropriates or sets aside money for low cost housing someone must build and manage the housing.
article ii of the constitution describes the branch of government that fills this role the executive branch.
the head of the executive branch is the president.
the president is often called the chief executive.
electing the president delegates at the constitutional congress were not prepared to let the people elect the president directly.
instead they decided that the president would be selected by a group of electors.
each state would have the same number of electors as it had representatives and senators in congress.
to win the presidency a candidate needs a majority of the electoral vote.
the president serves a four year term.
under the twenty second amendment a president may be reelected only once.
a new president makes a solemn promise called the oath of office.
the constitution gives the exact words of the oath.
the oath calls for the president to defend the constitution these words reinforce the importance of the constitution as the basic law of the land.
a president must be a natural born american citizen and at least 35 years old.
the constitution always refers to the president as he.
the delegates to the constitutional convention probably assumed that only men would ever vote or hold office.
but nothing in the constitution prevents a woman from being elected president.
presidents are atthe center of the american political stage.
here we see president obama meeting with his cabinet and other close advisers.
executive branch the part of government that carries out or executes the laws the constitution a more perfect union 169 the powers of the president in addition to carrying out laws passed by congress the president is commander in chief of the nations military forces.
he or she can with the consent of the senate make treaties or formal agreements with other nations.
the president nominates or recommends ambassadors official representatives to other countries and supreme court justices judges.
finally the president can grant pardons to people convicted of violating federal or national laws.
hie framers expected that the executive branch would need organizations called departments to carry out its duties.
for example the state department handles relations with other nations.
the justice department is involved in law enforcement as well as court actions.
the heads of executive departments are members of the president s cabinet a formal group of advisers.
today the executive branch has over a dozen executive departments.
each executive department contains smaller specialized agencies.
for instance the department of health and human services contains the food and drug administration.
this agency works to ensure that foods and medicines meet safety standards that have been set by congress.
removing the president the constitution gives con gress the power to remove a president or other officials from office if they commit certain crimes related to their duties.
the house of representatives can vote to impeach the president.
to impeach means to formally accuse the president of the crimes specified in the constitution.
these include bribery or other high crimes and misdemeanors if the house votes to impeach the senate puts the president on trial with the senators serving as the jury.
if found guilty the president is removed from office.
article ii of the constitution gives the president the responsibility of commanding the nation s armed forces.
here president obama speaks to u s troops in iraq.
judicial branch the part of government consisting of the supreme court and lower federal courts that interprets the laws 9 5 the judicial branch interprets the law the framers intended for the constitution to be the supreme law of the land.
that means no other laws or actions by the government or by any state can conflict with the constitution.
protecting the constitution is one of the principal responsibilities of the third branch of government the judicial branch.
the judicial branch consists of the system of federal courts and judges.
article iii of the constitution gives the basic framework of the judicial branch.
it establishes the countrys highest court the supreme court.
it also gives congress the power to create inferior lower courts to meet the nations needs.
federal courts also have the power to resolve disputes that involve national laws the federal government or the states.
people accused of breaking national laws can be tried in federal courts.
federal court system congress has authorized two main sets of inferior federal courts.
these lower courts are called district courts and appellate courts.
most cases involving federal laws are first heard in district court.
the united states is divided into large geographic districts.
each district covers several states.
citizens can appeal decisions given in district court which means asking a higher court to review the case.
courts that review cases are called courts of appeal or appellate courts.
an appellate court only considers whether the original trial was fair and legal.
a decision by an appellate court can be appealed to the supreme court.
judicial review the power of the supreme court to decide whether laws and acts made by the legislative and executive branches are unconstitutional the powers of the supreme court the supreme court is the last stop in the judicial system.
its decisions are final and they are binding on all lower courts.
the constitution does not specify the size of the supreme court.
congress has set the size at nine members who are called justices.
the constitution says that all federal judges including supreme court justices serve for good behaviour once they are appointed justices usually serve on the court for life.
a dispute goes directly to the supreme court only if it involves a state or an ambassador from another country.
any other case comes to the supreme court after a trial and an appeal in lower courts.
participants in either national or state courts may eventually appeal cases to the supreme court.
every year lawyers ask the supreme court to review thousands of cases but the court agrees to consider only about a hundred.
the supreme court usually reviews a case only if the justices think the decision made by a lower court might conflict with the constitution or a federal law.
after hearing statements from both sides the justices debate among themselves and vote.
supreme court decisions are announced and explained in writing.
these decisions then guide later decisions in lower courts.
early in its history the supreme court defined the power of judicial review.
this is the power to decide whether laws and acts made by the legislative and executive branches conflict with the constitution.
courts all over the country rely on the supreme court for guidance about what is constitutional.
judicial review gives the supreme court great power in its role of protecting the supreme law of the land the nine members of the supreme court hold important positions in u s government.
their legal opinions on such issues as gun control the death penalty abortion rights and prayer in schools are enforced in every state.
in 2009 sonia sotomayor second from right became the first hispanic justice on the court.
0 chapter 9 the constitution a more perfect union 171 checks and balances the system that allows each branch of government to limit the powers of the other two branches 9 6 checks and balances between the branches the framers of the constitution were very concerned about achieving a balance between a strong national government and protection for individual freedoms.
they hoped that dividing the federal government into three branches was one way to limit the governments power.
but what would keep one branch from dominating the others.
as one delegate to the constitutional convention pointed out from the nature of man we may be sure that those who have power in their hands will always when they can increase it because of this concern the framers developed a system that would enable each branch of the government to limit the power of the other two branches.
this system is called checks and balances.
checks and balances one of the most significant features of the constitution prevent one branch of government from gaining too much power.
constitutional checks and balances judicial executive checking the power of other branches checks allow one branch to block the actions of another branch.
for instance congress has the power to pass laws.
but the president can check this power by vetoing a bill before it becomes law.
in turn congress can check the presidents power by overriding the veto by a two thirds majority vote in each house.
similarly the judicial branch can check the actions of the other two branches.
through its power of judicial review the supreme court can declare that a law a treaty or an executive action is unconstitutional.
balancing the power of other branches balances allow each branch of the government to have some role in the actions and power of the other branches.
for instance judges ambassadors and cabinet members are appointed only if the president nominates them and the senate approves the nomination.
similarly the president has the power to sign treaties but they take effect only if the senate approves them.
the powers of the judicial branch are also balanced against the powers of the other two branches.
even though the supreme court can declare laws unconstitutional it is the president who chooses federal judges and the senate must approve these appointments.
in addition congress can impeach federal judges.
in these ways the legislative and executive branches have some role in the actions of the judicial branch.
these checks and balances keep any one branch of the federal government from being too strong.
this balance of powers is one of the most important features of the u s system of government.
er 9 9 7 the amendment process the framers knew that the constitution would need to be changed over time.
as thomas jefferson said the earth belongs to the living and not to the dead.
at the same time they wanted the constitution to provide a lasting and stable framework for the government.
to maintain that stability the framers made changing the constitution possible but difficult.
changing the constitution article v describes how changes called amendments can be made to the constitution.
an amendment may be proposed in one of two ways.
congress may propose an amendment by a vote of at least two thirds of each house of congress.
or a national convention called by congress at the request of at least two thirds of the state legis latures may propose an amendment.
thus either congress or the states can start the process of amending the constitution.
proposing an amendment is only the first step.
before an amendment can become part of the constitution it must be ratified.
the constitution gives two ways of ratifying an amendment.
an amendment may be approved by the legislatures in at least three fourths of the states or it may be ratified amending the constitution by special conventions in at least three fourths of the states.
once an amendment is approved it becomes part of the constitution.
amendments so far over the years people have suggested more than 10 000 amendments to the constitution.
only 27 have been approved.
the first 10 amendments were added almost immediately after the constitution was ratified.
these amendments were demanded by many americans in exchange for their support of the constitution.
called the bill of rights these 10 amendments primarily guarantee specific rights to citizens.
the other 17 amendments became part of the constitution one at a time.
some of them changed the way certain public officials are elected.
others guaranteed the rights of certain groups of americans.
the thirteenth amendment made slavery illegal.
the nineteenth amendment guaranteed women the right to vote.
the twenty sixth this chart shows the four ways that amendments to the constitution can be proposed and approved or ratified.
amendments are proposed in congress on a regular basis.
the vast majority of the proposals fail.
amendment gave the right to vote to all citizens over the age the constitution a more perfect union 173 interstate commerce trade and other business dealings between two or more states article i of the constitution gives the national government sole authority to print and coin money.
9 8 the federal system connects the nation and the states the framers of the constitution wanted a strong national government but they also wanted the states to keep significant powers.
they accomplished both goals by creating a federal system of government in which power is shared between the national and state governments.
powers belonging to the national government theconsti tution gives some powers only to the national government.
in general these are powers best exercised by one central authority such as declaring war and making treaties.
the constitution also says that only the national government can print and coin money.
the framers had learned from experience that separate state currencies made no sense.
similarly article i gives congress the power to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several states and with the indian tribes known as the commerce clause this provision gives the national government the power to regulate interstate commerce.
for example a state cannot try to protect its own businesses and industries by taxing goods imported from other states.
under the articles of confederation many states had done just that.
as a result interstate trade threatened to grind to a halt.
in effect the commerce clause made the entire united states a common market or free trade zone.
there were several advantages to giving states a common market.
first goods and resources could flow more easily across the country.
this is important because different regions do different things well.
new englanders might be very good at making cloth but their region is not good for growing cotton.
southerners might have lots of cotton but few factories for turning it into cloth.
making interstate trade easier for cloth makers and cotton growers helps both businesses thrive.
second the common market made it easier to create large businesses that crossed state lines.
this was very important to companies like those that built the nations railroads in the 19th century.
third the common market helped to create a single national economy.
under the articles of confederation it was almost as if the country had 13 small economies.
these could never have grown as diverse or powerful as the u s economy did.
notice that the commerce clause also gives the national government the right to regulate trade with indian tribes.
in effect the constitution treats native tribes as foreign governments.
relations with these nations within a nation are the responsibility of congress not the states.
powers belonging to the states the constitution does not spell out specific powers of the states.
instead it says that the states retain or keep any powers that are not given to the national government.
or instance the constitution says nothing about schools marriage sta is ing local governments owning property licensing doctors and lawyers or most crimes.
the states make the laws in these areas of life.
chapter 9 the federal system powers of the powers of national government shared powers state governments coin money set up a guarantee civil rights and liberties conduct elections establish local postal system levy and collect taxes governments maintain military i provide for public safety establish schools forces protect public health regulate marriage declare war establish courts divorce and adoption regulate interstate and foreign commerce punish lawbreakers regulate intrastate commerce regulate immigration j borrow money provide fire and negotiate treaties with foreign countries construct and maintain roads police protection enact license requirements the constitution does however outline the responsibilities of states to each other.
article iv says that each state must give full faith and credit to the laws and court decisions of other states.
this means accepting other states laws and court decisions as legal.
for example a drivers license issued in one state is legal in every state.
similarly states must obey legal contracts that people have made in other states.
like the commerce clause the full faith and credit provision brings stability to business dealings.
states are also required to help each other track down fleeing criminals.
criminals cannot escape justice by fleeing to another state.
finally the constitution does not allow one state to discriminate unreasonably against a citizen of another state.
a state may not for example refuse to let a child who was born in another state attend its public schools.
shared powers federal and state governments also share some powers.
for example both levels of government can collect taxes build roads borrow money and regulate education.
if you think federalism or the sharing of power sounds complicated you are right.
consider presidential elections.
congress sets the date for national elections while the states register voters and run the elections.
states count the ballots while the national government organizes the electoral college vote which determines who will be president.
federalism is also complicated because the constitution provides only a general framework for the sharing of powers.
there was no way for the framers to spell out rules for every possible situation.
the federal system continues to evolve through new laws court decisions and constitutional amendments.
the constitution divides power between the federal and state governments.
the idea behind the separation of powers is to create a unified nation while balancing power between the national and the state governments.
the law of the land americans may disagree about how to interpret the constitution but they may not ignore it.
article vi states that the constitution and the laws flowing from it are the supreme law of the land this means that a states constitution laws and judicial decisions must agree with the constitution.
they also must not conflict with any other federal laws or treaties.
in addition everyone who holds a state or federal office must promise to support the constitution.
federalism the constitutional system that shares power between the national and state governments the constitution a more perfect union 175 majority rule a basic principle of democracy that says laws are passed by majority vote and elections are decided by a majority of the voters interest group an organization that actively promotes the view of some part of the public on specific issues in order to influence government policy political parties are not mentioned in the constitution but they have become a central part of the u s political system.
9 9 popular participation in government ihe framers of the constitution designed a government based on the will of the people.
they expected people to take part in their own government and to hold leaders responsible for their actions.
for government to reflect the popular will it makes sense for its decisions to be based on what most people want.
the constitution therefore establishes the principle of majority rule.
laws are passed in congress by majority vote.
elections are decided by a majority of voters.
it is through elections that most people have a say in what the government does.
leaders must listen to the voters or they will not be elected or reelected.
elections serve the vital function of expressing the will of the people.
but who exactly are the people.
the framers did not specify who would have the right to vote.
over the years states established various requirements for voting.
it took many years of struggle to establish the principle that all citizens should have the right to vote.
women for example were not guaranteed this right until the nineteenth amend ment was ratified in 1920.
popular participation in government has evolved in other ways that are not part of the constitution.
for example the constitution makes no mention of political parties.
today parties select most candidates for political office.
becoming active in party affairs is another way that voters can help choose their leaders and influence the positions they take on issues.
people also take part in government indirectly through interest groups.
there are interest groups for almost any issue that people might care about.
some interest groups represent businesses industries and workers.
some represent groups of people such as churchgoers women or minorities.
some are organized around issues such as the environment or health care.
6 er 9 interest groups influence government in several ways.
they rally public opinion work to elect candidates who promise to listen to them and try to persuade lawmakers and government officials to take actions they favor.
if the framers were alive today they might be surprised to see the changes in the system they created.
yet the remarkable thing is how successful they were in building the basic framework of american democracy.
as one historian has said the constitution would become the rule of life for a country larger than any of the founders imagined and would last longer than most of them dared hope chapter summary in this chapter you learned how the constitution met the delegates goal of creating a more perfect union the preamble as the first words of the preamble tell us the constitutions authority comes directly from the people not the states.
this concept is known as popular sovereignty.
the preamble goes on to list the goals of the new government.
the legislative branch article i of the constitution creates a bicameral congress with a house of representatives and a senate.
every state is represented by two senators.
representation in the house is based on a states population.
congresss primary job is to make laws.
the executive branch article ii creates the executive branch.
the head of the executive branch is the president.
the president serves a four year term and may be reelected once.
the president carries out laws passed by congress.
other powers of the president include making treaties and appointing supreme court justices.
the judicial branch article iii establishes the supreme court and gives congress the power to create lower courts.
supreme court decisions are binding on all lower courts.
the power of judicial review allows the supreme court to decide whether laws and actions by the legislative and executive branches are unconstitutional.
checks and balances the framers developed a system of checks and balances that enables each branch of government to limit or check the power of the other two branches.
the constitution provides checks and balances in the powers of each branch.
the amendment process article v outlines the process by which amendments can be made to the constitution.
twenty seven amendments have been added.
the first ten amendments form the bill of rights.
the federal system the constitution creates a federal system of government in which power is shared between the national government and the states.
popular participation in government elections serve the vital function of expressing the will of the people.
people also participate in government by joining political parties and taking part in interest groups.
the constitution a more perfect union 177 reading further mum bettwas a slave who went to courtto gain herfreedom.
in 1781 a massachusetts court ruled that she was in fact free.
but when the u s constitution was written a few years later it excluded both women and african americans.
who are we the people.
i the constitution begins with the words ne the people.
but just who were these people who wanted to secure the blessings of liberty.
in 1787 we the people excluded more than half the population including african americans and women.
what were the framers thinking.
mum bett had had enough.
born into slavery she had served in the home of john ashley of sheffield massachusetts for more than 30 years.
when mrs ashley hit her with a hot kitchen shovel one day in 1781 mum bett fled and refused to return.
instead mum bett asked a lawyer theodore sedgwick to represent her in court.
mum bett wanted to be free and she believed the courts would recognize that she had the right to freedom.
sedgwick took her case.
mum bett who later changed her name to elizabeth freeman knew about the massachusetts state constitution.
it had been ratified in 1780.
mum bett had heard that it said that all people were born free and equal she believed that all people included her and that she had a legal right to her freedom.
the court agreed and mum bett became a free woman.
john ashley her former master had to pay her 30 shillings in damages.
though the court ruled in favor of mum bett the problem of just who would be included in we the people did not go away.
it surfaced again just a few years later.
in 1787 the leaders of the united states met in philadelphia.
they wrote a constitution for their new country.
but they did not pay attention to the massachusetts court s decision that mum bett was free.
initially the u s constitution excluded women and african americans from enjoying the full benefits of liberty.
the colonies had fought the revolution to gain their freedom.
they created a democracy but many people were disallowed from participating in it.
neither african americans nor women could vote or hold office.
these groups had to fight for many years to gain the right to take part in these democratic processes.
but the question arises why were they excluded in the first place.
the responsibilities of freedom the 55 white men who wrote the u s constitution were a privileged group.
more than half of them had been to college 34 had studied law almost half had been in congress and at least 20 owned slaves.
the delegates were hardly typical of the larger american population at the time.
but in many ways they reflected the general beliefs of 18th century american society.
hapter 9 the framers of the constitution believed that only certain people could handle the responsibilities of freedom.
the way they viewed it only people who controlled their own lives should have a say in the government.
dependent people those who didnt own property or who worked for someone else could not exercise their own free will the framers reasoned.
if they voted they would cast their ballots as they were told to.
the framers believed that the votes of such people would damage the entire country.
to the framers as to many americans in those days only a property owner could be an independent thinker.
that excluded more than half of the population.
we the people were white male and propertied.
some of the excluded could eventually join fully in civic life.
for example indentured servants completed their service after a number of years.
they might eventually own property.
some women might inherit property from their husbands.
but few women were likely ever to enjoy all the rights the constitution promised.
and many people were completely locked out of economic opportunity.
slaves could never own property.
they could never be independent and free.
the american system made it impossible for them to share as citizens in the new united states.
neither women nor african americans simply accepted their exclusion however.
for many years until they were successful both women and african americans would argue that they should be able to participate fully in american democracy.
the framers of the constitution had specific ideas about who we the people were.
in their view only people who owned property could manage the responsibilities of freedom.
in a mural at antioch college in ohio artist gilbert wilson painted a different view of american society.
in this panel titled order a diverse group of women and men come together around a common table.
179 abigail adams was an independent thinker who had strong ideas about women s rights.
in 1787 she was in great britain where john adams was serving as the representative of the new united states.
the rights of women perhaps the most famous woman to speak out for womens rights at the time was abigail adams.
her husband john adams would become the second president of the united states.
in the spring of 1776 when john was a delegate to the continental congress abigail wrote to him saying in the new code of laws which i suppose it will be necessary for you to make i desire you would remember the ladies do not put such unlimited power into the hands of husbands.
remember all men would be tyrants if they could.
abigail adams knew that in the 18th century women had legal status only through their husbands.
a married woman was called a feme covert a legal term that comes from the french words for covered woman women were covered invisible as far as the law was concerned by their husbands.
abigail warned her husband that women would not follow any laws that did not guarantee their rights.
they would not be bound by any laws in which we have no voice or representation john adams however feared that expanding freedom would lead to chaos.
he told abigail that women had more power over their husbands than they realized.
that being true he believed that men would be better off excluding women from the new countrys laws.
depend upon it he wrote we know better than to repeal our masculine systems nonetheless some women did vote during the republics early years.
a new jersey law passed in 1790 identified voters as he or she historians disagree about why.
some point out that new jersey was home to many quakers who believed in equality.
others call attention to the fact that only some counties granted women the vote and say it was more about political power.
thiese counties they say hoped 0 chapter 9 margaret brent requested voting rights declared independence.
in 1648 she asked the maryland assembly to grant her two votes one for owning land and one for being lord baltimore s legal representative.
the governor refused her request.
women s votes would affect election outcomes in their favor.
whatever the reasons women voted in new jersey until the law was repealed in 1807.
it would take more than 100 years and a hard fight to pass an amendment to the constitution that granted women the right to vote.
the rights of african americans when the war ended many african americans left the united states.
they feared that the new democracy would not include them.
some went to england.
others went to canada or the west indies.
most of those who left were fugitive slaves.
by some accounts 30 000 african americans left virginia.
another 25 000 left south carolina.
the majority of the african americans who stayed were slaves.
but some were not.
the 1790 census reported that there were about 59 000 free blacks living in the united states.
among them was benjamin banneker.
banneker was a maryland tobacco farmer a scientist and a surveyor.
he wrote a well known almanac.
he also wrote a letter to thomas jefferson.
in it he explained why african americans should have the same rights as whites.
banneker wrote the letter in 1791 the year in which he surveyed the land for the new national capital.
at the time jefferson was secretary of state.
banneker explained that both blacks and whites were created by god.
however variable we may be in society or religion he wrote however diversified in situation or color we are all of the same family he went on to quote the declaration of independence to the man who wrote it.
we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights and that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness banneker explained that african americans deserved those rights just as whites did.
he even went so far as to accuse jefferson of using fraud and violence to keep blacks enslaved.
although a slaveholder himself jefferson wrote back that no body wishes more than i do to see such proofs as you exhibit that nature has given to our black brethren talents equal to those of the other colors of men but slavery continued in the south until the civil war.
the freedoms guaranteed by the constitution would not be extended to african americans for many years.
african american men gained the right to vote in 1870.
it would take another 50 years before all women including african americans were granted voting rights.
and not until the 1960s were laws passed giving all african americans the legal protection to exercise their right to vote.
the words we the people still begin our constitution.
more than 200 years later their meaning has changed in ways that mum bett abigail adams and benjamin banneker would approve.
benjamin bannakers pennsylvania delaware mao land and virginia almanac for the year of onr lord 1 95 i besig the third after leap year printed for willusf bbons cherry a benjamin banneker published six almanacs between 1792 and 1797.
a self educated scientist he included information on tides astronomy and eclipses that he calculated himself.
the constitution a more perfect union 181 chapter 7 1793 french revolutionaries behead king louis xvi.
1794 the whiskey rebellion begins in pennsylvania.
1795 native american leaders sign the treaty of greenville.
1796 john adams is elected president on december.
1799 george washington dies at mount vernon virginia on december 14.
1799 the rosetta stone is discovered in egypt.
inscriptions on the stone make it possible for researchers to read egyptian hieroglyphics.
launching the nation 231 reading social 1 economics geography politics society and culture science and technology focus on themes this chapter titled launching the nation describes how the early leaders established this nation s political and economic systems.
you will read about washington s presidency hamilton s plan for financial security for the nation the establishment of two parties to elect the president and jefferson s struggles with both washington and hamilton.
throughout the chapter you will see that disagreement often defined these early days.
drawing inferences about history focus on reading what s the difference between a good guess and a weak guess.
a good guess is an educated guess.
in other words the guess is based on some knowledge or information.
that s what an inference is an educated guess.
drawing inferences about what you read to draw an inference combine information from your reading with what you already know and make an educated guess about what it all means.
once you have made several inferences you may be able to draw a conclusion that ties them all together.
i question what kind of person was alexander hamilton.
inside the text hamilton ran a company when he was just a teenager.
he had a career as a lawyer.
he became the secretary of the treasury under washington.
outside the text running a company takes intelligence and cleverness.
becoming a lawyer takes dedication.
washington probably wanted someone clever and capable.
steps for drawing inferences 1.
ask a question.
note information inside the text.
note information outside the text.
use both sets of information to make an educated guess or inference.
inference alexander hamilton was an intelligent clever and dedicated man.
chapter 7 you try it.
read the following passage and answer the questions that follow.
economic differences hamilton wanted new forms of economic growth.
he wanted to promote manufacturing and business.
he even suggested that the government award a prize to companies that made excellent products.
in addition hamilton wanted to pass higher tariffs.
known as protective tariffs these taxes would raise the prices of foreign products.
hamilton hoped this would cause americans to buy u s goods.
as a result american manufacturing would be protected from foreign competition.
jefferson worried about depending too much on business and manufacturing.
he believed that farmers were the most independent voters jefferson wanted to help farmers by keeping the costs of the goods they bought low.
lower tariffs would help keep prices low.
after you read the passage answer the following questions.
which two questions can be answered directly from the text above and which one requires that you make an inference.
from chapter 7 p 240 241 chapter 7 section 1 george washington p 234 electoral college ip.
234 martha washington p 235 precedent p 236 judiciary act of 1789 ip.
236 section 2 alexander hamilton p 238 national debt p 238 bonds ip.
238 speculators ip.
239 thomas jefferson p 239 loose construction p 242 strict construction p 242 bank of the united states p 242 section 3 french revolution p 243 neutrality proclamation ip.
244 privateers p 244 jay s treaty p 245 pinckney s treaty ip.
245 little turtle p 246 battle of fallen timbers ip.
247 treaty of greenville p 247 whiskey rebellion ip.
247 section 4 political parties fp.
250 federalist party ip.
250 democratic republican party p 250 xyz affair p 252 alien and sedition acts ip.
253 kentucky and virginia resolutions ip.
who wanted higher tariffs hamilton or jefferson.
why do you think hamilton and jefferson had different views on the importance of manufacturing.
c which man wanted to help the farmers.
to answer question b it might help to know that hamilton lived in new york city and jefferson was from the more rural area of virginia.
use that information and information in the passage to explain why one man might have valued manufacturing more than the other.
academic vocabulary in this chapter you will learn the following academic words agreement p 237 neutral p 244 as you read chapter 7 remember that you need to combine what you already know with the information in the chapter to draw inferences.
launching the nation 233 section teks 4b 5 a 5 b 14a 14b 20b 22a 22b washington leads a new nation what you will learn.
in 1789 george washington became the first president of the united states.
congress and the president organized the executive and judicial branches of government.
americans had high expectations for their new nation.
i if you were there you are a seamstress in new york city in 1789.
you ve joined the excited crowd in the streets for inauguration day.
church bells are ringing and people are cheering.
even though you were just a young child during the revolution washington is your hero.
now you watch as he takes the oath of office.
you are proud to see that he is wearing a suit of american made cloth.
what do you think americas future will be like under president washington.
president washington and members of congress established a new national government.
key terms and people george washington p 234 electoral college p 234 martha washington p 235 precedent p 236 judiciary act of 1789 p 236 building background george washington was more than just a popular war hero.
people naturally looked to him as a national leader.
he had taken part in the continental congresses and in creating the constitution.
he helped establish and strengthen the new national government.
i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on why and how george washington was chosen as first president.
the first president americans believed in george washington.
they saw him as an honest intelligent and steady leader.
he was a hero of the revolution and was known for his ability to motivate and administer the army.
many believed he should be the first u s president.
washington had been looking forward to retirement and a quiet life on his virginia farm.
when he hesitated to become a candidate for the presidency his friends convinced him to run.
fellow politician gou vemeur morris told him should the idea prevail win that you would not accept the presidency it should prove fatal to the new government.
morris concluded confidently of all men you are the best fitted to fill that office.
in january 1789 each of the 11 states that had passed the constitution sent electors to choose the first president.
the group was the electoral college a body of electors who represent the people s vote in choosing the president.
the electoral college selected washington unanimously and john adams became his vice president.
analyzing why was washington selected to be president.
reading check 4 chapter 7 leaders of the new nation hard work lay ahead for members of the new government.
the new federal government had to create policies and procedures that would determine the future of the country.
the founding fathers many leaders who had been involved in the revolution the creation of the articles of confederation and the framing of the constitution continued to be leaders after the adoption of the constitution.
there were more than 100 men who might be called founding fathers for their work in founding the nation.
delegates to conventions and members of early state governments all worked together and brought ideas for the creation of the new system of government.
these men expressed the civic virtue of representing the good of the whole nation even those people they disagreed with.
seven men stand out from the rest for their wide ranging contributions to the nation.
thomas jefferson and james madison were known for their leadership in authoring the declaration of independence and constitution respectively.
john adams alexander hamilton and john jay were known for their strong support of the new constitution.
benjamin franklin was older than many of the others and was respected for his wise ideas on the organization and purpose of the revolution.
george washington led the american forces during the revolutionary war and then led the nation during its first years.
several of these men acted as ambassadors to european nations and several became president.
each of them contributed their time intelligence and leadership to help found the nation.
women s contributions washington s wife first lady martha washington entertained guests and attended social events with her husband.
she described the scene to her niece i have not had one half hour to myself since the day of my arrival.
she ran the presidential household with style.
other women of the time period such as author judith sargent murray believed that women needed to play a greater role in the new nation than martha washington did.
murray abigail adams and others believed in republican motherhood the idea that women played an important role in teaching their children to be good citizens.
i history video did you know george washington n7i 0 henry knox secretary of war 0 alexander hamilton secretary of the 0 thomas jefferson secretary of state treasury 0 edmund randolph attorney general george washington president analysis skill.
analyzing visuals how do you think a modern cabinet meeting might look different from the one shown here.
v launching the nation 235 some americans lived in growing cities like new york shown above.
however the new republic was overwhelm ingly rural.
most americans lived and worked on farms.
why might rural americans and urban americans want different things from their new government.
a rural nation some promoters of republican motherhood did not expect women to participate in politics or business.
other people however hoped that republican motherhood would lead to greater opportunities for women.
they hoped more women would receive an education.
only a few families were willing to provide much education for their daughters and adult women rarely had the time or money to get an education later in life.
most women in the early republic faced long days managing their households and working hard inside or outside the home to support their families.
describe what did the founding fathers do.
reading check.
organizing the government as president washington noted in a letter to james madison the first of everything in our situation will serve to establish a precedent.
a precedent is an action or decision that later serves as an example.
the first congress created departments in the executive branch for different areas of national policy.
washington met with the department heads or cabinet members who advised him.
today we know that presidents have cabinet meetings with their top advisers.
this practice started during washington s presidency and was common by 1792.
chapter 7 for two of his most important cabinet positions washington chose carefully.
he picked alexander hamilton as secretary of the treasury and thomas jefferson as secretary of state.
henry knox served as secretary of war and samuel osgood was chosen as postmaster general.
hamilton was a gifted economic planner and jefferson had served as ambassador to france.
knox had helped washington run the continental army and osgood had government experience.
to set up the federal court system and the courts location congress passed the judiciary act of 1789.
this act created three levels of federal courts and defined their powers and relationship to the state courts.
it set up federal district courts and circuit courts of appeals.
the president nominated candidates for federal judgeships.
those candidates then had to be approved or rejected by the senate.
washington wrote about the importance of these duties l have always been persuaded that the stability and success of the national government would depend in a considerable degree on the interpretation and execution of its laws.
in my opinion therefore it is important that the judiciary system should not only be independent in its operations but as perfect as possible in its formation george washington quoted in the real george washington edited by parry et al.
the basic parts of the federal government were now in place.
leaders began to face the challenges of the new nation.
hard work lay ahead.
reading check finding main ideas what two important precedents were established for the federal government.
expectations for the nation in 1790 the united states was home to almost 4 million people.
most americans lived in the countryside and worked on farms.
they wanted fair tax laws and the right to settle western lands.
other americans worked in towns as craftspeople laborers or merchants.
many merchants wanted simpler trade laws but manufacturers wanted tariffs to protect them from foreign competitors.
americans had high expectations for their new nation.
they hoped the government would improve trade and keep the economy stable.
during this period the economic system of free enterprise expanded.
most business owners and merchants wanted the government to make few regulations on business practices protect the rights of property owners and keep taxes low.
they believed such government policies would encourage businesses to expand production and trade.
most cities were small.
only new york city and philadelphia had populations larger than 25 000.
new york city was the first capital of the united states and it represented the spirit of the new nation.
although badly damaged during the revolution the city had already begun to recover.
citizens got rid of many signs of british rule.
new york city had a bustling economy.
international trade and business became more active.
a french visitor to new york city noted the city s energy.
everything in the city is in motion everywhere the shops resound ring out with the noise of workers one sees vessels arriving from every partoftheworld a french visitor to new york quoted in new york in the american revolution by wilbur abbott academic vocabulary agreement a decision reached by two or more people or groups in 1792 some 24 stockbrokers signed an agreement under a buttonwood tree on wall street.
this agreement was the foundation for what later became the new york stock exchange.
it cemented wall street s image as today the the economic hub of the united states.
by exchange js the 1790 the city had grown rapidly.
to many largest market officials it reflected the potential future of for securities the new nation and was a fitting place for hesworld the capital.
the impact today reading check analyzing why was new york city chosen as the first capital of the united states.
summary bby preside and preview americans led it george washington set up their new government.
in the next section you will read about alexander hamilton s economic plan.
section 1 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
describe what role did the electoral college play in george washington s election to the presidency.
b summarize what were some of martha washington s duties as first lady.
c evaluate how did the contributions of the founding fathers demonstrate civic virtue.
describe what precedent did president washington and congress establish regarding the executive branch.
explain what was the purpose of the judiciary act of 1789.
c evaluate what do you think was the most important element of the judiciary act of 1789.
recall what city served as the first capital of the united states.
draw conclusions what expectations did most americans have for the new nation.
how did the nation begin to develop a free enterprise system.
c make judgments do you think new york city should still be the capital city of the united states.
explain your answer.
critical thinking 4.
comparing review your notes on george washington.
then copy the chart below and use it to compare how washington and congress organized the new government.
washington s acts of decisions congress a first u s government f writesmart 5.
thinking about washington s contributions in this section you learned some things about george washington as president.
jot down one or two things you could use to support his nomination for a nobel prize.
launching the nation 237 section 2 teks 5a 5b 5c 21c hamilton and national finances what you will learn 1.
hamilton tackled the problem of settling national and state debt.
thomas jefferson opposed hamilton s views on government and the economy.
hamilton created a national bank to strengthen the u s economy.
i treasury secretary alexander hamilton developed a financial plan for the national government.
key terms and people alexander hamilton p 238 national debt p 238 bonds p 238 speculators p 239 thomas jefferson p 239 loose construction p 242 strict construction p 242 bank of the united states p 242 use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the economic problems facing the nation when alexander hamilton became secretary of the treasury as well as hamilton s solutions to the problems.
if you were there you live on a plantation in north carolina in the 1790s.
you have just heard that the federal government plans to pay most of the northern states debts from the war.
your neighbors are outraged about this idea.
it means more taxes and tariffs.
new york and massachusetts are far away they say.
why should north carolina farmers have to pay northern debts.
would you pay other states war debts.
b l g ac und rrzof enewnat bi zt i problems were economic.
the national and state governments had i run up huge debts during the war.
butthe proposed solutions to these problems revealed differences in regional viewpoints.
southern planters.
and northern businesspeople had very different ideas about how the j national economy should develop.
settling the debt alexander hamilton seemed born with a head for economics.
while still in his teens he helped run a shipping company in his native british west indies.
family friends then sent him to the american colonies for an education.
hamilton eventually married into a wealthy new york family and began practicing law.
he served as washington s aide and as a delegate to four continental congresses.
national debt as secretary of the treasury hamilton s biggest challenge was paying off the national debt money owed by the united states from the revolutionary war.
the united states owed about 11 7 million to foreign countries and about 40 4 million to u s citizens.
during the war the government raised money with bonds.
bonds are certificates of debt that carry a promise to buy back the bonds at a higher price.
the new government could not afford to keep this promise.
bondholders who needed money sold 8 chapter 7 hamilton s economic plan gsgor o alexander hamilton developed a three point plan to solve the nation s financial problems.
total debt deal with the debt take on the foreign and domestic debt by replacing creditors old low value bonds with new interest bearing bonds take over most of the states 25 million revolutionary war debts would build investor confidence in the stability of the new nation gain revenue pass a tariff to both bring in money and help american manufacturers stabilize the banking system create a national bank would free up state money for business and trade their bonds for less than the original value to speculators or people who buy items at low prices in the hope that the value will rise and they can sell the items for a profit.
hamilton wanted to pay the foreign debt immediately and gradually repay the total value of all bonds.
the second part of his plan caused disagreements because paying full value would allow speculators to make a profit.
hamilton thought this was fair.
he said he the speculator paid what the commodity bond was worth and took the risks.
thomas jefferson disagreed.
he thought the idea cheated bondholders who had sold their bonds at low prices.
jefferson wrote immense sums were thus filched stolen from the poor and ignorant.
but more politicians agreed with hamilton.
in 1790 the government exchanged old bonds for new more reliable ones that were guaranteed.
states debts the states owed 25 million for revolutionary war expenses.
hamilton wanted the federal government to pay for 21 5 million of this debt.
hamilton believed that this action would help the federal government.
he thought that paying the states debts would help the national economy.
debtor states would not have to spend so much on repayment and would have money to develop business and trade.
increased business and trade would put more money back into the national economy.
the south however did not want to help the federal government pay the debts of other states.
states such as virginia and north carolina did not have many war debts.
they thought hamilton s idea was unfair.
patrick henry said he did not believe that the constitution gave congress the power to pay state debts.
hamilton knew that he needed the help of southern representatives to get his plan approved.
moving the capital hamilton also knew that he had something to bargain with.
southern officials wanted to change the location of the nation s capital.
many southerners thought that having the capital in new york gave the northern states too much influence over national policy.
hamilton jefferson and james madison met in june 1790.
hamilton launching the nation 239 the impact today washington d c and the surrounding areas are home to more than 5 million people today.
the city is not only the nation s capital but also a major tourist attraction.
promised to convince northern members of congress to move the capital.
jefferson and madison then agreed to gather support in the south for hamilton s debt plan.
the compromise worked.
the national capital was moved to philadelphia in 1791 for 10 years.
for the capital s permanent location washington chose a place on the potomac river that included part of both maryland and virginia.
the land was made up of swamps and farms.
this site would eventually become the city of washington d c reading check identifying points of view how did southerners feel about the federal government paying state war debts and how did hamilton change their minds.
biography benjamin banneker 0731 woe benjamin banneker was born to a free african american family in rural maryland.
he attended a quaker school but was largely self educated.
he was a skilled mathematician and scientist.
his mathematical skills prompted thomas jefferson to give him a job surveying the land for the new national capital.
draw conclusions how was benjamin banneker s life different from most african americans of the time.
jefferson opposes hamilton hamilton and jefferson did not cooperate for long.
instead they began to disagree about how to define the authority of the central government.
hamilton believed in a strong federal government.
jefferson wanted to protect the powers of the states.
their conflict reflected basic differences in their opinions about democracy.
hamilton had little faith in the average individual.
he once said that the people.
seldom judge or determine decide right.
differing views hamilton wanted a strong central government that balanced power between the mass of the people and wealthier citizens.
he believed that his approach would protect everyone s liberties while keeping the people from having too much power.
jefferson disagreed strongly with hamilton s views of the average citizen s ability to make decisions for the country.
he admitted that the people can not be all and always well informed.
however jefferson believed that it was the right of the people to rule the country.
economic differences hamilton and jefferson also fought over how the country s economy should grow.
hamilton wanted new forms of economic growth.
he wanted to promote manufacturing and business.
he even suggested that the primary source points of view role of a citizen alexander hamilton thought that the average citizen had no interest in public affairs.
m ne must take man as we find him and if we expect him to serve the public we must interest his passions in doing so.
a reliance on pure patriotism has been the source of many of our errors alexander hamilton quoted in odd destiny the life of alexander hamilton marie b hecht i how did the views of hamilton and jefferson differ.
thomas jefferson believed that each citizen could work to better society.
it is my principle that the will of the majority should always prevail win.
above all things i hope the education of the common people will be attended to i am convinced that on their good sense we may rely with the most security for the preservation of a due degree of liberty thomas jefferson from thomas jefferson a biography in his own words government award a prize to companies that made excellent products.
in addition hamilton wanted to pass higher tariffs.
known as protective tariffs these taxes would raise the prices of foreign products.
hamilton hoped this would cause americans to buy u s goods.
as a result american manufacturing would be protected from foreign competition.
jefferson worried about depending too much on business and manufacturing.
he believed that farmers were the most independent voters.
they did not depend on other people s work to make a living.
jefferson wrote our governments will remain virtuous pure for many centuries as long as they are chiefly agricultural.
jefferson wanted to help farmers by keeping the costs of the goods they bought low.
lower tariffs would help keep prices low.
summarizing what were the main differences between hamilton and jefferson concerning the power of the nation s government.
reading check.
a national bank hamilton s and jefferson s differences became more and more public in early 1791.
the two men had very different opinions about how the government should approach its economic problems.
hamilton s plan for a national bank hamilton wanted to start a national bank where the government could safely deposit its money.
the bank would also make loans to the government and businesses.
hamilton also thought that the united states should build a national mint a place to make coins.
then the country could begin issuing its own money.
hamilton knew that people who wanted to protect states rights might have a strong reaction to the idea of a national bank so he suggested limiting it to a 20 year charter.
after that time congress could decide whether to extend the charter.
hamilton also asked each state to start its own bank so the national bank would not have a monopoly.
the impact today beginning in 2008 the u s mint has tried to increase the use of 1 00 coins for several reasons including the ability to recycle the metal used to make them.
launching the nation 241 jefferson opposes the bank both jefferson and madison believed that hamilton s plans for the economy gave too much power to the federal government.
they also thought the u s constitution did not give congress the power to create a bank.
but hamilton quoted the elastic clause which states that congress can make all laws which shall be necessary and proper to govern the nation.
hamilton declared that the clause allowed the government to create a national bank.
hamilton believed in loose construction of the constitution.
loose construction means that the federal government can take reasonable actions that the constitution does not specifically forbid.
jefferson thought that the elastic clause should be used only in special cases.
he wrote to president washington the constitution allows only the means which are necessary not those which are merely convenient.
jefferson believed in strict construction of the constitution.
people who favor strict construction think that the federal government should do only what the constitution specifically says it can do.
president washington and congress agreed with hamilton.
they hoped a bank would offer stability for the u s economy.
in february 1791 congress enacted the charter for the bank of the united states the country s first national bank.
the bank played an important role in making the u s economy more stable.
reading check drawing conclusions why did congress and the president agree to create a national bank.
summary and preview washington and hamilton developed plans for paying the national debt.
in the next section you will read about the u s neutrality policy.
section 2 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
describe what economic problems did the new government face.
b summarize what compromise did alexander hamilton thomas jefferson and james madison reach regarding repayment of state debts.
identify what disagreement did jefferson and hamilton have over the central government.
compare summarize hamilton s and jefferson s views on the national bank.
c elaborate do you agree with hamilton or jefferson regarding the average citizen s ability to make decisions for the country.
explain your answer.
recall why did jefferson oppose the creation of the bank of the united states.
contrast what is the difference between loose construction and strict construction of the constitution.
c elaborate defend alexander hamilton s stance in favor of the creation of a national bank.
critical thinking 4.
identifying solutions review your notes on u s economic problems and hamilton s solutions.
then copy the chart below and use it to show how hamilton s views on the economy differed from those of thomas jefferson.
hamilton jefferson bonds economy tariffs national bank 5.
gathering information about hamilton and jefferson both hamilton and jefferson were strong leaders who helped shape the government of the young united states.
what could you say about either of them to support a nomination for a nobel prize.
2 chapter 7 challenges for thc neiaf nation if you were there you are the captain of an american merchant ship in the 1790s.
your ship has just picked up cargo in the french west indies.
you are headed back to your home port of philadelphia.
suddenly a british warship pulls alongside your ship.
marines swarm aboard.
they order you into the nearest harbor and seize your goods.
how would this incident affect your views of great britain.
teks 5a 5e 21a what you will learn main ideas 1.
the united states tried to remain neutral regarding events in europe.
the united states and native americans came into conflict in the northwest territory.
the whiskey rebellion tested washington s administration.
in his farewell address washington advised the nation.
t i building background as the new nation tried to get orga i nized it faced economic problems and internal divisions.
even more dif ficult challenges came from conflicts in europe.
the united states could not avoid being caught up in fighting between france and great britain.
j remaining neutral tensions between france and britain began to build after the french people rebelled against their king.
on july 14 1789 citizens of paris attacked and captured the bastille a hated fortress and prison that stood as a mighty symbol of royal power.
the storming of the bastille was one of the first acts of the french revolution a rebellion of french people against their king in 1789.
the french people overthrew their king and created a republican government.
the big idea the united states faced significant foreign and domestic challenges under washington.
key terms and people french revolution p 243 neutrality proclamation p 244 privateers p 244 jay s treaty p 245 pinckney s treaty p 245 little turtle p 246 battle of fallen timbers p 247 treaty of greenville p 247 whiskey rebellion p 247 7 taking notes french revolutionaries storm the bastille.
use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the challenges faced by the new nation during washington s administration.
launching the nation 243 focus on reading what can you infer about france before 1793 using this paragraph and what you already know about democracies.
academic vocabulary neutral unbiased not favoring either side in a conflict many french citizens had been inspired to take action by the american revolution.
many americans in turn supported the french revolution.
they thought that france was creating the same kind of democracy as the united states.
some americans worried about the french revolution s violent riots and attacks on traditional authority.
revolutionaries shocked many americans by beheading king louis xvi in january 1793 and queen marie antoinette later that year.
a few years after the french revolution started france and great britain went to war.
some americans supported the french while others backed the british.
some wanted to remain neutral.
the neutrality proclamation the debate divided congress and washington s cabinet.
washington presented his opinion to congress on april 22 1793 the duty and interest of the united states require that they should with sincerity and good faith adopt and pursue a conduct friendly and impartial unbiased towards the belligerent fighting powers.
george washington quoted in the real george washington by parry et al.
this neutrality proclamation stated that the united states would not take sides with any european countries that were at war.
washington believed his plan was the safest for the long run but not everyone agreed.
some members of congress criticized washington s ideas.
james madison believed that the president had gone beyond his authority.
he questioned washington s right to issue the proclamation without the approval of congress.
the french question france s new representative to the united states edmond genet zhuh nay asked american sailors to help france fight england by commanding privateers.
privateers were private ships hired by a country to attack its enemies.
washington told genet that using american privateers violated u s neutrality.
jefferson wanted the french revolutionaries to succeed but even he agreed that allowing france to use american privateers against england was a bad idea.
jefferson was still upset by u s policy toward france.
he believed that the united states should back france because france had supported the united states during the revolutionary war.
hamilton on the other hand was pro british.
he hoped to strengthen trading ties with britain the most powerful trading nation in the world at the time.
jefferson thought that hamilton had too much influence on the president s foreign policy and that hamilton consequently interfered with jefferson s role as secretary of state.
jefferson decided to resign from washington s cabinet in 1793.
time line the struggle for neutrality april 1789 george washington becomes president.
april 1793 president washington i issues the neutrality proclamation.
jay s treaty there were other threats to u s neutrality.
in late 1793 the british seized ships carrying food to the french west indies.
hundreds of the ships were neutral american merchant ships.
also british officers were helping native americans fight settlers.
washington wanted to prevent another war with the british.
he sent chief justice john jay to london to work out a compromise.
the british knew the united states lacked a strong navy and that u s businesses relied heavily on british trade.
however the british did not want to fight another war in america.
in november 1794 the two sides signed jay s treaty.
jay s treaty settled the disputes that had arisen between the united states and great britain in the early 1790s.
the british would pay damages on seized american ships and abandon their forts on the northwestern frontier.
the united states agreed to pay debts it owed the british.
the treaty was unpopular and sparked violent protests.
citizens and congressional leaders thought the treaty hurt trade and did not punish britain enough for some of its actions.
southerners were especially angry that the treaty did not ask britain to repay them for slaves that britain had set free during the revolutionary war.
washington did not like the treaty but believed it was the most that could be done.
at his urging the senate approved the treaty.
pinckney s treaty american businesses faced problems as well.
the spanish disputed the border between the united states and florida.
spain closed the port of new orleans to u s trade in 1784.
this hurt the american economy because all goods moving down the mississippi to places in the east or overseas had to pass through new orleans.
washington asked ambassador thomas pinckney to meet with spanish officials to discuss the problem.
he asked the spaniards to reopen new orleans to u s trade.
pinckney also asked for the right of deposit in new orleans.
this right would allow american boats to transfer goods in new orleans without paying cargo fees.
spanish minister manuel de godoy goh thoy tried to delay reaching an agreement hoping pinckney would become desperate and sign a treaty that favored the spanish.
he was worried that the united states and great britain might join against spain after signing jay s treaty.
pinckney was patient however and his patience was rewarded.
in october 1795 godoy agreed to pinckney s treaty which settled the border and trade disputes with spain.
under the treaty spain agreed to recognize the u s southern boundary as 31n latitude.
spain s government also reopened the port at august 1795 the treaty of greenville ends fighting in the northwest territory.
october 1795 pinckney s treaty reopens the port of new orleans.
analysis skill.
reading time lines to what extent was president washington successful in maintaining american neutrality.
launching the nation 245 new orleans to american ships and gave them the right of deposit.
because it opened the frontier to more expansion washington and most other americans believed that pinckney s treaty was a successful compromise.
reading check summarizing why did president washington want the united states to remain neutral.
conflict in the northwest territory as the united states dealt with international conflicts trouble was also brewing at home.
americans continued to settle the northwest territory despite native americans protests.
supplied by british traders with guns native americans went to war.
in 1790 a native american alliance under the command of miami chief little turtle defeated u s forces under general josiah harmar.
then in 1791 native americans defeated general arthur st clair s troops.
general wayne takes command in 1792 president washington gave command of the army in the west to general anthony wayne.
wayne s task was to bring troops to the frontier to fight against the indians.
in 1793 general wayne arrived in ohio.
many of his men were ill from smallpox and influenza so they were unable to fight well.
wayne s troops moved north and built fort greenville where they remained during the winter.
they built additional forts for protection and to have supplies at hand.
as the summer of 1794 neared several native american groups led by little turtle attacked a supply train near the fort.
wayne and his men responded.
they attacked native american towns and burned crops.
the british no longer aided the native americans after this defeat and little turtle realized that he was outmatched.
he urged his people to seek peace.
16 chapter 7 the trail has been long and bloody it has no end.
the whites are many.
they are like the leaves of the trees.
when the frost comes they fall and are blown away.
but when the sunshine comes again they come back more plentiful than ever before little turtle quoted in the ohio frontier by douglas hurt the end of conflict on august 20 1794 native americans fought wayne s troops in the battle of fallen timbers and were defeated.
the battle was named for an area where many trees had been destroyed by a tornado.
waynes forces burned indians villages and fields.
the strength of indian forces in the region was broken.
the frontier war soon ended.
in august 1795 native american leaders signed the treaty of greenville which gave the united states claim to most indian lands in the northwest territory.
the treaty also guaranteed the safety of citizens there.
in exchange native americans received 20 000 worth of goods and an acknowledgment of their claim to the lands they still held.
finding main ideas what conflicts did the united states face in the late 1700s.
the whiskey rebellion other conflicts occurred on the frontier.
congress passed a tax on american made whiskey in march 1791.
the tax was part of hamilton s plan to raise money to help pay the federal debt.
he was also testing the power of the federal government to control the states actions.
reaction in the west people in areas such as western pennsylvania were bitter about the tax.
they were already angry with the federal government which they believed did not protect settlers from native american attacks and did not allow settlers enough opportunities for trade.
the farmers com crops were often made into whiskey which was easier to transport than reading check the com.
because cash was rare whiskey became like money in their region.
the farmers believed that the tax was aimed specifically at them.
farmers who produced small amounts of whiskey for trade argued that they could not afford the tax.
they believed they should be able to keep the money they had made from a product they created themselves.
protests in 1792 led president washington to issue a proclamation saying that people had to obey the law.
westerners also disliked the fact that cases about the law were to be tried in a district court.
these courts were usually far away from the people they affected and were a great inconvenience to them.
whiskey rebellion is crushed the complaints of western pennsylvanians were at first expressed peacefully.
but by 1794 fighting had broken out.
in what became known as the whiskey rebellion farmers lashed out against the tax on whiskey.
protesters refused to pay the tax.
they even tarred and feathered tax collectors.
some called themselves the new sons of liberty.
incidents of violence spread to other states.
president washington feared that the rebels threatened the federal government s authority.
he believed he needed to make people understand that the constitution gave congress the right to pass and enforce the tax.
washington declared that he could no longer remain a passive inactive spectator in the event.
he personally led the army in military action against the rebellion the first and only time an american president has done so.
the army of about 13 000 men approached western pennsylvania in november 1794.
by this time most of the rebels had fled.
the whiskey rebellion ended without a battle.
supporting a point of view defend the viewpoint of the pennsylvania farmers who did not want to pay the whiskey tax.
reading check.
launching the nation 247 primary source z 11.
111 n hi iu 1 1 11 j 11 11 1 n.
historical document washington s farewell address on september 19 1796 president george washington s farewell address first i appeared in a philadelphia newspaper.
in it washington wrote about the nation s economy political parties and foreign policy.
while then every part of our country feels an immediate and particular interest in union all the parts combined cannot fail to find in the united mass 9reater strength greater resource proportionally greater security from external danger and a less frequent interruption of their peace by foreign nations i have already intimated1 to you the danger of political parties in the state with particular reference to the founding of them on geographical discriminations2.
let me now take a more comprehensive3 view and warn you in the most solemn manner against the baneful4 effects of the spirit of party generally.
v if in the opinion of the people the distribution or modification5 of the constitutional powers be in any particular wrong let it be corrected by an amendment promote then as an object of primary importance institutions for the general diffusion6 of knowledge as the structure of a government gives force to public opinion it is essential that public opinion should be enlightened y avoid likewise the accumulation of debt not ungenerously throwing upon posterity7 the burden which we ourselves ought to bear.
observe good faith and justice towards all nations cultivate8 peace and harmony with all.
the great rule of conduct for us in regard to foreign nations is to have with them as little political connection as possible.
washington lists the benefits of uniting the states under one government.
it is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world.
there can be no greater error than to expect or calculate9 upon real favors from nation to nation.
it is an illusion which experience must cure which a just pride ought to discard.
in this phrase washington emphasizes his warning against the dangers of political parties.
washington points out the need for education.
this is washington s advice to the new nation about foreign policy.
the duty of holding a neutral conduct may be inferred from the obligation which justice and humanity impose on every nation to maintain inviolate10 the relations of peace and amity11 towards other nations.
8 cultivate seek 9 calculate plan 10 inviolate unchanging 11 amity friendship 1 intimated told 2 discriminations differences 3 comprehensive complete 4 baneful destructive 5 modification change 6 diffusion spreading 7 posterity future generations analysis skill i analyzing primary sources 1.
what events happened before washington left office that might have led to his warning against political parties.
why did washington suggest neutrality as a foreign policy.
chapter 7 washington says farewell in 1796 washington decided not to run for a third presidential term.
he wrote that he was tired of public life and devoutly strongly wished for retirement.
he also wanted to remind americans that the people were the country s true leaders.
with the help of alexander hamilton and james madison washington wrote his farewell address.
in it he spoke about what he believed were the greatest dangers to the american republic.
among these were the dangers of foreign ties and political conflicts at home.
washington warned against forming permanent ties with other countries because choosing sides could draw the united states into war.
the nation would try to follow a course of non involvement for another century but some involvement with other governments seemed unavoidable.
he also worried about growing political conflicts within the nation.
washington believed that disagreements between political groups weakened government.
political unity he said was a key to national success.
washington left office warning the nation to work out its differences and protect its independence.
washington also warned against too much public debt.
he thought the government should try not to borrow money.
he wanted future generations to be protected from debt.
he concluded his speech by looking forward to his retirement and praising his country.
i anticipate.
the sweet enjoyment of good laws under a free government the ever favorite object of my heart.
reading check finding main ideas what issues did washington believe were most dangerous to the future of the new nation.
i summary and preview americans res i ponded to foreign and domestic conflict during washington s presidency.
in the next section you will read about the administration of john adams.
section 3 assessment i online quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
describe what did washington s neutrality proclamation state.
compare and contrast in what ways were jay s treaty and pinckney s treaty similar and different.
how did they affect areas important to the united states.
identify who were the leaders of american indian and u s forces in the conflict in the northwest territory.
predict what are some possible consequences of the treaty of greenville for american indians in the northwest territory.
recall why did congress tax american made whiskey.
explain how did the tax lead to the whiskey rebellion.
c elaborate why do you think that president washington personally led the army against westerners in the whiskey rebellion.
identify what warnings did washington give the nation in his farewell address.
explain the impact of the address.
draw conclusions why did washington not run for a third term as president.
critical thinking 5.
categorizing review your notes on the challenges the young united states faced.
then categorize those challenges as either foreign or domestic in a graphic organizer like this one.
challenges foreign domestic vwritesmart 6.
thinking about washington hamilton and jefferson in this section you read about the activities of these three men during a difficult time for our country.
what did you learn that you could add to a nobel prize nomination for any of these leaders.
i launching the nation 249 what you will learn john adams s presidency main ideas the rise of political parties created competition in the election of 1796.
the xyz affair caused problems for president john adams.
controversy broke out over the alien and sedition acts.
if you were there you are a newspaper editor in virginia in 1798.
you ve joined jefferson s political party which opposes the new president.
in fact your paper has printed many articles that criticize him calling him greedy and foolish.
you believe that s your right in a free country.
but now congress has passed a law that makes it illegal to criticize the government.
you could be arrested for your articles.
would you stop criticizing the government.
the development of political parties in the united states contributed to differing ideas about the role of the federal government.
key terms political parties p 250 federalist party p 250 democratic republican party 250 xyz affair p 252 alien and sedition acts p 253 kentucky and virginia resolutions p 253 building background people within the new united states had differing viewpoints on many issues.
personal rivalries among political leaders also created divisions in the new nation.
trying to limit dissent in the country the federal government passed several unpopular laws.
i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the two political parties that emerged during the election of 1796 their views of government their candidates and the outcome of the election.
the election of 1796 the election of 1796 began a new era in u s politics.
for the first time more than one candidate ran for president.
political parties groups that help elect people and shape policies had begun to form during washington s presidency.
despite washington s warnings about political parties the rivalry between two parties dominated the 1796 election.
alexander hamilton helped found the federalist party which wanted a strong federal government and supported industry and trade.
the federalists chose john adams and thomas pinckney as candidates.
adams knew he was not well liked in the south or the west but he hoped people would support him after they thought about his years of loyal public service.
thomas jefferson and james madison founded the democratic republican party.
its members called republicans wanted to limit the federal government s power.
this party is not related to today s republican party.
they chose thomas jefferson and aaron burr as their candidates.
chapter 7 thomas jefferson james madison albert gallatin federalist adams democratic republican jefferson 11 number of electoral votes 0 150 300 miles i 0 150 300 kilometers v w geography skills interpreting maps 9 region v electoral vi 7hich political party had more ates in 1796.
party differences were based partly on where and how people lived.
businesspeople in the cities tended to support the federalists.
farmers in more isolated areas generally favored the democratic republicans.
both sides attacked each other.
republicans called adams a royalist an insult to a man so involved in the revolution.
the federalists accused the republicans of favoring the french.
in the end adams defeated jefferson.
at the time the person who came in second in a presidential election became vice president.
so after months of campaigning against one another adams and jefferson took office together.
finding main ideas how did the election of 1796 change the nature of politics in the united states.
reading check.
president adams and the xyz affair john adams had the challenging task of following washington as president.
the people had adored washington.
adams would have to work hard to win the people s trust.
a new president at first glance john adams did not appear well suited for the presidency.
although adams had been a leading patriot during the american revolution and had later served as a foreign diplomat he lacked washington s dignity and most people saw him as a cold and distant person.
still many people even those who opposed him respected adams.
they recognized his hard work honesty and intelligence.
launching the nation 251 primary source political cartoon the xyz affair after the xyz affair french ships continued to attack american merchant ships.
in this cartoon the united states is represented by the woman.
the men symbolizing the french are taking valuables from her.
the people in the distance are other european nations.
why do you think this man is encouraging the woman to look awav.
analysis skill.
interpreting political cartoons how does the cartoon show that america is being preyed upon by the french.
the french government also wanted a loan of 12 million.
the amazed diplomats refused these demands.
in march 1798 president adams told congress that the peace seeking mission had failed.
he described the french terms substituting the letters x y and z for the names of the french agents.
upon hearing the disgraceful news federalists in congress called for war with france.
the xyz affair as the french demand for a bribe came to be called outraged the american public.
millions for defense but not one cent for tribute.
became the rallying cry of the american people.
preparations for war fearing war adams asked congress to expand the navy to a fleet of more than 30 ships.
he thought war with france might be unavoidable.
he also decided the united states should keep a peacetime army.
congress approved both measures.
although adams had asked congress for military support he did not want to go to war with france.
he was worried about its cost.
and he remembered washington s warning to remain neutral.
so he did not ask congress to declare war.
instead he tried to reopen peace talks with france.
the united states and france one of adams s first goals as president was to improve the relationship between the united states and france.
you may remember that the french had once tried to hire american privateers to help them fight great britain a practice washington frowned upon.
adams sent u s diplomats to paris to smooth over the conflict and to negotiate a treaty to protect u s shipping.
when the diplomats arrived in france they learned that french foreign minister talleyrand would not speak to them.
instead they had a strange and secret visit from three french agents.
shockingly the agents said that talleyrand would discuss a treaty only in exchange for a 250 000 bribe.
peace efforts adams s decision not to declare war stunned federalists.
despite intense pressure from members of his own party adams refused to change his mind.
american and french ships however began fighting each other in the caribbean.
adams sent a representative to france to engage in talks to try to end the fighting.
the united states and france eventually signed a treaty.
adams then forced two members of his cabinet to resign for trying to block his peace efforts.
identifying points of view what did americans mean when they said millions for defense but not one cent for tribute.
reading check.
chapter 7 the alien and sedition acts many democratic republicans continued to sympathize with france.
federalists angered by their stand called them democrats mob ocrats and all other kinds of rats.
in 1798 the federalist controlled congress passed four laws known together as the alien and sedition acts.
these laws were said to protect the united states but the federalists intended them to crush opposition to war.
the most controversial was the sedition act which forbade anyone from publishing or voicing criticism of the federal government.
in effect this cancelled basic protections of freedom of speech and freedom of the press.
the two main democratic republican leaders thomas jefferson and james madison viewed these acts as a misuse of the government s power.
attacking the problem at the state level they wrote resolutions passed by the kentucky legislature in 1798 and in virginia in 1799.
known as the kentucky and virginia resolutions these documents argued that the alien and sedition acts were unconstitutional.
they stated that the federal government could not pass these acts because they interfered with state government.
madison and jefferson pressured congress to repeal the alien and sedition acts.
congress did not although it allowed the acts to expire within a few years.
the kentucky and virginia resolutions did not have the force of national law but they supported the idea that states could challenge the federal government.
this idea would grow to have a tremendous impact on american history later in the 1800s.
analyzing how did the kentucky and virginia resolutions support the rights of states.
and preview political parties i reflect different viewpoints.
in the next chapter you will read about thomas jefferson s presidency.
reading check bsummary i formed t section 4 assessment i reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
recall what two political parties emerged before the election of 1796.
who were the founders of each party.
how did their views differ.
b analyze what effect did political parties have on the election of 1796.
c elaborate do you think it was difficult for adams and jefferson to serve together as president and vice president.
explain your answer.
recall what was one of adams s first goals as president.
make inferences why were federalists shocked by adams s decision to resume peace talks with the french.
identify identify the foreign policy of john adams.
what did the alien and sedition acts state.
explain what idea regarding states rights did the kentucky and virginia resolutions support.
c elaborate would you have supported the alien and sedition acts.
explain your answer.
critical thinking 4.
contrasting review your notes on the election of 1796 and the formation of political parties.
then create a chart like this one identifying how each of the terms listed below reflected party disagreements.
xyz affair alien and sedition acts kentucky and virginia resolutions 5.
gathering information about john adams take some notes about john adams s contributions that would support his nomination for the nobel prize then begin to compare and contrast all four leaders you have studied in this chapter.
which one will you nominate.
launching the nation 253 social studies skills analysis critical thinking civic participation making group decisions define the skill democracy is one of the most valued principles of american society.
it is based on the idea that the members of society or representatives they choose make the decisions that affect society.
decisionmaking would be much more efficient if just one person decided what to do and how to do it.
however that method is not at all democratic.
making decisions as a group is a complicated and difficult skill.
however it is an important one at all levels of society from governing the nation to making group decisions at school in the community and with your friends.
at every level the skill is based on the ability of the group s members to interact in effective and cooperative ways.
learn the skill think about the job the first congress faced after the constitution was ratified.
the nation was still millions of dollars in debt from the revolutionary war.
congress had to find a way to pay these debts as well as raise money to run the government.
they had to work together to find the best plan for the nation.
like that first congress being part of an effective group requires that you behave in certain ways.
identify the situation.
decide as a group what situation or problem the decision needs to address.
gather information.
each person in the group should gather information to develop his or her idea about what the best decision might be.
identify options and predict outcomes.
members of the group should contribute opinions and ideas for what the decision should be.
part of supporting your decision should be a description of what the outcome of your decision would be and why it would benefit the group as a whole.
discuss and compromise.
after everyone has contributed his or her opinions and thoughts on the decisions the group should work together to discuss the best option.
the final decision might include parts of several people s ideas.
implement the decision.
each member of the group should act according to the decision.
this might be as simple as going to see the same movie with your friends or it might involve each member of the group doing a different task to carry out the plan of the group.
practice the skill suppose that you are a member of the first congress.
with a group of classmates you must decide what and who should be taxed to raise the money the government needs.
when your group has finished answer the following questions.
did your group have a plan.
did it discuss what taxes to pass.
compared to other members how much did you take part in those activities.
how well did your group work together.
what role did you play in that.
was your group able to make a decision.
if not why.
if so was compromise involved.
do you support the decision.
explain why or why not.
i chapter 7 chapter chapter review visual summary reviewing vocabulary terms and people complete each sentence by filling in the blank with the correct term or person.
the established the structure of the federal court system and its relationship to state courts.
federalists angered many republicans when they passed the to protect the united states from traitors.
as president washington was able to establish several or decisions that serve as examples for later action.
farmers in western pennsylvania protested taxes in the.
the was created in order to strengthen the u s economy.
comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 234 237 6 a.
recall what precedents were established for the executive and judicial branches.
draw conclusions why did americans select george washington as their first president.
c evaluate do you think the new government met citizens expectations.
why or why not.
d explain summarize americans expectations regarding the new nation s taxes tariffs and banking system.
section 2 pages 238 242 7 a.
identify what changes did alexander hamilton make to the national economy.
contrast in what ways did hamilton and jefferson disagree on the economy and the banking system.
c evaluate which of hamilton s economic plans do you think was the most important to the new nation.
launching the nation 255 section 3 pages 243 249 8 a.
describe what challenges did the nation face during washington s presidency.
make inferences why did washington believe that it was important for the united states to remain neutral in foreign conflicts.
c evaluate rate the success of washington s presidency.
explain the reasons for your rating.
section 4 pages 250 253 9 a.
describe what role did political parties play in the election of 1796.
b analyze how did the alien and sedition acts create division among some americans.
c predict how might the political attacks between the federalist and democratic republican parties lead to problems in the future.
reviewing themes 10.
economics what economic problems troubled the nation at the beginning of washington s presidency.
how were they solved.
politics how did the creation of political parties change politics in the united states.
using the internet cbmbuwt 12.
activity creating a poster in 1798 war with france seemed on the horizon.
federalist controlled congress passed a law that made it a crime to criticize the government in print.
in 1971 war raged in vietnam and the president used a court order to stop publication of information critical of the government s actions in vietnam.
what do these events have in common.
through your online book research the alien and sedition acts and the pentagon papers case during the vietnam war.
create a poster to display your information and to illustrate the connection between a free press and a democratic society.
71 reading skills drawing inferences about history use the reading skills taught in this chapter to answer the question about the reading selection below.
party differences were based partly on where.
and how people lived.
businesspeople in the cities tended to support the federalists.
i farmers in more isolated areas generally i favored the democratic republicans p 251 13.
which of the following statements can be inferred from the selection.
farmers wanted a large federal government.
urban americans were usually republicans.
c merchants supported john adams.
d people in the cities had different concerns than did the rural population.
social studies skills making group decisions use the social studies skills taught in this chapter to answer the questions below.
get together with a group of three or four students and discuss the alien and sedition acts.
using the steps listed on page 254 answer the following questions individually and as a group.
do you think that limits should have been put on americans speeches and printed articles.
what other ideas might congress have considered to resolve the tensions over the issue.
j writesmart 16.
writing a nobel nomination now that you ve chosen your nominee for the nobel prize you can start to write your nomination.
begin with a sentence that identifies the person you are nominating.
then give at least three reasons for your nomination.
each reason should include a specific achievement or contribution of this person.
end your nomination with a sentence that sums up your reasons for nominating this person for the nobel prize.
be persuasive.
you need to convince the nobel prize committee that this person deserves the prize more than anyone else in the world.
chapter 7 chapter texas test practice directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 in the 1790s most americans a lived in the countryside and worked on family farms.
b lived in small towns and worked as laborers or craftspeople.
c lived in cities and worked as laborers craftspeople or merchants.
d lived west of the appalachian mountains or wanted to move west.
2 in his farewell address in 1796 president washington advised americans of f the nations need for a national bank.
g his fear of a british invasion to end american independence.
h his wish that the office of president be given more power.
j the dangers of ties with foreign nations.
3 president washington demonstrated the governments power under the new constitution to enforce federal law in the way he handled the a whiskey rebellion.
b alien and sedition acts.
c xyz affair.
d judiciary act of 1789.
4 the two party system that exists in american politics today first arose during the election of which president.
f george washington g john adams h thomas jefferson j james madison 5 why did george washington issue the neutrality proclamation.
a he feared that involvement in the war between france and britain was dangerous.
b he hoped to show the world that the united states was a peaceful nation.
c he wanted to concentrate on internal problems that faced the nation.
d jefferson persuaded washington to stay neutral toward france.
6 which of the following was an issue on which alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson had differing views.
f protective tariffs g national bank h role of the central government j all of the above 7 examine the following passage from a description of the alien act and then use it to answer the question below.
z the alien law has been bitterly criticized as a direct attack upon our liberties.
in fact it affects only foreigners who are plotting against us and has nothing to do with american citizens.
it gives authority to the president to order out of the country all aliens he judges dangerous to the peace and safety of the united states or whom he suspects of treason or secret plots against the government timothy pickering adapted from life of timothy pickering vol.
3 document based question what is the authors point of view toward the alien law.
launching the nation 257 writing workshop assignment write a paper explaining how the federal system balances power among the legislative executive and judicial branches of government.
explaining a political process how do you register to vote.
what is the difference between a civil court and a federal court.
when we want to know about a process or system of our govern ment we often turn to written explanations.
prewrite using a graphic organizer a chart like the following can help you organize the bocjy of your explanation.
legislative executive judicial considering purpose and audience in this assignment you will be writing for an audience of middle school students.
you ll need to identify questions they might have about the process or system identify factors or details that might confuse them as you plan your paper keep your audience in mind.
collecting and organizing the information the big idea or thesis of your explanation will be that the federal system balances the power among the three branches of government.
to collect information about each branch and its powers you can use a chart like the one on the left.
be sure to note the relationships among the parts.
also note the important characteristics of each part.
when you have completed the chart you will have the basic organization of your paper.
write you can use this framework to help you write your first draft.
a writer s framework introduction state the big idea of your paper.
explain briefly why this topic is important to the reader.
body identify the important characteristics of each part of the process or system.
explain any relationships between or among the parts.
define terms your readers might not know.
where appropriate include graphics to illustrate your explanation.
conclusion restate your big idea in different words.
summarize your main points.
i unit 2 3.
evaluate and revise evaluating clear straightforward language is important when explaining how things work.
use the following questions to discover ways to improve your paper.
evaluation questions for an explanation of a process or system does your big idea statement accurately reflect your explanation of the process or system.
do you discuss each part of the process or system in logical order.
do you include details and information to explain each part of the process or system.
if you used bulleted or numbered lists are the items parallel that is do they have the same grammatical forms or structures.
does your conclusion restate your big idea and explain the importance of your topic.
using bulleted lists the 1 items in a bulleted list should be in the same grammatical forms or structures.
not the same duties of the judicial branch include interpret laws overseeing lower courts the same duties of the judicial branch include interpreting laws overseeing lower courts revising sometimes a complex explanation sounds even more complex when you try to explain it in a paragraph.
in those cases a bulleted list of facts or examples may make it easier for your readers to understand the information you are presenting.
as you revise your paper consider whether you have any information you should put in a bulleted list.
proofread and publish proofreading if you use special formatting in your paper it is important to make sure that it is consistent.
here are some things to check if you have used boldface or italic type have you always used it in the same way for important information for a heading for a technical term.
if you have used a list of items have you consistently used numbers or bullets.
publishing since you are writing this paper for students you might find a student in the sixth or seventh grade to read it.
find out whether your explanation seems clear and interesting.
ywritesmart use mywritesmartto create share and revise your paper.
practice and apply use the steps and strategies outlined in this workshop to write your explanation of a process or system.
a new nation 259 sb r what you will learn by the time the country had experienced two presidential terms people had begun to think of themselves as americans.
a new sense of pride and unity influenced all areas of american society from politics to art from economics to religion.
settlers began moving deeper into the continent and the united states began to grow.
in the next four chapters you will learn about the first expansion of the young nation.
explore the art in this picture lewis and clark are shown asking advice from sacagawea a teenaged shoshone indian who helped them on their exploration of the continent.
how does this picture show the challenges facing the explorers.
chapters st ibnal identity chapter 11 expa mw ft.
otwibwsz m m l w e bwsllillsli i z a iii bib r w j chapter 8 1800 1815 0l ls l8is8o w.
gss uu j t fl j essential question how did the events of the jefferson era strengthen the nation.
texas essential knowledge and skills teks a 10b 11 a 12a 13a 14a 14b 18a 18c 20c 22a 22b 23c 29b 29d section 1 jefferson becomes president 266 the big idea thomas jefferson s election began a new era in american government.
section 2 the louisiana purchase 272 the big idea under president jefferson s leadership the united states added the louisiana territory.
i fifis as t kft o jefferson s history presidential style ml ju a i wllf silfl islfll ft the jefferson era 263 08 chapter 4 1774 the first continental congress meets.
1775 the revolutionary war begins with the fighting at lexington and concord.
7 w jk jefferson writes the declaration of history independence 7 video soldiers fight with single shot muskets in this re enactment of a battle during the revolutionary war.
1776 on july 4 the thirteen colonies issue the declaration of independence and break away from great britain.
1778 france allies with the americans and joins the war against great britain.
1781 the british surrender to george washington at yorktown.
1779 spain declares war against great britain 1783 the treaty of paris is signed ending the war.
1783 simon bolivar is born in present day venezuela.
the american revolution 109 reading social studies economics geography society science and politics and culture technology focus on themes in this chapter you will read about the events of the revolutionary war the war by which the united states won its independence.
you will learn about some of the major battles that occurred between the american colonists and the british army and how geography sometimes affected their outcomes.
you will also read the declaration of independence one of the most important political documents in all of american history.
j main ideas in social studies focus on reading when you are reading it is not always necessary to remember every tiny detail of the text.
instead what you want to remember are the main ideas the most important concepts around which the text is based.
identifying main ideas most paragraphs in history books include main ideas.
sometimes the main idea is stated clearly in a single sentence.
at other times the main idea is suggested not stated.
however that idea still shapes the paragraph s content and the meaning of all of the facts and details in it.
topic the paragraph is about the pamphlet common sense by thomas paine.
news of the work spread throughout the colonies eventually sell ing some 500 000 copies.
paine reached a wide audience by writing as a common person speaking to common people.
common sense changed the way many colonists viewed their king.
p 118 facts and details many people from different colonies read the pamphlet.
common sense eventually sold 500 000 copies.
thomas paine s writing style was easy for the common people to read.
steps in identifying main ideas i i read the paragraph.
ask yourself what is this paragraph mostly i about.
this will be the topic of the paragraph.
list the important facts and details s that relate to that topic.
ask yourself what seems to be the most important point i the writer is making about the i topic.
or ask if the writer could say only one thing about this paragraph what would it be.
this is the main idea of the paragraph.
i main idea the pamphlet common sense shaped the way some colonists thought about their rulers.
10 chapter 4 from chapter 4 p 139 i you try it.
the following passage is from the chapter you are about to read.
read it and then answer the questions below.
the treaty of paris after yorktown only a few small battles took place.
lacking the money to pay for a new army great britain entered into peace talks with america.
benjamin franklin had a key role in the negotiations.
delegates took more than two years to come to a peace agreement.
in the treaty of paris of 1783 great britain recognized the independence of the united states.
the treaty also set america s borders.
a separate treaty between britain and spain returned florida to the spanish.
british leaders also accepted american rights to settle and trade west of the original thirteen colonies.
j after you have read the passage answer the following questions.
the main idea of the second paragraph is stated in a sentence.
which sentence expresses the main idea.
what is the first paragraph about.
what facts and details are included in the paragraph.
based on your answers to these questions what is the main idea of the first paragraph.
use appropriate academic and social studies vocabulary words in your main idea sentence.
with a partner discuss the main idea you each wrote down.
use your partner s main idea to further understand the paragraphs and to confirm your own interpretation of the main ideas.
chapter 4 section 1 first continental congress p 112 patriots p 113 minutemen p 114 redcoats p 114 second continental congress p 114 continental army p 114 george washington p 114 battle of bunker hill p 115 section 2 common sense p 118 thomas paine p 118 declaration of independence p 119 thomas jefferson p 119 loyalists p 119 section 3 mercenaries p 128 battle of trenton p 129 battle of saratoga p 130 marquis de lafayette p 131 baron friedrich von steuben p 131 bernardo de galvez p 131 john paul jones p 133 george rogers clark p 133 section 4 francis marion p 136 comte de rochambeau p 137 battle of yorktown p 137 treaty of paris of 1783 p 139 academic vocabulary success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions.
in this chapter you will learn the following academic words reaction p 114 strategy p 129 l as you read chapter 4 identify the main ideas of the paragraphs you are reading.
the american revolution 111 what you will learn.
the revolution begins if you were there 1.
the first continental congress demanded certain rights from great britain.
armed conflict between british soldiers and colonists broke out with the shot heard round the world.
the second continental congress created the continental army to fight the british.
in two early battles the army lost control of boston but then regained it.
u you are a member of the british parliament in the 1770s.
some members say that the americans are defying the king.
others point out that the colonists are british citizens who have certain rights.
now the king must decide to punish the rebellious colonists or listen to their complaints.
what advice would you give the king.
sthebigldea b the tensions between the colonies and great britain led to armed conflict in 1775.
j key terms and people first continental congress p 112 patriots p 113 minutemen p 114 redcoats p 114 second continental congress p 114 continental army p 114 george washington p 114 battle of bunker hill p 115 use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the events that occurred in the early days of the american revolution.
i building background taxes and harsh new laws led some colonists to protest againstthe british.
in some places the protests i turned violent.
the british government refused to listen ignoring the i colonists demands for more rights.
that setthe stage for war.
first continental congress to many colonists the closing of boston harbor was the final insult in a long list of abuses.
in response to the mounting crisis all the colonies except georgia sent representatives to a meeting in october 1774.
this meeting known as the first continental congress was a gathering of colonial leaders who were deeply troubled about the relationship between great britain and its colonies in america.
at carpenters hall in philadelphia the leaders remained locked in weeks of intense debate.
patrick henry and others believed that violence was unavoidable.
on the other hand delegates from pennsylvania and new york had strict orders to seek peace.
wisely the delegates compromised.
they encouraged colonists to continue boycotting british goods but told colonial militias to prepare for war.
meanwhile they drafted the declaration of rights a list of 10 resolutions to be presented to king george iii.
included was the colonists right to life liberty and property.
the first continental congress did not seek a separation from britain.
its goal was to state the colonists concerns and ask the king to correct the problems.
but before they left philadelphia the delegates agreed to meet in 1775 if the king refused their petition.
patrick henry returned from the congress and reported to his fellow virginians.
to encourage them to support the patriot cause chapter 4 henry voiced these famous words they tell us sir that we are weak unable to cope with so formidable an adversary.
but when will we be stronger.
gentlemen may cry peace peace but there is no peace.
i know not what course others may take but as for me give me liberty or give me death patrick henry quoted in eyewitnesses and others in time many colonists came to agree with henry.
they became known as patriots colonists who chose to fight for independence from great britain.
identifying cause and effect why did the delegates attend the first continental congress.
what were the results.
reading check.
shot heard round the world the continental congress planned to meet again in 1775.
before it could the situation in the colonies had changed for the worse.
the ride of paul revere british military leaders in the colonies grew uneasy when local militias seemed to be preparing for action.
the governor of massachusetts thomas gage learned that a stockpile of weapons was stored in concord about 20 miles from boston.
in april 1775 he decided to seize the supplies.
the american revolution 113 academic vocabulary reaction response gage thought he had kept his plan a secret.
however boston was full of spies for the patriot cause.
they noticed the british were preparing for action and quickly informed the patriots.
unsure of how the british would strike sons of liberty member paul revere enlisted the aid of robert newman.
newman was to climb into the steeple of the old north church and watch for british soldiers.
if they advanced across land newman would display one lantern from the steeple.
if they rowed across the charles river newman would display two lanterns.
when revere and fellow patriot william dawes saw two lights shine they set off on horseback.
using two different routes out of boston they sounded the alert.
as the riders advanced drums and church bells called out the local militia or minutemen who got their name because they were ready to fight at a minute s notice.
another rider a free african american named wentworth cheswell rode north to new hampshire and maine to gather reinforcements.
battles at lexington and concord at dawn on april 19 the british troops arrived at the town of lexington near concord and about 15 miles from boston where 70 armed minutemen waited.
patriot captain john parker yelled to his troops don t fire unless fired upon.
suddenly a shot rang out.
to this day no one knows who fired this shot heard round the world.
the battle at lexington ended in minutes with only a few volleys fired.
when the smoke cleared 8 of the badly outnumbered minutemen lay dead and 10 were wounded.
the british with only one soldier wounded marched on to concord.
although revere had been arrested the citizens of concord were warned by another rider samuel prescott.
most of the weapons in concord had already been hidden but the few that were left were now concealed.
some of the british troops frustrated because the stockpile had disappeared set fire to a few buildings.
in reaction the minutemen charged forward.
for the skilled colonial marksmen of concord the british soldiers made an easy target.
they were wearing the british military uniform with its bright red jacket.
for some time the colonists had called the british soldiers redcoats because of these jackets.
the british were forced to retreat to boston suffering many casualties along the way.
reading check drawing inferences why did the patriots need several riders.
why did they take different routes.
second continental congress king george iii had refused to address the concerns listed in the declaration of rights.
in may 1775 delegates from 12 colonies met again in philadelphia for the second continental congress.
this second group of delegates from the colonies was still far from unified but represented the first attempt at a republican government in the colonies.
some of the delegates called for a war others for peace.
once again they compromised.
although the congress did not openly revolt delegates showed their growing dissatisfaction.
they sent word to colonial authorities asking for new state constitutions.
states set up conventions to write them.
they also authorized the massachusetts militia to become the continental army.
this force would soon include soldiers from all colonies and would carry out the fight against britain.
congress named a virginian george washington to command the army.
as washington prepared for war the congress pursued peace.
on july 5 the delegates signed the olive branch petition as a final attempt to restore harmony.
king george refused to read it.
instead he looked for new ways to punish the colonies.
14 chapter 4 reading check summarizing what did the second continental congress accomplish.
early battles while the congress discussed peace the massachusetts militia began to fight.
boston was a key city in the early days of the war.
both patriots and the british fought to hold it.
bunker hill desperate for supplies leaders in boston sent benedict arnold and a force of 400 men to new york state.
their objective was to attack the british at fort ticonderoga.
in may 1775 arnold captured the fort and its large supply of weapons.
meanwhile the poorly supplied patriots kept the british pinned down inside boston.
although british leaders were trying to form a battle plan they awoke on june 17 to a stunning sight.
the colonial forces had quietly dug in at breed s hill a point overlooking north boston.
the redcoats would have to cross boston harbor and fight their way uphill.
as the british force of 2 400 advanced 1 600 militia members waited.
low on gunpowder the commander ordered his troops not to fire until you see the whites of their eyes.
as they climbed the exposed hillside with their heavy packs the british soldiers were cut down.
twice they retreated.
stepping over the dead and wounded they returned for a third try.
the colonists were now out of ammunition and eventually they had to retreat.
this famous conflict is now known as the battle of bunker hill although it was actually launched from breed s hill.
while the patriots lost they proved they could take on the redcoats.
for the british the battle was a tragic victory.
to win they had sacrificed about double the number of patriot soldiers.
dorchester heights shortly after the battle of bunker hill general washington arrived in boston to command the continental army.
washington knew that he would need heavier guns to drive the british out of boston and he knew where to get them fort ticonderoga.
colonel henry knox was assigned to transport the captured cannons from fort ticonderoga to boston.
he successfully brought the heavy guns over 300 miles of rough terrain in the middle of winter.
when knox delivered the cannons washington was ready to regain control of boston.
on march 4 1776 washington moved his army to dorchester heights an area that overlooked boston from the south.
he stationed the cannons and his troops on nook s hill overlooking british general william howe s position.
when howe awoke the next morning and saw the patriots well positioned artillery he knew he would have to retreat.
the rebels have done more in one night than my whole army could do in months howe declared.
on march 7 howe retreated from boston to canada.
the birthplace of the rebellion was now in patriot hands.
reading check drawing inferences why was the geography of the boston area important in forming a battle plan.
i summary and preview some colonial i leaders became convinced that they could not avoid war with great britain.
in the next section you will read about another step toward war the writing of the declaration of independence.
section 1 assessment ml f online quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
identify what was the first continental congress.
make inferences why did the first continental congress send the declaration of rights to the king.
c elaborate why did king george iii refuse to consider the colonists declaration.
identify who warned the colonists of the british advance toward lexington and concord.
b analyze why did the british army march on lexington and concord.
c elaborate what is meant by the expression shot heard round the world.
describe what was the purpose of the second continental congress.
draw conclusions were the delegates to the second continental congress ready to revolt against george iii.
c evaluate defend george ill s response to the declaration of rights and the olive branch petition.
identify what leader captured fort ticonderoga.
draw conclusions how was the continental army able to drive british forces out of boston.
c evaluate how would you evaluate the performance of the continental army in the early battles of the war.
critical thinking 5.
categorizing review your notes on the early battles of the revolution.
then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to categorize events in the early days of the revolution.
some events will be attempts at peace others will be movement toward war.
attempts at peace movement toward war 6.
thinking about the beginning you ll have about five minutes for your report and only a minute or twoto talk about the beginning of the war.
what are the one or two most important things you want to say.
which ideas from your notes on class lectures might you include in your summary.
16 chapter 4 biography george washington what would you do if you were asked to lead a new country.
when did he live.
1732 1799 where did he live.
george washington was a true american born in the virginia colony.
as president he lived in new york city and philadelphia the nation s first two capitals.
when he retired he returned to his plantation at mount vernon.
what did he do.
although washington was a wealthy farmer he spent most of his life in the military and in politics.
leading the colonial forces to victory in the revolutionary war he then helped shape the new government of the united states.
on april 30 1789 he was sworn in as the first president of the united states.
why is he so important.
george washington inspired americans and helped to unite them.
one of his great accomplishments as president was to keep the peace with britain and france.
upon leaving the presidency he urged americans to avoid becoming politically divided.
key events 1775 serves in second continental congress selected commander of the continental army 1789 inaugurated as president 1793 begins second term as president 1796 publishes his farewell address and retires to his plantation at mount vernon 1799 dies at mount vernon his will frees his slaves drawing conclusions how might washington s leadership in the revolutionary war have prepared him for his role as president.
mount vernon was washington s plantation.
1 r 2 i section teks 1a 1c 4b 4c 15c 19a 20a 25a what you will learn y 1.
thomas paine s common sense led many colonists to support independence.
colonists had to choose sides when independence was declared.
the declaration of independence did not address the rights of all colonists.
t the colonies formally declared their independence from great britain.
key terms and people common sense p 118 thomas paine p.
118 declaration of independence p 119 thomas jefferson p 119 loyalists p 119 use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the declaration of independence.
declaring independence if you were there you live on a farm in new york in 1776.
the conflicts with the british have torn your family apart.
your father is loyal to king george and wants to remain british.
but your mother is a fierce patriot and your brother wants to join the continental army.
your father and others who feel the same way are moving to british held canada.
now you must decide what you will do.
would you go to canada or support the patriots.
building background the outbreak of violence at lexington concord and boston took some colonists by surprise.
many like the father above opposed independence from britain.
those who supported freedom began to promote their cause in many ways.
paine s common sense there is something very absurd in supporting a continent to be perpetually forever governed by an island.
this plainspoken argument against british rule over america appeared in common sense a 47 page pamphlet that was distributed in philadelphia in january 1776.
common sense was published anonymously that is without the author s name.
the author thomas paine argued that citizens not kings and queens should make laws.
at a time when monarchs ruled much of the world this was a bold idea.
news of the work spread throughout the colonies eventually selling some 500 000 copies.
paine reached a wide audience by writing as a common person speaking to common people.
common sense changed the way many colonists viewed their king.
it made a strong case for economic freedom and for the right to military self defense.
it cried out against tyranny that is the abuse of government power.
thomas paine s words rang out in his time and they have echoed throughout american history.
supporting a point of view would you have agreed with thomas paine.
reading check chapter 4 independence is declared many colonial leaders agreed with paine.
in june 1776 the second continental congress began writing a document declaring independence.
a committee also created a seal for the new country with the latin motto epluribus unum or out of many one.
this motto recognized the new union of states.
a new philosophy of government the declaration of independence formally announced the colonies break from great britain.
in doing so it expressed three main ideas.
first thomas jefferson the document s main author argued that all people possess unalienable rights or rights that are a natural part of being bom and cannot be taken away.
these include the rights of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
next jefferson listed the complaints of the colonists.
he asserted that king george iii had violated the colonists rights by taxing them without their consent.
jefferson accused the king of passing unfair laws and interfering with colonial governments.
he also believed that stationing a large british army within the colonies was a burden.
third jefferson stated that the colonies had the right to break from britain.
influenced by the enlightenment ideal of the social contract he maintained that governments and rulers must protect the rights of citizens.
in exchange the people agree to be governed.
jefferson argued that king george iii had broken the social contract.
on july 4 1776 the continental congress approved the declaration of independence.
this act broke all ties to the british crown.
the united states of america was bom.
choosing sides the signing of the declaration made the rebellion a full scale revolt against britain.
those who supported it would be considered traitors.
colonists who chose to side with the british were known as loyalists often called tories.
the impact today the continental congress voted for independence on july 2.
however because the declaration was not approved until july 4 the fourth is celebrated today as independence day.
primary source points of view choosing sides when ben franklin s son william was a child he helped his father experiment with lightning.
but by the time william had grown and the revolution started the two men viewed the conflict differently.
they exchanged letters on the subject.
am indeed of the opinion that the parliament has no right to make any law whatever binding on the colonies.
i know your sentiments differ from mine on these subjects.
you are a thorough government man which i do not wonder at nor do i aim at converting you.
i only wish you to act uprightly and steadily benjamin franklin quoted in the writings of benjamin franklin vol.
ill tt i think that all laws until they are repealed ought t to be obeyed and that it is the duty of those k who are entrusted with the executive part of government to see that they are so william franklin quoted in benjamin and william franklin by sheila l skemp how did the two men view the british government differently.
the american revolution 119.
mi signing the declaration of independence w k jefferson writes.
j the declaration jk of independence history historians estimate that 40 to 45 percent of americans were patriots while 20 to 30 percent were loyalists.
the rest were neutral.
because of persecution by patriots more than 50 000 loyalists fled the colonies during the revolution.
most went to canada where britain allowed them more self rule after the revolution.
in doing so they abandoned their homes and property.
divided allegiances tore apart families and friendships even benjamin franklin became separated from his loyalist son william.
native americans were at first encouraged by both sides to remain neutral.
by the summer of 1776 however both patriots and the british were aggressively recruiting indian fighters.
most sided with the british.
in northern new york four of the six iroquois nations fought for the british.
however the oneida and tuscarora helped the patriots even delivering food to the soldiers at valley forge.
drawing conclusions why would native americans have lost out no matter who won the war.
reading check unfinished business today we recognize that the declaration of independence excluded many colonists.
while it declared that all men are created equal the document failed to mention women enslaved africans or native americans.
the rights of these minorities would be subject to the rule of the majority.
women although many women were patriots the declaration did not address their rights.
at least one delegate s wife abigail adams tried to influence her husband john to include women s rights in the declaration.
in a failed effort she expressed her concerns remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands.
if particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are and will not hold ourselves bound by laws in which we have no voice or representation abigail adams quoted in notable american women 10 chapter 4 african and native americans the declaration did not recognize the rights of enslaved africans either.
the authors had compared life under british rule to living as an enslaved people.
the obvious question arose why did any form of slavery exist in a land that valued personal freedom.
even thomas jefferson the main author of the declaration was a slaveholder.
in july 1776 slavery was legal in all the colonies.
by the 1780s the new england colonies were taking steps to end slavery.
even so the conflict over slavery continued long after the revolutionary war.
the declaration of independence also did not address the rights of native americans to life liberty or property.
despite the proclamation of 1763 american colonists had been quietly settling on lands that belonged to native americans.
this tendency to disregard the rights of native americans would develop into a pattern after the colonists won their independence from great britain.
reading check finding main ideas what groups were unrepresented in the declaration of independence.
i summary and preview in 1776 the i colonists declared their independence.
to achieve their goal however they would have to win a war against the british army.
in the next section you will learn about some of the battles of the revolutionary war.
for a time it seemed as if the british would defeat the colonists.
section 2 assessmen online quiz is reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
identify who was thomas paine.
make inferences why do you thinkthomas paine originally published common sense anonymously.
c elaborate do you think that most colonists would have supported independence from britain without thomas paine s publication of common sensei explain.
identify what two sides emerged in response to the declaration of independence.
what did each side favor.
explain what arguments did the authors of the declaration of independence give for declaring the colonies free from british control.
c predict define and give some examples of unalienable rights.
how might some groups use the declaration of independence in the future to gain rights.
identify who urged her husband to remember the ladies.
making inferences why did the authors of the declaration of independence fail to address the rights of women native americans and african americans in the document.
critical thinking 4.
analyzing review your notes on the declaration of independence.
then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to identify three results of the declaration of independence.
declaration of 1.
2 independence 3.
writesmart gathering ideas about the declaration of independence you are living at the time of the american revolution.
what is new and surprising about the colonists actions.
in one or two minutes what is the most important thing you can say about the colonies declaring independence.
the american revolution 121 1 thomas jefferson wrote the first draft of the declaration in a little more than two weeks.
how is the declaration s idea about why governments are formed still important to our country today.
exploring thedocument vocabulary impel force endowed provided usurpations wrongful seizures of power evinces clearly displays f despotism unlimited power tyranny oppressive power exerted by a government 1 or ruler i candid fair i here the declaration lists the charges that the colonists had against king george iii.
how does the language in the list appeal to people s emotions.
exploring thedocument the declaration of independence in congress july 4 1776 the unanimous declaration of the thirteen united states of america when in the course of human events it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another and to assume among the powers of the earth the separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and of nature s god entitle them a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it and to institute new government laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness.
prudence indeed will dictate that governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes and accordingly all experience hath shown that mankind are more disposed to suffer while evils are sufferable than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed.
but when a long train of abuses and usurpations pursuing invariably the same object evinces a design to reduce them under absolute despotism it is their right it is their duty to throw off such government and to provide new guards for their future security such has been the patient sufferance of these colonies and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former systems of government.
the history of the present king of great britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over these states.
to prove this let facts be submitted to a candid world.
he has refused his assent to laws the most wholesome and necessary for the public good.
he has forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing importance unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be obtained and when so suspended he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
he has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of people unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the legislature a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only.
he has called together legislative bodies at places unusual uncomfortable and distant from the depository of their public records for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.
he has dissolved representative houses repeatedly for opposing with manly firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.
he has refused for a long time after such dissolutions to cause others to be elected whereby the legislative powers incapable of annihilation have returned to the people at large for their exercise the state remaining in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without and convulsions within.
he has endeavored to prevent the population of these states for that purpose obstructing the laws of naturalization of foreigners refusing to pass others to encourage their migration hither and raising the conditions of new appropriations of lands.
he has obstructed the administration of justice by refusing his assent to laws for establishing judiciary powers.
he has made judges dependent on his will alone for the tenure of their offices and the amount and payment of their salaries.
he has erected a multitude of new offices and sent hither swarms of officers to harass our people and eat out their substance.
he has kept among us in times of peace standing armies without the consent of our legislature.
he has affected to render the military independent of and superior to the civil power.
he has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution and unacknowledged by our laws giving his assent to their acts of pretended legislation for quartering large bodies of armed troops among us for protecting them by a mock trial from punishment for any murders which they should commit on the inhabitants of these states j vocabulary relinquish release yield inestimable priceless formidable causing dread annihilation destruction convulsions violent disturbances naturalization of foreigners the process by which foreign born persons become citizens i appropriations of lands i setting aside land for i settlement i tenure term a multitude of many quartering lodging housing mum bett a massachusetts slave believed that the words all men are created equal should apply to her and other enslaved africans.
she successfully sued for her freedom in 1781.
for cutting off our trade with all parts of the world for imposing taxes on us without our consent for depriving us in many cases of the benefits of trial by jury vocabulary arbitrary not based on law render make abdicated given up foreign mercenaries soldiers hired to fight for a country not their own perfidy violation of trust insurrections rebellions petitioned for redress asked formally for a correction of wrongs unwarrantable jurisdiction unjustified authority magnanimity generous spirit conjured urgently called upon consanguinity common ancestry acquiesce consent to here the declaration calls the king a tyrant.
what do you think tyrant means in this passage.
exploring the document for transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offences for abolishing the free system of english laws in a neighboring province establishing therein an arbitrary government and enlarging its boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these colonies for taking away our charters abolishing our most valuable laws and altering fundamentally the forms of our governments for suspending our own legislature and declaring themselves invested with power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
he has abdicated government here by declaring us out of his protection and waging war against us.
he has plundered our seas ravaged our coasts burnt our towns and destroyed the lives of our people.
he is at this time transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to complete the works of death desolation and tyranny already begun with circumstances of cruelty perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.
he has constrained our fellow citizens taken captive on the high seas to bear arms against their country to become the executioners of their friends and brethren or to fall themselves by their hands.
he has excited domestic insurrections amongst us and has endeavored to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless indian savages whose known rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages sexes and conditions.
in every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in the most humble terms our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated injury.
a prince whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a tyrant is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
nor have we been wanting in attention to our british brethren.
we have warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us.
we have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here.
we have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these usurpations which would inevitably interrupt our connections and correspondence.
they too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity.
we must therefore acquiesce in the necessity which denounces our separation and hold them as we hold the rest of mankind enemies in war in peace friends.
we therefore the representatives of the united states of america in general congress assembled appealing to the supreme judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions do in the name and by authority of the good people of these colonies solemnly publish and declare that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states that they are absolved from all allegiance to the british crown and that all political connection between them and the state of great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved and that as free and independent states they have full power to levy war conclude peace contract alliances establish commerce and to do all other acts and things which independent states may of right do.
and for the support of this declaration with a firm reliance on the protection of divine providence we mutually pledge to each other our lives our fortunes and our sacred honor.
vocabulary rectitude rightness here is where the document declares the independence of the colonies.
whose authority does the congress use to declare independence.
exploring thedocument john hancock button gwinnett lyman hall george walton william hooper joseph hewes john penn edward rutledge thomas heyward jr thomas lynch jr arthur middleton samuel chase william paca thomas stone charles carroll of carrollton george wythe richard henry lee thomas jefferson benjamin harrison thomas nelson jr francis lightfoot lee carter braxton robert morris benjamin rush benjamin franklin john morton george clymer james smith george taylor james wilson george ross caesar rodney george read thomas mckean william floyd philip livingston francis lewis lewis morris richard stockton john witherspoon francis hopkinson john hart abraham clark josiah bartlett william whipple samuel adams john adams robert treat paine elbridge gerry stephen hopkins william ellery roger sherman samuel huntington william williams oliver wolcott matthew thornton exploring the document the congress adopted the final draft of the declaration of independence on july 4 1776.
a formal copy written on parchment paper was signed on august 2 1776.
from whom did the declaration s signers receive their authority to declare independence.
the following is part of a passage that the congress removed from jefferson s original draft he has waged cruel war against human nature itself violating its most sacred rights of life and liberty in the persons of a distant people who never offended him captivating and carrying them into slavery in another hemisphere or to incur miserable death in their transportation thither.
why do you think the congress deleted this passage.
section 3 teks 2a 4b 4c ioc 22b 25b what you will learn.
many americans supported the war effort.
the patriots both won and lost battles during the years 1775 1777.
france and spain helped the patriots fight the british.
the winter at valley forge tested the strength of patriot troops.
the war continued at sea and in the west.
t the big idea patriot forces faced many obstacles in the war against britain.
key terms and people mercenaries p 128 battle of trenton p 129 battle of saratoga p 130 marquis de lafayette p 131 baron friedrich von steuben p 131 bernardo de galvez p 131 john paul jones p 133 george rogers clark p 133 i use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the early years of the american revolution.
the struggle for if you were there you are a serving maid at an inn in new york city.
british soldiers often stop at the inn for a meal.
you sometimes overhear their conversations though they don t notice you.
now a patriot leader has asked you to bring him any information you hear.
you want to help the patriot cause but wonder what will happen if you are caught spying.
would you agree to spy for the patriots.
building background many colonists struggled for the patriot cause.
men women and children all made important contributions.
they fought kept farms and shops running and provided food and supplies.
in spite of their efforts winning the war was a great challenge.
supporting the war effort george washington s chief task as the continental army s commander in chief was to raise troops.
during the war more than 230 000 soldiers served in the continental army and another 145 000 enlisted in local militias.
the typical soldier was young often under the legal age of 16 and had little money or property.
the army offered low pay harsh conditions and a big chance of becoming a casualty.
yet the patriots knew they were fighting for their homes and their freedom.
finding and keeping dedicated soldiers would be a constant challenge throughout the war.
in time the continental congress required states to supply soldiers.
men who could afford it often paid others such as slaves or apprentices to fight in their places.
one question facing general washington was whether to recruit african americans.
many white southerners opposed the idea and at first washington banned african americans from serving.
when the british promised freedom to any slave who fought on their side however thousands of african americans joined the redcoats.
26 chapter 4 battles in the middle colonies 1776 77 f ticondero l oston major battles middle colonies 1 new york august 1776 trenton december 1776 if princeton january 1777 brandywine september 1777 atlantic ocean strengths strengths j hkwh fought for a cause they well trained well 1 believed in equipped soldiers hmhrb got help from european large powerful navy fj nations weaknesses f wmv weaknesses had to cross atlantic w w untrained poorly ocean js dj equipped soldiers used mercenaries as jjk i small navy soldiers j bndywin chesapes i.
v skills interpreting maps long island new york bay few york philadelphia 70w atlantic ocean british advance if british victory colonial advance h colonial victory proclamation line of 1763 150 miles 75 150 kilometers 1.
movement about how far was washington s march from boston to new york.
human environment interaction how did geography affect the british advance on philadelphia.
in response the continental army began allowing free african americans to serve.
while men served as soldiers many women ran farms and businesses.
others helped the army by raising money for supplies or making clothing.
mercy otis warren a member of a prominent family of patriots wrote and published several plays that supported the revolutionary cause.
women served as messengers nurses and spies.
a massachusetts man noted at every house women and children are making cartridges running bullets and at the same time animating encouraging their husbands and sons to fight.
anonymous quoted in born for liberty by sara m evans perhaps the best known woman to fight in the war was mary ludwig hays.
she was called molly pitcher because she brought water to the troops.
when her husband was wounded in a 1778 battle she took his place loading cannons.
another woman deborah sampson dressed as a man and fought in.
several battles.
summarizing how did vari ous groups contribute to the war effort.
defeats and victories as the revolution gathered steam it became more deadly.
at first the continental army suffered a number of defeats.
in time though the patriots patience began to pay off.
reading check the impact today today women serve in every branch of the u s military.
in 2013 they became able to serve in combat units.
women soldiers in the iraq and afghanistan wars have undertaken difficult and dangerous jobs including patrolling streets driving trucks and searching iraqi and afghan women for weapons.
the american revolution 127 focus oh reaping what is the main idea of the third paragraph under new york.
canada in part because the army was short on supplies many patriot leaders favored fighting a defensive war.
others wanted to invade british controlled canada and make it the 14th colony.
patriot troops led by general richard montgomery captured montreal in november 1775.
the next major target was the city of quebec.
benedict arnold now a general led his troops north on a remarkable trek through the rough backcountry of maine.
he reached quebec around the same time that montreal fell to montgomery.
since his first attempt to take the city failed arnold waited for montgomery s troops to join his.
taking an immense chance the combined armies attacked during a fierce blizzard on new year s eve.
they were quickly defeated.
the americans had suffered a crushing loss and the patriots hopes of taking canada faded.
new york new york city became the next battleground.
general washington had moved his troops to new york expecting the british arrival.
sure enough in june 1776 a fleet of british ships approached new york bay.
led by general william howe the british forced the continental army off long island.
howe s 32 000 soldiers were much better equipped than washington s 23 000 men most of whom were militia.
the patriot general had to use all of his skills just to save his army.
in a series of battles howe pounded the continental army forcing it to retreat farther and farther.
the redcoats captured patriots as well as supplies.
eventually the british pushed washington across the hudson river into new jersey.
howe s revenge for his defeat at boston was complete.
during the new york campaigns a young connecticut officer named nathan hale went behind british lines to get secret information.
seized by the british with documents hidden in the soles of his shoes hale was ordered to be hanged.
before his crossing the delaware george washington and his troops crossed the partially frozen delaware river on the night of december 25 1776.
this daring act led to a key patriot victory at the battle of trenton.
german american artist emanuel leutze created this famous painting in 1851.
a version of leutze s washington crossing the delaware hangs in the metropolitan museum of art in new york city.
what feelings do you think leutze wanted to inspire with this painting.
execution he is said to have declared i regret that i have but one life to lose for my country.
new jersey in november 1776 the tattered continental army was on the run.
washington s remaining 6 000 men were tired and dis couraged.
the one year contract for many of them would end on december 31 who would re enlist in this losing army and who would replace the soldiers who left.
washington s army was in danger of vanishing.
thinking the rebellion would end soon howe left new jersey in the hands of soldiers from the german state of hesse.
the hessians were mercenaries foreign soldiers who fought not out of loyalty but for pay.
on december 7 washington retreated across the delaware river into pennsylvania.
even with 2 000 fresh troops the patriots were near the end.
these are the times that try men s souls wrote thomas paine in the american crisis a series of pamphlets he began publishing in late 1776.
without a convincing victory washington knew he would lose his army.
he decided to take a big chance and go on the offensive.
the americans would attack the hessians at trenton new jersey.
128 chapter 4 on christmas night 1776 with a winter storm lashing about them washington and 2 400 soldiers silently rowed across the ice clogged delaware river.
as morning broke the men short on supplies and many with no shoes marched through the snow to reach the enemy camp.
the hessians having celebrated the holiday the night before were fast asleep when the patriots sprang upon them.
the battle of trenton was an important patriot victory.
american soldiers took more than 900 prisoners.
british general charles cornwallis rushed to stop washington as he marched northeast to princeton.
on the night of january 2 1777 the patriots left their campfires burning then slipped into the darkness and circled behind the british troops.
in the morning washington attacked.
a local resident witnessed it the battle was plainly seen from our door and the guns went off so quick and many together that they could not be numbered.
almost as soon as the firing was over our house was filled and surrounded with general washington s men anonymous quoted in voices of 1776 by richard wheeler as washington watched the redcoats flee princeton he cheered it is a fine fox chase my boys.
now new soldiers joined the chase.
others re enlisted.
the army and the revolution was saved.
saratoga the two quick defeats stung the british.
in the spring of 1777 they wanted a victory.
british general john burgoyne decided to push through new york state and cut off new england from the other colonies.
the strategy required perfect timing.
according academic vocabulary strategy a plan for fighting a battle or war the american revolution 129 to the plan burgoyne s army would invade from canada recapture fort ticonderoga and sweep south to albany.
general howe in new york city would sail up the hudson river to meet him strangling new england.
indeed burgoyne took ticonderoga in early july and headed toward albany.
here the timing went wrong for the british.
unknown to burgoyne howe had left new york sailed up the chesapeake bay and captured philadelphia.
delegates to the continental congress were forced to flee.
meanwhile burgoyne s army bogged down in thick forests.
the patriots had chopped down large trees and dammed rivers to create obstacles.
all along the route the militia swarmed out of nowhere to attack the redcoats.
as burgoyne neared saratoga new york he found himself surrounded.
on october 17 1777 he was forced to surrender his entire army to general horatio gates.
the battle of saratoga in new york was the turning point of the revolutionary war.
it was the greatest victory yet for the american forces.
morale soared.
patriot james thacher wrote this event will make one of the most brilliant pages of american history.
help from europe the french and indian war had drastically changed the balance of power in north america.
the french and spanish had lost a large expanse of valuable land to the british.
both countries were delighted to see their powerful rival experiencing trouble in its american colonies.
the victory at saratoga gave the patriots something they had been desperately seeking foreign help.
not surprisingly it came from britain s enemies france and spain.
even britain s old ally holland joined the fight on the side of the patriots.
two remarkable europeans the welfare of america is closely bound up with the welfare of mankind declared a wealthy young frenchman the marquis de lafayette.
inspired by the ideas of the revolution lafayette bought his own ship and arrived in america in 1777.
he brought with him a group of well trained soldiers and volunteered to serve in the continental army himself without pay.
lafayette spoke little english and had never seen battle.
however he quickly became a skillful commander earning the title of major general.
lafayette led 2 000 patriots to successfully pursue 6 000 redcoats throughout virginia during 1780 81.
he gave 200 000 of his own money to support the revolution and wrote many letters home to powerful friends and family asking their aid for the patriot cause.
in february 1778 another european came to serve heroically under washington.
baron friedrich von steuben an experienced military officer from prussia led with a combination of respect and fear.
he started training the american troops focusing on basic military drills.
soon he turned the continental army into a finely tuned fighting force.
a historian called von steuben s feat perhaps the most remarkable achievement in rapid military training in the history of the world.
help from france benjamin franklin a skilled and experienced diplomat had gone to france to ask king louis xvi for support.
finally the battle of saratoga in 1777 persuaded the king that the colonists could win the war.
not until then did the king agree to an official alliance with the patriots.
in may 1778 the continental congress ratified the treaty of support with france.
the french had been helping the patriots all along with some supplies and ammunition.
after the treaty became official the french increased the level of supplies and provided soldiers and ships.
french naval support would be a key to defeating the british.
french loans were converted into cash by new yorker haym salomon.
he also convinced many hessians to leave the conflict.
help from spain spain also a bitter enemy of britain joined the war in 1779.
bernardo de galvez the governor of spanish louisiana became a key ally to the patriots.
galvez gathered a small army of spanish soldiers french americans colonists and native americans.
together they made their way east from louisiana.
galvez seized british posts all the way to pensacola florida.
summarizing how did france and spain help the patriots.
reading check.
primary source r journal entry valley forge a surgeon at valley forge albigence waldo kept a journal of what he saw during the winter of 1777 78.
the army which has been surprisingly healthy hitherto now begins to grow sickly from the continued fatigues they have suffered this campaign.
yet they still show a spirit of alacrity cheerful readiness and contentment not to be expected from so young troops.
i am sick discontented and out of humour.
poor food hard lodging cold weather fatigue nasty cloaths clothes nasty cookery smoke and cold hunger and filthyness a pox on my bad luck albigence waldo from diary of surgeon albigence waldo of the connecticut line analysis skill.
analyzing primary sources why did waldo seem surprised by the soldiers attitude.
winter at valley forge the entry of france and spain into the war came at a crucial moment.
the continental army was running very low on food and clothing.
in december 1777 washington settled his 12 000 men at valley forge north of philadelphia.
to this day the name of valley forge brings to mind suffering and courage.
yet no battles took place here.
the only enemy was the brutal winter of 1777 78.
washington s men lacked even the most basic protections against shin deep snows.
in spite of the general s repeated requests for supplies conflicts over funding between state authorities and congress kept supplies from coming.
washington wrote in a letter to see men without clothes without blankets to lie upon without shoes without a house or hut to cover them until those could be built and submitting without a murmur is a proof of patience and obedience which in my opinion can scarcely be paralleled matched george washington quoted in george washington a collection as winter roared in soldiers quickly built crude shelters that offered little protection against the weather.
some soldiers had no shirts.
others had marched the shoes off their feet.
at their guard posts they stood on their hats to keep their feet from touching the freezing ground.
one soldier wrote that getting food was the business that usually employed us.
during that terrible winter some 2 000 soldiers died of disease and malnutrition.
amazingly the survivors not only stayed they drilled and marched to the orders of baron von steuben becoming better soldiers.
while the soldiers suffered through the winter at valley forge the british lived a life of luxury in philadelphia.
most of the patriots had fled the city leaving only loyalists and british soldiers.
together they enjoyed the city s houses taverns and theaters and held parties and balls.
finding main ideas what challenges did the continental army face at valley forge.
reading check.
32 chapter 4 war at sea and in the west while some americans struggled against the british on land in the former colonies others fought at sea and on the western frontier.
each area posed tough challenges.
war at sea the entry of the french navy into the war greatly aided the colonists.
many people had thought that the mighty british navy would crush the much smaller american fleet.
however the british failed to use their powerful navy effectively during the war.
in the fall of 1775 the continental congress made plans to build four american warships.
soon afterward the congress formally established the marines and the continental navy.
by adapting merchant vessels the navy had eight fighting ships ready for combat by february 1776.
that month the tiny american navy launched a major offensive to damage the operating ability of the british fleet located off the carolina coast.
rather than attack the fleet directly the patriots went after the british supply base on nassau in the bahamas.
the american troops seized the main supply fort on the island.
they then raised the newly created flag of the american revolution over nassau.
after that campaign the american navy focused on seizing british supply ships and weakening britain s naval forces in the west indies.
john paul jones the patriots owed much of their success on the seas to naval hero john paul jones.
jones had once been considered an outlaw.
he was bom john paul in scotland and began working on ships at a young age.
after accidentally killing the leader of a mutiny he fled to america and added jones to his name.
when the war broke out jones volunteered his services to the newly created navy.
he quickly established himself as a brave and clever sailor.
considered a pirate by the british jones captured many british supply ships.
the french greatly admired jones.
when france entered the war in 1778 french leaders presented him with a small fleet of seven vessels to command.
he named his flagship bonhomme richard gentleman richard in honor of benjamin franklin s poor richard s almanac.
one of jones s most famous victories was the capture of the british warship serapis on september 23 1779.
early in the battle the british knocked out the heaviest artillery on the bonhomme richard.
captain richard pearson of the serapis then called out to jones has your ship struck surrendered.
jones replied i have not yet begun to fight.
the battle continued for more than two hours.
finally the americans wore down the british who surrendered at 10 30 p m.
the continental navy used fewer than 100 ships over the course of the war.
yet the british lost more than 200 ships to the small but effective american naval force.
war in the west the lands west of the appalachian mountains were controlled by native american nations.
both the british and the patriots tried to enlist these groups in their cause.
george rogers clark volunteered to lead the western campaign.
clark had been a surveyor along the ohio and kentucky rivers.
by the time the war broke out he knew the lands of the midwest well.
clark created an army from the scattered settlements in the area.
one of the best known groups was the over mountain men a band of settlers from present day tennessee.
determined to weaken british support systems clark targeted trading villages.
following the ohio river to the tennessee clark s force set out on a 120 mile overland trek to kaskaskia in present day illinois.
the village s leaders learned of the attack and surrendered.
other patriots took cahokia without a fight.
in february 1779 clark launched a surprise attack on fort sackville near the town the american revolution 133 1.
movement how far did the patriots march to get to vincennes.
human environment interaction why did military forces follow river routes.
of vincennes.
the attack was unexpected because the nearby wabash river was icy and flooded.
despite overflowing riverbanks clark s force of 150 men endured an 18 day march through freezing water.
they also managed to bring enough patriot flags for an army of hundreds.
the flags were displayed near the fort and the skilled pioneers sustained enough musket fire to indicate a much larger army.
falling for the ruse the commander of fort sackville surrendered.
in general the british were more successful at winning over the native americans.
but clark s many campaigns undermined british support in the west.
reading check finding main ideas how did jones and clark help the patriots war effort.
summary and preview the patriots.
faced hardships as the war continued.
in the next section you will see how they finally achieved their goal of independence.
section 3 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
identify what groups supported the patriot war effort.
how did each group contribute.
b analyze why was it difficult to find and keep soldiers in the continental army.
describe what early defeats did the patriots face.
elaborate was it a mistake for the british to use mercenaries to help them fight the war.
why or why not.
c explain what roles did bernardo de galvez and the marquis de lafayette play in the revolution.
elaborate why do you think european nations supported the colonists rather than great britain.
evaluate do you think that the patriots would have won the war without help from france and spain.
why or why not.
describe what difficulties did the patriots face at valley forge.
elaborate how might weather conditions affect the outcome of a battle.
identify who was john paul jones.
compare in what ways was jones s naval strategy like that of the continental army.
c draw conclusions why was the western frontier an important area for the patriots to control.
critical thinking 6.
drawing conclusions review the events on your time line.
copy the chart below and use it to identify the region in which the events took place and how the events reflected the patriots successes and failures.
region patriot problems patriot successes writesmart 7.
thinking about the struggle for liberty why was this period of the war so difficult for the patriots.
how did they struggle through.
what are the one or two points that are the most important about this period of the war.
4 chapter 4 1 mdep ncj n e i if you were there you have grown up on a farm in south carolina.
you know every inch of the woods and marshes around your home.
you are too young to join the continental army but you have heard stories about a brave group of soldiers who carry out quick raids on the british then disappear into the woods.
these fighters get no pay and live in constant danger.
would you consider joining the fighters.
patriot forces faced many problems in the war in the south.
the american patriots finally defeated the british at the battle of yorktown.
the british and the americans officially ended the war by signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
building background as the war moved to the south american forces encountered new problems.
they suffered several major defeats.
but american resistance in the southern colonies was strong.
backwoods fighters confused and frustrated the british army.
the war spread to the southern colonies where the british were finally defeated.
war in the south the war across the ocean was not going the way the british government in london had planned.
the northern colonies with their ragged scrappy fighters proved to be tough to tame.
so the british switched strategies and set their sights on the south.
the british hoped to find support from the large loyalist populations living in georgia the carolinas and virginia.
as they moved across the south the british also planned to free enslaved africans and enlist them as british soldiers.
under the leadership of a new commander general henry clinton the strategy paid off for a while.
brutal fighting the southern war was particularly brutal.
much more than in the north this phase of the war pitted americans patriots versus loyalists against one another in direct combat.
the british also destroyed crops farm animals and other property as they marched through the south.
one british officer banastre tarleton sowed fear throughout the south by refusing to take prisoners and killing soldiers who tried to surrender.
key terms and people francis marion p 136 comte de rochambeau p 137 battle of yorktown p 137 treaty of paris of 1783 p 139 use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major events that led to the british defeat.
ie american revolution 135 georgia the last colony to join the revolution was the first to fall to the british.
a force of 3 500 redcoats took savannah in 1778 and put in place a new government.
britain s next major target was charleston south carolina.
in early 1780 general clinton landed a force of 14 000 troops around the port city.
with a minimal cost of about 250 casualties the british scored one of their biggest victories of the war.
the patriots surrendered charleston in may handing over four ships and some 5 400 prisoners.
camden and king s mountain in august 1780 patriot forces led by horatio gates tried to drive the british out of camden south carolina.
the attack was poorly executed however.
gates had only half as many soldiers as he had planned for and most were tired and hungry.
in the heat of battle many panicked and ran.
the patriot attack quickly fell apart.
of some 4 000 american troops only about 700 escaped.
general nathanael greene arrived to reorganize the army.
as he rode through the southern countryside he was discouraged by the devastation.
he later wrote i have never witnessed such scenes.
american forces attacked loyalists at king s mountain in october 1780 scoring a major victory.
swamp fox francis marion leads his soldiers down a river in south carolina.
from a hideout on a river island marion led raids against british communication and supply lines.
which figure do you think is francis marion.
guerrilla warfare the southern patriots switched to swift hit and run attacks known as guerrilla warfare.
no patriot was better at this style of fighting than francis marion.
he organized marion s brigade a group of guerrilla soldiers.
marion s brigade used surprise attacks to disrupt british communication and supply lines.
despite their great efforts the british could not catch marion and his men.
one frustrated general claimed as for this old fox the devil himself could not catch him.
from that point on marion was known as the swamp fox.
reading check sequencing list the events of the war in the south in chronological order.
battle of yorktown in early 1781 the war was going badly for the patriots.
they were low on money to pay soldiers and buy supplies.
the help of their foreign allies had not brought the war to a quick end as they had hoped.
the british held most of the south plus philadelphia and new york city.
the patriots morale took another blow when benedict arnold one of america s most gifted officers turned traitor.
regrouped under nathanael greene the continental army began harassing british general charles cornwallis in the carolinas.
the patriot s system of spies kept washington and lafayette informed of british plans.
one african american spy a slave named james armistead posed as a runaway slave who wanted to help the british.
he moved easily in the camps of both cornwallis and arnold but sent reports of their plans back to lafayette.
hoping to stay in communication with the british naval fleet cornwallis moved his force of 7 200 men to yorktown virginia.
it was a fatal mistake.
1 r f r a history close up battle of yorktown a w c j w s j the british scuttled or purposely sank dozens of their ships.
this formed a barrier that kept the french ships from coming too close.
lx 2 x f f.
i v y v w v t j x ta.
j s x v x x w v american troop positions w french troop positions y v 5 j l f l1 q a a i hl i ii ii r ff wh x y s.
w o v x x general washington in new york saw a chance to trap cornwallis at yorktown.
he ordered lafayette to block cornwallis s escape by land.
then he combined his 2 500 troops with 4 000 french troops commanded by the comte de rochambeau raw shahn boh.
washington led the french american force on a swift march to virginia to cut off the other escape routes.
the patriots surrounded cornwallis with some 16 000 soldiers.
meanwhile a french naval fleet seized control of the chesapeake bay preventing british ships from rescuing cornwallis s stranded army.
the siege began.
for weeks the fight ing steadily wore down the british defenses.
in early october washington prepared for a major attack on the weakened british troops.
facing near certain defeat on october 19 1781 cornwallis sent a drummer and a soldier with a white flag of surrender to washington s camp.
the patriots took some 8 000 british prisoners the largest british army in america.
the battle of yorktown was the last major battle of the american revolution.
prime minister lord north received word of the yorktown surrender in november.
in shock he declared it is all over.
ak history video george washington yorktown 1.
reading check.
drawing conclusions why did the victory at yorktown end the fighting.
the american revolution 137 primary source pamphlet sentiments of an american woman the continental army received aid from female patriots led by esther deberdt reed and sarah franklin bache the daughter of benjamin franklin.
in 1780 these women organized a campaign that raised 300 000 for soldiers clothing.
the following pamphlet written by the campaign s leaders announced the campaign.
in it the authors used images of women helping with war efforts of the past to gain support for their cause.
on the commencement of actual war the women of america manifested a firm resolution to contribute to the deliverance of their country.
animated by the purest patriotism they are sensible of sorrow at this day in not offering more than barren wishes for the success of so glorious a revolution.
they aspire to render themselves more really useful and this sentiment is universal from the north to the south of the thirteen united states.
our ambition is kindled by the fame of those heroines of antiquity who have proved to the universe that if opinion and manners did not forbid us to march to glory by the same paths as the men we should at least equal and sometimes surpass them in our love for the public good.
i glory in all that which my sex has done great and commendable.
i call to mind with enthusiasm and with admiration all those acts of courage of constancy and patriotism which history has transmitted to us jj so many famous sieges where the women have been seen building new walls digging trenches with their feeble hands furnishing arms to their defenders they themselves darting the missile weapons of the enemy resigning the ornaments of their apparel and their fortune to fill the public treasury and to hasten the deliverance of their country burying themselves under its ruins throwing themselves into the flames rather than submit to the disgrace of humiliation before a proud enemy born for liberty disdaining to bear the irons of a tyrannic government we associate ourselves with those rulers who have extended the empire of liberty and contented to reign by sweetness and justice have broken the chains of slavery forged by tyrants i a female spy passes news to a colonial officer.
1 commencement start 2 manifested presented 3 render make 4 antiquity ancient times 5 commendable praiseworthy 6 disdaining refusing 7 tyrannic unjust 8 contented determined the women declare that they would fight if they were allowed.
the authors list ways in which women have helped fight wars in the past.
in this phrase the women link themselves to great women rulers of the past.
analysis skilli analyzing primary sources 1.
what do the writers call to mind in asking women to join the patriots cause.
with whom do the writers associate themselves.
138 chapter 4 the treaty of paris after yorktown only a few small battles took place.
lacking the money to pay for a new army great britain entered into peace talks with america.
benjamin franklin had a key role in the negotiations.
delegates took more than two years to come to a peace agreement.
in the treaty of paris of 1783 great britain recognized the independence of the united states.
the treaty also set america s borders.
a separate treaty between britain and spain returned florida to the spanish.
british leaders also accepted american rights to settle and trade west of the original thirteen colonies.
the revolution which had begun in 1774 with the meeting of the first continental congress was finally over.
at the war s end patriot soldiers returned to their homes and families.
the courage of soldiers and civilians had made america s victory possible.
as they returned home george washington thanked his troops for their devotion.
wish that your latter days be as prosperous as your former ones have been glorious.
summarizing explain how the war for independence finally came to an end.
reading check i summary and preview americans won i their independence from great britain in 1783.
in the next chapter you will learn how the new nation formed its first government.
section 4 assessment i reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
describe what problems did the patriots experience in the war in the south.
b analyze what advantages did the southern patriots have over the british in the south.
describe what was the patriots strategy for defeating the british at yorktown.
elaborate why do you think general cornwallis decided to surrender at the battle of yorktown.
identify who helped to negotiate the treaty of paris for the americans.
predict how might relations between great brit ain and its former colonies be affected by the war.
f i organizer below and use it to identify and describe the most important event in turning the war in the patriots favor.
event importance to end of war i writesmart 5.
thinking about the revolution s end after reading this section you have a picture of the whole war.
in your talk what do you want to say about how the war ended.
were there any moments that were especially trying for the colonists.
what events in your notes from class lectures might you include in a summary.
critical thinking 4.
evaluating review your notes on the events that led to the end of the war.
then copy the graphic the american revolution 139 social studies skills analysis critical thinking civic participation study constructing time lines define the skill time lines are a good way to organize historical information.
time lines clearly show a sequence of historical events eras or people s achievements over a certain period of time.
using a time line to describe the events in the sequence in which they happened is using relative chronology.
in addition to showing events in the order they happened time lines also show the amount of time between events.
using the specific dates of events is ordering events with absolute chronology.
when you construct a time line to sequence events you can often better understand the context of certain events.
it can help you determine cause and effect relationships among them or see specific themes within a time period.
the first step in actually constructing the time line is to draw a straight line using a ruler.
then mark intervals of time on the line.
these represent the dates that divide the time line into smaller equal time periods.
for example a time line of the revolution might include three year intervals 1770 1773 1776 and so on.
then add events in the correct places on the time line.
the beginning and end of the time line each interval and each event should be labeled with dates.
as a final touch the time line needs a title.
once you have completed the time line you can use it to interpret the events.
look for events that are similar such as the meetings of the first and second continental congresses.
you can describe how far apart they are and which events led to each one.
learn the skill practice the skill when you construct a time line you need to make some basic decisions.
first the time line needs a topic.
this topic can be general or specific.
for example it might be as general as the american revolution or more specific such as important battles of the revolution.
the time line should span a period that includes the main events related to the topic.
a time line on all the major events of the revolution might cover the period 1770 1783.
the next step in constructing a time line is taking notes on events from the chosen time period and topic.
write down the date when each event happened.
if there are too many events it is a good idea to include only the most important ones.
follow these instructions to construct a time line.
using your textbook choose a topic related to the revolution for your time line.
decide on the dates your time line will need to cover.
use your textbook to take notes on events to include in your time line and their dates.
put the events in order.
following the steps described above construct your time line.
the finished time line should include clearly labeled dates at least six events and a title.
look for relationships between the events and then write a summary of the time line.
0 chapter 4 chapter chapter review visual summary reviewing vocabulary terms and people 1.
what were american colonists who remained loyal to great britain called.
a whigs c royalists b loyalists d democrats 2.
what was the name of the battle in which the patriots finally defeated the british.
battle of saratoga c battle of yorktown b.
battle of new jersey d battle of valley forge 3.
what was the name for the colonial military force created to fight the british.
a mercenaries c hessians b redcoats d continental army 4 who was the french nobleman who helped the patriots fight the british.
comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 112 116 5 a.
recall what actions did the first and second continental congresses take.
b analyze how did the events at lexington and concord change the conflict between great britain and the colonies.
c elaborate why do you think that control of boston early in the revolutionary war was important.
section 2 pages 118 121 6 a.
identify why is july 4 1776 a significant date.
draw conclusions what effect did common sense have on colonial attitudes toward great britain.
a bernardo de galvez c baron von steuben b marquis de lafayette d lord dunmore c predict how might the content of the declaration of independence lead to questions over the issue of slavery.
the american revolution 141 section 3 pages 126 134 7 a.
describe what difficulties did the patriots experience in the early years of the war.
b analyze how did the patriots turn the tide of the war.
why was the battle of saratoga important.
c elaborate could the patriots have succeeded in the war without foreign help.
section 4 pages 135 139 8 a.
recall why did the british think they might find support in the southern colonies.
make inferences why did it take more than two years for the british and the americans to agree to the terms of the treaty of paris.
c evaluate in your opinion what was the most important reason for the patriots defeat of the british.
reading skills main ideas in social studies use the reading skills taught at the beginning of the chapter to answer the question about the reading selection below.
1 native americans were at first encouraged by both sides to remain neutral.
2 by the summer of 1776 however both patriots and the british were aggressively recruiting indian fighters.
3 most sided with the british.
4 in northern new york four of the six iroquois nations fought for the british p 120 9.
which sentence contains the main idea of the paragraph.
sentence 1 b.
sentence 2 c sentence 3 d sentence 4 reviewing themes 10.
politics what are three important rights listed in the declaration of independence.
geography what role did geography play in the fighting that took place in the west.
politics the american revolution took place between which years.
social studies skills constructing time lines use the social studies skills taught in this chapter to answer the questions.
construct a time line of seven battles mentioned in the chapter.
include a complete sentence in each label that states the importance or outcome of the battle.
write a paragraph analyzing the information in the time line you ve created.
mywritesmart 15.
prepare your oral report review your notes and identify the contributions of each of the following people abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
choose one or two important ideas events or people for each period of the war.
next choose one of your teacher s lectures to summarize and ask him or her for clarification of any words or ideas you didn t understand.
now start to prepare your oral report by writing a one sentence introduction to your talk.
then write a sentence or two about each period of the war.
write a concluding sentence that makes a quick connection between the revolutionary war and our lives today.
use different types of sentences such as declaratory imperative exclamatory or interrogative and different types of connecting words such as conjunctions and prepositions.
practice your talk until you can give it with only a glance or two at your notes.
be prepared to answer questions from your fellow students.
as they give their reports take notes on the information they present.
then ask them questions about any ideas or phrases you don t understand or want more information about.
be sure to define important key terms or people in your discussion.
2 chapter 4 chapter texas test practice directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 what action would a loyalist have been likely to take during the revolution.
a attend the continental congress b support the olive branch petition c support the declaration of independence d join the continental army 2 which of the following events took place last.
f the declaration of independence was issued.
g the second continental congress met.
h the battles at lexington and concord occurred.
j the battle of bunker hill took place.
3 why was the victory at the battle of saratoga so important to the patriot cause.
a it allowed the declaration of independence to be issued.
b it forced the british army to retreat from boston.
c it convinced france to aid the colonies in their fight.
d it caused the british government to give up the war.
4 the most brutal and destructive fighting of the war probably occurred f in the southern colonies.
g at valley forge.
h in new england.
j at lexington and concord.
5 the declaration of independences claim that people have a right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness shows the influence of what enlightenment thinker from europe.
a jonathan edwards b john locke c king george iii d thomas paine 6 in what way was clarks battle strategy the same as john paul joness strategy.
f they both were badly outnumbered by the british.
g they both knew the colonial midwest region well.
h they both aimed to weaken the british by attacking their supply lines.
j they both survived the winter at valley forge.
7 read the following passage from thomas paines the crisis and use it to answer the question below.
these are the times that try mens souls.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the service of his country but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.
tyranny is not easily conquered yet we have this consolation with us that the harder the conflict the more glorious the triumph.
thomas paine the crisis 1776 document based question what point is paine trying to make in this passage.
the american revolution 143 h multimedia connections history i s revolution the american revolution 143 mc2 assignment write a biographical narrative about a person who lived in the early americas before or during the colonial period.
a biographical narrative you have been listening to and telling narratives all your life.
a biographical narrative a form of historical writing i is a true story about an event or brief period in a person s life.
1 asking questions try using i the 5i 1 how questions who.
to help you think of descriptive details.
ask questions such as who was this person.
what was he or she doing.
exactly where and when did the event occur.
how did the person or other people react to the event.
prewrite getting started think of all the people you read about in this unit.
which ones interested you most.
what particular events and situations in these people s lives seem most exciting or significant.
pick one of these events or situations as the subject of your narrative.
creating an interesting narrative make your narrative lively and interesting by including physical descriptions of people places and things using details that appeal to the five senses sight hearing touch smell taste specific actions that relate directly to the story you are telling dialogue between the people involved or direct quotations background information about the place customs and setting all relevant details and information needed to relate the events of the story and how they affected the person and perhaps history organize the events in your narrative in chronological order the order in which they occurred.
write you can use this framework to help you draft your narrative.
a writer s framework introduction grab your reader s attention with a striking detail or bit of dialogue.
introduce the historical person and setting using specific details.
set the scene by telling how the event or situation began.
body present actions and details in the order in which they occurred.
connect actions with transition words like first then next and finally.
provide specific details to make the person and the situation come alive.
conclusion wrap up the action of the narrative.
tell how the person was affected by what happened.
explain how the event or situation was important in the persons life and how it affected history.
14 unit1 3.
evaluate and revise evaluating read through your completed draft to make sure your narrative is complete coherent and clear.
then look for ways to improve it.
evaluation questions for a biographical narrative does your introduction grab the reader s attention.
do you introduce the historical person and tell how i the event or situation began.
s do you include details to make the person place and event seem real.
i are the actions in the story in the order in which they occurred.
have you included all of the actions and details a reader would need to understand what happened.
does the conclusion tell how the event or situation affected the person and history.
showing sequence a clear sense of the sequence of events is important in any narrative.
here is a list of words that show those after next before now finally soon first still second etc.
then last when later while revising when you revise your narrative you may need to add transition words.
transition words help you link ideas between sentences and paragraphs.
notice the words in bold in the following sentences.
after cabeza de vaca and the other adventurers left the beach and started inland they separated into different groups.
later cabeza de vaca heard that many of the others had died.
still he never lost faith that he would reach his fellow spaniards in mexico.
proofread and publish proofreading throughout your narrative you used transition words to link events.
make sure that you have spelled the words correctly and have not confused them with other words.
for example be sure to use two l s in finally and not to mistake the transition word then for the comparative word than.
publishing one good way to share your biographical narrative is to exchange it with one or more classmates who have written about the same person you have.
after reading each other s narratives you can compare and contrast them.
how are your stories similar.
how do they differ.
writesmart use mywritesmartto create share and revise your paper.
practice and apply use the steps and strategies outlined in this workshop to write your biographical narrative.
our colonial heritage 145 the big idea americans carried on a vigorous debate before ratifying the constitution.
vwritesmart a newspaper editorial it is 1788 and you re writing an editorial for a local newspaper.
you want to convince your readers that the new constitution will be much better than the old articles of confederation.
in this chapter you ll find the information you need to support your opinion.
48 chapters united states 1777 the continental congress approves the articles of confederation on november 15.
1775 world 1778 the united states and france become allies.
1781 on march 1 the articles of confederation go into effect after being ratified by all 13 states.
1785 the united states begins using the dollar currency.
1786 shays s rebellion breaks out in massachusetts.
1787 on may 14 state delegates begin to arrive at the constitutional convention in philadelphia.
1791 the bill rights i ratified the stat decemt 1787 the ottoman empire declares war on russia.
1791 the lady washington becomes the first u s ship to reach japan.
forming a government 1 reading social studies economics geography politics society and culture science and technology focus on themes visualize a row of dominoes lined up one after the other.
push over the first one and one after the other all eventually fall.
in this way the events in this chapter are like dominoes that cause each other to occur.
these events one after another finally led to the formation of a new government and a new society.
if you read closely you will see that political disagreements started the entire process.
understanding chronological order focus on reading like falling dominoes historical events can create huge chains of results often stretching over many years.
to understand history and events therefore we often need to see how they are related in time.
understanding chronological order the word chronological means related to time.
events discussed in this history book are discussed in sequence in the order in which they happened.
to understand history better you can use a sequence chain to take notes about events in the order they happened.
sequence chain tip writers sometimes signal chronological order or sequence by using words or phrases like these first before then later soon after before long next eventually finally definition there are two kinds of chronological order absolute and relative.
an absolute chronology includes the date of each event and the amount of time between each one.
a relative chronology does not include dates it simply notes the order in which events occurred.
ii tip you can put lengths of time in chronological order.
people s life spans or important eras of time can be placed in the order of the first date and with the i spans of time overlapping on a i time line.
50 chapter 5 from chapter 5 p 161 you try it.
read the following passage and answer the questions that follow.
farmers rebel in august 1786 farmers in three western counties began a revolt.
bands of angry citizens closed down courts in western massachusetts.
in september a poor farmer and revolutionary war veteran daniel shays led hundreds of men in a forced shutdown of the supreme court in springfield massachusetts.
the state government ordered the farmers to stop the revolt under threat of capture and death shays s forces were defeated by state troops in january 1787.
by february many of the rebels were in prison.
during their trials 14 leaders were sentenced to death.
however the state soon freed most of the rebels including shays.
after you have read the passage answer the following questions.
which happened first citizens closing courts in western massachusetts or shays shutting down the supreme court.
how can you tell.
if you don t know ask your teacher or classmates.
what happened after shays s forces were defeated by state troops.
draw a sequence chain that shows the effects of shays s rebellion in the order they occurred.
then write a relative chronology of events.
read the chapter and create a sequence chain an absolute chronology a relative chronology and a time line for each of the following topics the constitutional convention the time periods from columbus to the ratification of the constitution and the people found in chapter 5.
chapter 5 section 1 magna carta p 152 constitution p 153 virginia statute for religious freedom p 153 suffrage p 153 articles of confederation p 154 ratification p 154 land ordinance of 1785 ip.
155 northwest ordinance of 1787 p 155 northwest territory ip.
155 section 2 tariffs p 159 interstate commerce ip.
160 inflation p 161 depression ip.
161 daniel shays p 161 shays s rebellion ip.
161 section 3 constitutional convention p 164 james madison ip.
164 virginia plan ip.
164 new jersey plan p 165 great compromise p 165 three fifths compromise p 166 popular sovereignty ip.
167 legislative branch ip.
167 executive branch p 167 judicial branch ip.
167 checks and balances ip.
167 federalism p 167 amendments ip.
168 section 4 antifederalists ip.
170 george mason p 170 federalists p 171 federalist papers ip.
171 bill of rights ip.
173 academic vocabulary in this chapter you will learn the following academic word i before you read chapter 5 look for advocate ip.
171 clues that signal the order in which events occurred.
forming a government 151 what you will learn.
the articles ot confederation 1.
the american people examined many ideas about government.
the articles of confederation laid the base for the first national government of the united states.
the confederation congress established the northwest territory.
if you were there you live in a town in new england during the 1770s.
in the town meeting people are hotly debating about who will have the right to vote.
most think that only men who own property should be able to vote.
some think that all property owners men and women should have that right.
a few others want all free men to have the vote.
now it is time for the meeting to decide.
how would you have voted on this issue.
thebigldeaj the articles of confederation provided a framework for a j national government.
key terms and people magna carta p 152 constitution p 153 virginia statute for religious freedom p 153 suffrage p 153 articles of confederation p 154 ratification p 154 land ordinance of 1785 p 155 northwest ordinance of 1787 p 155 northwest territory p 155 i building background at the time of the revolution each i of the 13 states had its own government.
the rights of citizens varied i from state to state.
in their town meetings people often argued about exactly what those rights ought to be.
solving such issues was one step in moving toward a national government.
i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the new american government.
ideas about government the american colonies had taken a bold step in declaring their independence from great britain in july 1776.
their next political goal was to form a new government.
to do so the american people drew from a wide range of political ideas.
english laws and the enlightenment one source of inspiration was the rule of law.
this rule makes even government officials subject to law.
england had limited the power of its kings and queens in two documents.
these were magna carta and the english bill of rights.
magna carta a document signed by king john in 1215 made the king subject to law.
the english bill of rights passed in 1689 declared the supremacy of parliament.
it kept the king or queen from changing laws without parliament s consent.
as a result the people s representatives had a strong voice in england s government.
many americans were also influenced by the enlightenment a philosophical movement that emphasized the use of reason to 152 chapter 5 examine old ideas and traditions.
philosopher john locke believed that a social contract existed between political rulers and the people they ruled.
baron de montesquieu argued that the only way to achieve liberty was through the separation of governmental powers.
american models of government americans had their own models of self government to follow like town meetings the virginia house of burgesses and the mayflower compact.
in 1639 the people of connecticut drew up the english colonies first written constitution.
a constitution is a set of basic principles and laws that states the powers and duties of the government.
in addition the declaration of independence clearly set forth the beliefs on which americans thought government should be based.
to keep individual leaders from gaining too much power the new state constitutions created limited governments or governments in which all leaders have to obey the laws.
most state constitutions had rules to protect the rights of citizens or those accused of crimes.
some banned slavery.
the massachusetts constitution of 1780 is the oldest state constitution still in effect.
thomas jefferson s ideas about religious freedom were included in the virginia statute for religious freedom.
this document declared that no person could be forced to attend a particular church or be required to pay for a church with tax money.
right to vote under british rule only free white men that owned land could vote.
many states constitutions expanded suffrage or the right to vote by allowing any white man who paid taxes to vote.
in every state however only land owners could hold public office.
some states originally allowed women and free african americans to vote but these rights were soon taken away.
suffrage would not be restored to these groups for decades to come.
comparing what two principles were common to state constitutions written during the revolutionary war.
reading check.
articles of confederation the second continental congress was organized to create a national government.
the continental congress appointed a committee of thirteen with one member from each colony.
this group was assigned to discuss and draft the articles of confederation the new national constitution.
under the articles of confederation congress would become the single branch of the national government but it would have limited powers in order to protect the liberties of the people.
each state had one vote in the congress.
congress could settle conflicts among the states issue coins borrow money and make treaties with other countries and with native americans.
congress could also ask the states for money and soldiers.
however states had the power to refuse these requests.
the government did not have a president or a national court system.
the second continental congress passed the articles of confederation on november 15 1777.
then it sent the articles to each state legislature for ratification or official approval before the new national government could take effect.
conflicts over claims to western lands slowed the process but by 1779 every state except maryland had ratified the articles.
maryland s leaders refused to ratify until other states gave up their western land claims.
thomas jefferson assured maryland that western lands would be made into new states rather than increasing territory for existing states.
satisfied with this condition in march 1781 maryland ratified the articles.
this put the first national government of the united states into effect.
summarizing what were two weaknesses of the new national government.
reading check j 4 chapter 5 northwest territory congress had to decide what to do with the western lands now under its control and how to raise money to pay debts.
it tried to solve both problems by selling the western lands.
congress passed the land ordinance of 1785 which set up a system for surveying and dividing western lands.
the land was split into townships which were 36 square miles divided into 36 lots of 640 acres each.
one lot was reserved for a public school and four lots were given to veterans.
the remaining lots were sold to the public.
to form a political system for the region congress passed the northwest ordinance of 1787.
the ordinance established the northwest territory which included areas that are now in illinois indiana michigan ohio minnesota and wisconsin.
the northwest ordinance created a system for bringing new states into the union.
congress agreed that the northwest territory would be divided into several smaller territories with a governor appointed by congress.
when the population of a territory reached 60 000 its settlers could draft their own constitution and ask to join the union.
in addition the law protected civil liberties and required that public education be provided.
finally the ordinance stated that there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude forced labor in the.
this last condition banned slavery in the territory and set the standard for future territories.
the system of land allotment and political structures created by the two ordinances would become the typical method of organizing all new land added to the united states.
however slavery would continue to be a controversial issue.
analyzing information how did the northwest ordinance of 1787 affect the united states.
i summary and preview the new govem i ment settled the future of the northwest territory.
in the next section you will read about other challenges the united states faced.
reading check the impact today the surveying system created by the northwest ordinance still applies to public lands today and even many existing private land boundaries are determined by these original measurements.
section 1 assessment j reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
identify wha t documents influenced ideas about government in the united states.
draw conclusions what impact did the virginia statute for religious freedom have on the u s government.
c elaborate why is the separation of government powers a requirement for a society to be free.
identify what was the articles of confederation.
b summarize what powers were granted to congress by the articles of confederation.
c predict what are some possible problems that might result from the lack of a national court system.
identify which states include land that was once part of the northwest territory.
describe how were public lands in the west divided by the land ordinance of 1785.
c evaluate in your opinion what was the most important element of the northwest ordinance of 1787.
d elaborate what does the assignment of township lots reveal about values of americans at this time.
what precedents did the method set.
critical thinking 4.
categorizing review your notes on the articles of confederation.
copy the chart below and use it to show the strengths and weaknesses of the new government.
articles of confederation strengths weaknesses j writesmart 5.
thinking about the articles of confederation make a list of powers the articles of confederation gave the national government.
which ones seem strong.
can you think of any important powers that are missing.
forming a government 155 history and geography origins constitution lican consent consti jlesfrom lies and from testing document.
magna carta 1215 the mayflower compact 1620 the mayflower shown here in an illustration sailed to america in 1620.
aboard the ship 41 men signed the mayflower compact the first document in the colonies to establish guidelines for self government.
the signers agreed that they and their families would combine to form a civil body politic or community.
colonial assemblies in this painting king john of england is signing magna carta or the great charter which established that the king was subject to the law just like everyone else.
it also declared that people could not be deprived of their lives liberty or property except by the lawful judgment of their peers or by the law of the land.
compare this language to that of the fifth amendment to the constitution.
no person shall be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law fifth amendment u s constitution the english bill of rights 1689 the british parliament s two chamber structure also influenced colonial governments.
in article i section 1 of the constitution the framers continued the practice of a two chamber legislature.
all legislative powers shall be vested in a congress of the united states which shall consist of a senate and house of representatives.
i section i u s constitution virginia statute for religious freedom 1786 this painting shows king william and queen mary of england.
before taking the throne william and mary had to accept the english bill of rights.
the english bill of rights took even more power away from the monarch than did magna carta.
it also protected the rights of english citizens.
these ideas would later influence the u s constitution.
excessive bail ought not be required nor excessive fines imposed nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
english bill of bights classical liberal principles such as the written protection of citizens personal liberties were reflected in the addition of the bill of rights.
the first amendment s freedom of religion clauses were based on thomas jefferson s virginia statute for religious freedom.
the document which was accepted by the virginia legislature in 1786 ensured the separation of church and state in virginia.
congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof first amendment u s constitution luaidiwi declaration of independence 1776 the framers wrote the constitution to help implement the ideals put forth in the declaration of independence.
the grievances listed in the declaration discussed the king s interference with representative government and the application of laws by judges and juries the quartering of troops in colonists homes and the ignoring of petitions sent to the king that requested changes to british policies.
the constitution provided for a clear system of representation in government.
the bill of rights addresses some of the grievances specifically the sixth amendment requires criminal trials to have juries.
the first amendment guarantees the right of citizens to petition the governmer the third amendment restricts the government s ability to quarter troops in private homes.
4 analysis skill analyzing information enlightenment thinkers such as english philosopher john locke supported the movement toward self government.
locke argued in his writings that government could exist only with the consent of the governed.
the framers of the constitution looked to locke for inspiration when writing the constitution as you can see from its very first words.
we the people of the united states u s constitution ork fotln 1.
what documents did the framers look to when writing the constitution.
how did the english parliamentary system affect the kind of government the framers created.
s section iliilwlilwi 2 teks 1a 10a ioc 11a 15a 15b what you will learn 1.
the united states had difficulties with other nations.
internal economic problems plagued the new nation.
shays s rebellion pointed out weaknesses in the articles of confederation.
many americans called for changes in the national government.
the neifl mlation faces czhallencjes if you were there you own an orchard in maryland in the 1780s.
when you sell apples and apple pies in the market people pay you with paper money.
but now the tax collector says you must pay your taxes in gold or silver coins not paper money.
you and the other farmers are furious.
is this the liberty you fought a war for.
what would you do to protest these taxes.
problems faced by the young nation made it clear that a new constitution was needed.
key terms and people tariffs p 159 interstate commerce p 160 inflation p 161 depression p 161 daniel shays p 161 shays s rebellion p 161 l2.
jsss5 use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the problems faced by the new nation.
i building background americans surprised the world by win i ning their independence from great britain.
butthe 13 new states were i far from being a strong nation.
internal problems especially with taxes j.
and the economy led to protests and rebellion.
the government also had trouble with foreign trade and treaties.
relations with other countries under the articles of confederation congress could not force states to provide soldiers for an army.
the continental army had disbanded or dissolved soon after the signing of the treaty of paris of 1783.
without an army the national government found it difficult to protect its citizens against foreign threats.
trouble with britain it was also difficult to enforce international treaties such as the treaty of paris of 1783.
the united states found it especially hard to force the british to turn over with all convenient speed their forts on the american side of the great lakes.
the united states wanted to gain control of these forts because they protected valuable land and fur trade routes.
still britain was slow to withdraw from the area.
a british official warned against the united states trying to seize the forts by force.
he said that any attempt to do so would be opposed by the thousands of british soldiers who had settled in canada after the revolution who are ready to fly to arms at a moment s warning.
58 chapter 5 trade with britain the united states also faced problems trading with great britain.
after the signing of the treaty of paris britain closed many of its ports to american ships.
before the revolutionary war colonial ships had traded a great deal with the british west indies and stopped there on their way to other destinations.
this travel and trading stopped after 1783.
in addition britain forced american merchants to pay high tariffs taxes on imports or exports.
the tariffs applied to goods such as rice tobacco tar and oil that were grown or mined in the united states and then sold in britain.
merchants had to raise prices to cover the tariffs.
ultimately the costs would be passed on to customers who had to pay higher prices for the goods.
the economic condition of the country was getting worse by the day.
trade with spain in 1784 spanish officials closed the lower mississippi river to u s shipping.
western farmers and merchants were furious because they used the mississippi to send goods to eastern and foreign markets.
congress tried to work out an agreement with spain but the plan did not receive a majority vote in congress.
the plan could not be passed.
as a result spain broke off the negotiations.
many state leaders began to criticize the national government.
rhode island s representatives wrote our federal government is but a name a mere shadow without substance power.
critics believed that spain might have continued to negotiate if the united states had possessed a strong military.
these leaders believed that the national government needed to be more powerful.
forming a government 159 impact of closed markets the closing of markets in the british west indies seriously affected the u s economy.
james madison of virginia wrote about the crisis.
the revolution has robbed us of our trade withthe west indies.
without opening any other channels to compensate make up for it.
in every point of view indeed the trade of this country is in a deplorable terrible condition james madison quoted in independence on trial by frederick w marks iii farmers could no longer export their goods to the british west indies.
they also had to hire british ships to carry their goods to british markets which was very expensive.
american exports dropped while british goods flowed freely into the united states.
this unequal trade caused serious economic problems for the new nation.
british merchants could sell manufactured products in the united states at much lower prices than locally made goods.
this difference in prices hurt american businesses.
the confederation congress could not correct the problem because it did not have the authority either to pass tariffs or to order the states to pass tariffs.
the states could offer little help.
if one state passed a tariff the british could simply sell their goods in another state.
most states did not cooperate in trade matters.
instead states worked only to increase their own trade rather than working to improve the trade situation for the whole country.
in 1785 the situation led a british magazine to call the new nation the dis united states.
as a result of the trade problems with britain american merchants began looking for other markets such as china france and the netherlands.
despite such attempts britain remained the most important trading partner of the united states.
reading check analyzing why was the confederation congress unable to solve america s international trade problems.
economic problems in addition to international trade issues other challenges soon appeared.
trade problems among the states war debts and a weak economy plagued the states.
trade among states because the confederation congress had no power to regulate interstate commerce trade between two or more states states followed their own trade interests.
as a result trade laws differed from state to state.
this situation made trade difficult for merchants whose businesses crossed state lines.
inflation after the revolutionary war most states had a hard time paying off war debts and struggled to collect overdue taxes.
to ease this hardship some states began printing large amounts of paper money.
the result was inflation.
this money had little i a farmer leads a revolt h in the face of demands that he leave the court s s ting down the courts fanners hoped to stop the governmetnt from selling their land.
whotwastheoirtco neofshpys sffebe kon.
0 chapter 5 or no real value because states did not have gold or silver reserves to back it up.
inflation occurs when there are increased prices for goods and services combined with the reduced value of money.
congress had no power to stop states from issuing more paper money and thus stop inflation.
weak economy in rhode island the state legislature printed large amounts of paper money worth very little.
this made debtors people who owe money quite happy.
they could pay back their debts with paper money worth less than the coins they had borrowed.
however creditors people who lend money were upset.
hundreds of creditors fled rhode island to avoid being paid back with worthless money.
the loss of trade with britain combined with inflation created a depression.
a depression is a period of low economic activity combined with a rise in unemployment.
reading check summarizing what economic problems did the new nation face.
shays s rebellion each state handled its economic problems differently.
massachusetts refused to print worthless paper money.
it tried to pay its war debts by collecting taxes on land.
heavy debts for farmers massachusetts s tax policy hit farmers hard.
as landowners they had to pay the new taxes.
however farmers had trouble paying their debts.
the courts began forcing them to sell their property.
some farmers had to serve terms in debtors prison others had to sell their labor.
many government leaders in the state did not care about the problems of poor farmers however.
in some cases farmers actually owed these leaders money.
farmers rebel in august 1786 farmers in three western counties began a revolt.
bands of angry citizens closed down courts in western massachusetts.
their reasoning was simple with the courts shut down no one s property could be taken.
in september a poor farmer and revolutionary war veteran daniel shays led hundreds of men in a forced shutdown of the supreme court in springfield massachusetts.
the state government ordered the farmers to stop the revolt under threat of capture and death.
these threats only made sh i nd his followers more determined.
the of farmers to protest high taxes anc debt became known as shays s rebellion.
shays s defeat shays s forces were defeated by state troops in january 1787.
by february many of the rebels were in prison.
during their trials 14 leaders were sentenced to death.
however the state soon freed most of the rebels including shays.
state officials knew that many citizens of the state agreed with the rebels and their cause.
reading check shays s rebellion 71 finding main ideas what led to shays s rebellion.
forming a government 161 calls for change weaknesses of the articles of confederation most power held by states one branch of government delegates were late and missed the meeting.
connecticut georgia maryland and south carolina did not respond to the request at all and sent no delegates.
because of the poor attendance the participants including james madison and alexander hamilton called on all 13 states to send delegates to a constitutional convention in philadelphia in may 1787.
they planned to revise the articles of confederation to better meet the needs of the nation.
the failure of the articles of confederation led to the creation of the constitution and began the period of the early republic.
this period would last until 1800 when the political system we know today became more established.
finding main ideas why did some people believe the national government needed to change.
in the end shays s rebellion showed the weakness of the confederation government.
it led some americans to admit that the articles of confederation had failed to protect the ideals of liberty set forth in the declaration of independence.
when massachusetts had asked the national government to help put down shays s rebellion congress could offer little help.
more americans began calling for a stronger central government.
they wanted leaders who legislative branch has few powers no executive branch no judicial system no system of checks and balances would be able to protect the nation in times of crisis.
earlier in 1786 the virginia legislature had called for a national conference.
it wanted to talk about economic problems and ways to change the articles of confederation.
the meeting took place in annapolis maryland in september 1786.
nine states decided to send delegates to the annapolis convention but some of their reading check.
i summary and preview many ameri i cans believed that shays s rebellion was final proof that the national government needed to be changed.
in the next section you will read about the constitutional convention.
section 2 assessment online quiz reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a summarize what problems did the united i states experience with spain and great britain.
predict what are some possible results of the t growing problems between the united states and great britain.
why was access to the mississippi i so important for americans.
describe what difficulties were involved with interstate commerce.
i b analyze what was the cause of inflation in the new nation and how could it have been prevented.
explain how did massachusetts s tax policy affect farmers.
evaluate defend the actions of daniel shays and the other rebels.
recall why did madison and hamilton call for a constitutional convention.
t b analyze how did shays s rebellion lead to a call for change in the united states.
i i 2 chapter 5 c analyze identify the causes of the creation of the early republic.
critical thinking 5.
categorizing review your notes on the problems faced by the new nation.
then identify those problems as either domestic or international in a graphic organizer like the one shown below.
domestic problems international problems wywritesmart 6.
identifying problems in this section you learned about several problems of the young united states.
were any of those problems made worse by the powers that the articles of confederation did or did not give the national government.
cir at i ng th constitution section teks 1 a 1c 4d 10c 12b 15b 15c 15d 16a 19a if you were there you are a merchant in connecticut in 1787.
you have been a member of your state legislature for several years.
this spring the legislature is choosing delegates to a convention to revise the articles of confederation.
delegates will meet in philadelphia.
it means leaving your business in others hands for most of the summer.
still you hope to be chosen.
why would you want to go to the constitutional convention.
what you will learn main ideas delegates to the constitutional convention met in philadelphia s indepen building background it did not take long for people 1 to realize that the articles of confederation had many weaknesses.
by the mid 1780s most political leaders agreed that changes were needed.
to make those changes they called on people with experience in government.
constitutional convention in february 1787 the confederation congress invited each state to send delegates to a convention in philadelphia.
the goal of the meeting was to improve the articles of confederation.
the constitutional convention met to improve the government of the united states.
the issue of representation led to the great compromise.
regional debate over slavery led to the three fifths compromise.
the u s constitution created federalism and a balance of power.
the big idea a new constitution provided a framework for a stronger national government.
key terms and people constitutional convention p 164 james madison p 164 virginia plan p 164 new jersey plan p 165 great compromise p 165 three fifths compromise p 166 popular sovereignty p 167 legislative branch p 167 executive branch p 167 judicial branch p 167 checks and balances p 167 federalism p 167 amendments p 168 i i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the principles supported by the constitution.
163 roger sherman james madison james wilson the constitutional convention was held in may 1787 in philadelphia s independence hall to improve the articles of confederation.
however delegates would leave with an entirely new u s constitution.
this decision angered some of the participants.
most delegates were well educated and many had served in state legislatures or congress.
benjamin franklin and james madison were there.
revolutionary war hero george washington was elected president of the convention.
several important voices were absent.
john adams and thomas jefferson could not attend.
patrick henry chose not to attend because he did not want a stronger central government.
women african americans and native americans did not take part because they did not yet have the rights of citizens.
summarizing what was the purpose of the constitutional convention.
reading check great compromise several issues divided the delegates to the constitutional convention.
some members wanted only small changes to the articles of confederation while others wanted to rewrite the articles completely.
those delegates who wanted major changes to the articles had different goals.
for example small and large states had different ideas about representation economic concerns such as tariffs and slavery.
in addition delegates disagreed over how strong to make the national government.
virginia plan after the delegates had met for four days edmund randolph of virginia presented the virginia plan.
he proposed a new federal constitution that would give sovereignty or supreme power to the central government.
the legislature would be bicameral made 4 chapter 5 this painting shows the signing of the constitution on september 17 1787 james madison number 4 on the diagram became known as the father of the constitution for his ideas about government and his ability to lead the delegates to agreement.
which person did the artist choose to make the focus of this painting.
why do you think that is.
up of two houses or groups of representatives and chosen on the basis of state populations.
larger states would thus have more representatives than would smaller states.
delegates from the smaller states believed that it would give too much power to the larger states.
new jersey plan the smaller states came up with a plan to stop the larger states from getting too much power.
new jersey delegate william paterson presented the small state or new jersey plan which called for a unicameral or one house legislature.
the plan gave each state an equal number of votes and thus an equal voice in the federal government.
the plan gave the federal government the power to tax citizens in all states and it allowed the government to regulate commerce.
compromise is reached after a month of debate the delegates were unable to agree on how states should be represented.
the convention reached a deadlock.
finally roger sherman of connecticut proposed a compromise plan.
the legislative branch would have two houses.
each state regardless of its size would have two representatives in the senate or upper house.
this would give each state an equal voice pleasing the smaller states.
in the house of representatives or lower house the number of representatives for each state would be determined by the state s population.
this pleased the larger states.
the agreement to create a two house legislature became known as the great compromise.
james wilson a great speaker saw his dream of a strong national government come true.
reading check the impact today all u s states but one modeled their legislative branches on the federal one with a house of representatives and a senate.
nebraska has a unicameral legislature.
contrasting how did the virginia plan and new jersey plan differ.
virginia plan bicameral legislature number of representatives based on state populations in lower house number of representatives equal from each state in upper house new jersey plan gave more power to national government bicameral legislature number in both houses based on population gave more power to state governments unicameral legislature number of representatives equal from each state forming a government 165 primary source j mhmi points of view compromise and the slave trade the issue of slavery highlighted the growing division between the north and the south.
gouverneur morris of new york spoke with much emotion against the three fifths compromise.
also the idea of banning the foreign slave trade prompted southerners such as john rutledge of south carolina to defend the practice.
if the convention thinks that north carolina south carolina and georgia will ever agree to the plan to prohibit the slave trade unless their right to import slaves be untouched the expectation is vain useless john rutledge quoted in the atlantic monthly february 1891 by frank gaylord cook the admission of slaves into the representation comes to this that the inhabitant of a state who goes to the coast of africa and tears away his fellow creatures from their dearest connections and damns them to the most cruel bondage slavery shall have more votes in a government established for protection of the rights of mankind gouverneur morris quoted in founding the republic edited by john j patrick finding main ideas how did these two views of slavery differ.
three fifths compromise the debate over representation also involved regional differences.
southern delegates wanted enslaved africans to be counted as part of their state populations.
this way they would have more representatives and more power in congress.
northerners disagreed.
they wanted the number of slaves to determine taxes but not representation.
to resolve this problem some delegates thought of a compromise.
they wanted to count three fifths of the slaves in each state as part of that state s population to decide how many representatives a state would have.
after much debate the delegates voted to accept the proposal called the three fifths compromise.
under this agreement only three fifths of a state s slave population would count when determining representation.
another major issue was the foreign slave trade.
some of the delegates believed slavery was wrong and wanted the federal government to ban the slave trade.
others said that the southern states economies needed the slave trade.
many southern delegates said they would leave the union if the constitution immediately ended the slave trade.
also at issue was congress s ability to tax imports and exports.
worried delegates reached another compromise.
the commerce compromises allowed congress to levy tariffs on imports but not exports and allowed the importation of slaves until the end of 1807.
the delegates omitted or left out the words slavery and slave in the constitution.
they referred instead to free persons and all other persons.
summarizing what compro mise was reached over the issue of the slave trade.
reading check a 66 chapter 5 a new system of government most of the delegates to the convention wanted a stronger central government than the articles of confederation could provide.
they believed it was necessary for the protection and administration of the group of states.
but delegates also wanted to protect the individual rights that had been won in the revolution.
they wanted the new system of government to support the ideals stated in the declaration of independence.
the right of individual citizens to maintain the unalienable rights of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness was supported by the idea of popular sovereignty.
this is the idea that political authority is in the hands of the people.
in the new nation people expressed this power through their votes.
the power of the government is limited by the power of voters.
in a republic the government consists of people elected by voters to represent them.
in this system voters can limit the actions of government by removing representatives who do not truly work for the goals of voters.
checks and balances the delegates also divided the roles of government into three branches the legislative the executive and the judicial.
the legislative branch is congress.
it is responsible for proposing and passing laws which are also called legislation.
it is made up of two houses as created in the great compromise.
members of the senate and members of the house of representatives are elected through different systems which helps balance the power among voters from different states.
the executive branch includes the president and the departments that help run the government.
the executive branch makes sure that laws are carried out.
the judicial branch is made up of all of the national courts.
this branch is responsible for interpreting laws punishing criminals and settling disputes between states.
the framers of the constitution created a system of checks and balances which keeps any single branch of government from becoming too powerful.
for example congress has the power to pass bills into law.
the president has the power to veto or reject laws that congress passes.
however congress can override the president s veto with a two thirds majority vote.
the supreme court has the power to review laws passed by congress and strike down any law that violates the constitution.
federalism even though many of the delegates wanted a stronger central government they did not want to destroy state governments.
in order to balance the power between these two types of government they created the system of federalism.
federalism is the sharing of power between a central government and the states that make up a nation.
under the previous confederal system states were only loosely joined together.
under the constitution each state must obey the authority of the federal or national government.
states have control over government functions not specifically assigned to the federal government.
this includes control of local government education the chartering of corporations and the supervision of religious bodies.
states also have the power to create and oversee civil and criminal laws.
states must protect the welfare of their citizens.
amending the constitution one of the most important decisions the framers made was to include a method for changing or adding to the constitution.
they wanted the government to be able to adapt as changes were needed.
the process for amending the constitution was made difficult however so that major changes to the government would require the support of a large majority of voters.
two thirds of each house of congress and three fourths of forming a government 167 states must approve a change before it can take effect.
although many amendments or changes to the constitution have been suggested only twenty seven have been approved.
the purposes of these amendments have usually focused on protecting civil and voting rights and on procedures for administering the government.
even though the final draft of the constitution was adopted by the convention many disagreements still existed among delegates.
debates continued around the power of state governments and the role of each branch.
almost as soon as the document was adopted different interpretations of the language used began to appear.
some of the disagreements reading check.
i summary i tion balanc affect the views of lawmakers even today but the constitution is still the guiding blueprint for the nation s government.
explain how does the con stitutional system of government protect the rights of individuals.
and preview the constitu d power among three branches of the federal government but was only written after many compromises.
in the next section you will read about antifederalist and federalist views of the constitution and the struggle to get it approved by the states.
section 3 assessment reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
recall why did the confederation congress call for a constitutional convention.
elaborate why do you think it was important that most delegates had served in state legislatures.
identify what was the great compromise.
draw conclusions how did state issues lead to debate over structure of the central government.
explain what was the debate between north and south over counting slave populations.
contrast how did delegates views differ on the issue of the foreign slave trade.
recall why did the framers of the constitution create a system of checks and balances.
evaluate did the constitution resolve the weaknesses in the articles of confederation.
explain your answer.
critical thinking 5.
summarizing copy the graphic organizer below and use it to analyze how the constitution supports each of the following principles limited government republicanism checks and balances federalism separation of powers popular sovereignty and individual rights.
thinking about the constitution look back through what you ve just read and make a list of important features of the constitution.
be sure to note important compromises.
8 chapter 5 biography key events benjamin franklin how did one man accomplish so much.
when did he live.
1706 1790 where did he live.
benjamin franklin was born in boston but ran away to philadelphia at age 17 and made it his home.
he also crossed the atlantic ocean eight times and visited 10 countries.
what did he do.
what didn t he do.
he was a printer publisher creator of the first circulating library the first president of the university of pennsylvania inventor scientist philosopher musician economist and the first u s postmaster general.
in politics he was a leading revolutionary signer of the declaration of independence head of an antislavery organization delegate to the constitutional convention and diplomat.
why is he important.
benjamin franklin son of a candlemaker became a celebrity in his own time both in america and in europe.
few people have mastered so many fields of knowledge and accomplished so much.
he invented many useful objects from bifocal glasses to the lightning rod.
one of the oldest founding fathers franklin inspired younger revolutionaries such as thomas jefferson.
franklin believed strongly that people should volunteer and be active in public service.
finding main ideas how did benjamin franklin s life reflect his belief in public service.
1729 becomes owner and publisher of the pennsylvania gazette 41732 1758 publishes poor richard an almanack 1752 performs famous experiment using a kite to show that electricity exists in storm clouds 1775 submits the articles of confederation 1779 appointed minister to france 1782 helps negotiate the treaty of paris with britain poor richard a n.
for the year of chrift 1 7 3 jeing the fecond after leap year makes finee the creation years 169 what you will learn ratifying the constitution 1.
federalists and antifederalists engaged in debate over the new constitution.
the federalist papers played an important role in the fight for ratification of the constitution.
ten amendments were added to the constitution to provide a bill of rights to protect citizens.
t americans carried on a vigorous debate before ratifying the constitution.
key terms and people antifederalists p 170 george mason p 170 federalists p 171 federalist papers p 171 bill of rights p 173 i taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the differing views of the u s constitution.
if you were there you are a newspaper editor in philadelphia.
during colonial rule officials sometimes closed down your newspaper because you had criticized the governor.
now you are one of many americans who want to be sure the new constitution will guarantee individual rights.
you are writing an editorial in your paper explaining what you want.
what rights would you want the constitution to protect.
i building background the new constitution did not make i everyone happy.
even its framers knew they had not made a perfect document many people were afraid a strong national government j would become as tyrannical as the british government had been.
before f approving the constitution they wanted to be sure that their rights i would be protected.
l federalists and antifederalists when the constitution was made public a huge debate began among many americans.
antifederalists people who opposed the constitution thought that the constitutional convention should not have created a new government.
others thought the constitution gave too much power to the central government.
convention delegate george mason became an antifederalist for this reason.
in a speech to a virginia ratifying convention he stated this power is calculated to annihilate totally the state governments.
for some antifederalists the main problem was that the constitution did not have a section that guaranteed individual rights.
many antifederalists were small farmers and debtors.
some patriots including samuel adams and patrick henry were also strong antifederalists.
at the virginia ratifying convention henry spoke out against the lack of protection of individual freedoms.
the first thing i have at heart is american liberty he said.
the second thing is american union.
antifederalists were 0 chapter 5 alexander hamilton federalist supported the constitution as an excellent plan for government defended his views in the federalist papers george mason antifederalist opposed the constitution believed the constitution needed a section guaranteeing individual rights challenged by those who believed that the united states needed a stronger central government.
federalists supporters of the constitution included james madison george washington benjamin franklin and alexander hamilton.
most federalists believed that the constitution offered a good balance of power between various political views.
many federalists were wealthy planters farmers and lawyers.
however others were workers and craftspeople.
federalists and antifederalists debated whether the new constitution should be approved.
they made speeches and printed pamphlets advocating their views.
mercy otis warren an ardent patriot during the war wrote a pamphlet entitled observations on the new constitution in which she criticized the lack of individual rights it provided.
the federalists had to convince people a change in the structure of government was needed.
to do this they had to overcome people s fears that the constitution would make the government too powerful.
reading check.
comparing and contrasting explain the similarities and differences between the antifederalists and the federalists.
federalist papers one of the most important defenses of the constitution appeared in a series of essays that became known as the federalist papers.
these essays supporting the constitution were written anonymously under the name publius.
they were actually written by hamilton madison and jay.
the authors of the federalist papers tried to reassure americans that the new federal government would not overpower the states.
in federalist paper no.
10 madison argued that the diversity of the united states would prevent any single group from dominating the government.
the federalist papers were widely reprinted in newspapers around the country as the debate over the constitution continued.
finally they were collected and published in book form in 1788.
focus on reading take notes on the chronological order of this section.
which was written first the federalist papers or the bill of rights.
academic vocabulary advocate to plead in favor of forming a government 171 primary source historic document federalist paper no.
10 in november 1787 number 10 in the series called the federalist papers was written in support of the constitution.
in it james madison describes the way federalism will overcome disagreements within society.
mk landed interest a manufacturing interest a mercantile trading interest a moneyed interest with many lesser interests grow up of necessity in civilized nations and divide them into different classes actuated moved by different sentiments and views.
the regulation of these various and interfering interests opinions forms the principal task of modern legislation and involves the spirit of party and faction group in the necessary and ordinary operations of the government.
the federal constitution forms a happy combination the great interests being referred to the national legislature the local and particular to the state legislatures.
the influence of factious leaders may kindle start a flame within their particular states but will be unable to spread a general conflagration large fire through the other states james madison quoted in living american documents edited by isidore starr et al.
madison believes that lawmakers are responsible for regulating the many competing concerns that make up society.
the federal government will handle issues affecting the nation as a whole state and local governments will handle those concerning local issues.
analysis skill.
analyzing primary sources why does madison think federalism will prevent disagreement.
the constitution needed only 9 states to pass it.
however to establish and preserve national unity each state needed to ratify it.
every state except rhode island held special state conventions that gave citizens the chance to discuss and vote on the constitution.
paul revere served on a committee supporting ratification.
he wrote of the constitution the proposed government is well calculated planned to secure the liberties protect the property and guard the rights of the citizens of america.
antifederalists also spoke out in state conventions and wrote articles and pamphlets that became known as the antifederalist papers.
in new york one citizen said it appears that the government will fall into the hands of the few and the great.
on december 7 1787 delaware became the first state to ratify the constitution.
it went into effect in june 1788 after new hampshire became the ninth state to ratify it.
political leaders across america knew the new government needed the support of the large states of virginia and new york where debate still raged.
finally madison and fellow virginia federalists convinced virginia to ratify it in mid 1788.
in new york riots had occurred when the draft of the constitution was made public.
at the state convention in poughkeepsie to discuss ratification hamilton argued convincingly against the antifederalists led by dewitt clinton.
when news arrived of virginia s ratification new york ratified it as well.
rhode island was the last state to ratify the constitution in may 1790.
reading check drawing conclusions why were virginia and new york important to the ratification of the constitution.
2 chapter 5 bill of rights several states ratified the constitution only after they were promised that a bill protecting individual rights would be added to it.
many antifederalists did not think that the constitution would protect personal freedoms.
some federalists said that the nation did not need a federal bill of rights because the constitution itself was a bill of rights.
it was they argued written to protect the liberty of all u s citizens.
james madison wanted to make a bill of rights one of the new government s first priorities.
in congress s first session madison encouraged the legislators to put together a bill of rights.
the rights would then be added to the constitution as amendments or official changes.
in article v of the constitution the founders had provided a way to change the document when necessary in order to reflect the will of the people.
the process requires that proposed amendments must be approved by a two thirds majority of both houses of congress and then ratified by three fourths of the states before taking effect.
legislators took ideas from the state ratifying conventions the virginia declaration of rights the english bill of rights and the declaration of independence to make sure that the abuses listed in the declaration of independence would be illegal under the new government.
in september 1789 congress proposed 12 amendments and sent them to the states for ratification.
by december 1791 the states had ratified the bill of rights 10 of the proposed amendments intended to protect citizens rights.
these 10 amendments set a clear example of how to amend the constitution to fit the needs of a changing nation.
the flexibility of the u s constitution has allowed it to survive for more than 200 years.
reading check the impact today summarizing why is being able to amend the constitution important.
i summary i ments ove and preview early disagree r individual rights resulted in the bill of rights.
in the next chapter you will learn about the structure of the constitution.
in 1789 madison suggested an amendment limiting congress s power over its own salary.
although congress proposed the amendment in 1789 it was not ratified until 1992.
section 4 assessment i hmhsocialstudies com reviewing ideas terms and people 1 a.
identify who were the federalists and the antifederalists.
draw conclusions what arguments did the federalists make for ratification of the constitution.
what was the main argument of the antifederalists against the constitution.
recall when did the constitution go into effect.
draw conclusions why was it important that all 13 states ratify the constitution.
c elaborate do you think that the federalist papers played an essential role in the ratification of the constitution.
explain your answer.
recall why did congress add the bill of rights.
explain from where did legislators ideas for the bill of rights come.
c elaborate do you think the process for amending the constitution is too difficult.
explain your position.
critical thinking 4.
analyzing review your notes on federalist and antifederalist views.
then identify the outcome of the debate in a graphic organizer like the one below.
be sure to mention the bill of rights.
organizing your evidence in this section you learned how the bill of rights was an important addition to the constitution.
you now have all your evidence about the difference between the articles of confederation and the constitution.
choose two or three of the most important points and prepare to defend the constitution just like alexander hamilton and james madison did in the federalist papers.
forming a government 173 social studies skills analysis 1 critical thinking civic participation study determining different points of view define the skill a point of view is a person s outlook or attitude.
it is the way that he or she looks at a topic or thing.
each person s point of view is shaped by his or her background.
because people s backgrounds are different their points of view are too.
since a person s point of view shapes his or her opinions knowing that point of view helps you understand and evaluate those opinions.
being able to detect differences in point of view is important to understanding differences in people s opinions and actions in history.
learn the skill when you encounter someone s beliefs opinions or actions in your study of history use the following guidelines to determine his or her point of view.
look for information about the person s background.
ask yourself what factors in the person s background might have influenced his or her opinion or action concerning the topic or event.
be aware that sometimes the person s opinions or actions themselves will provide clues to his or her point of view.
benjamin lincoln led the troops that put down shays s rebellion in massachusetts.
he was also a state politician and a general during the revolution.
lincoln offered this explanation of shays s uprising.
among the main causes i rank the ease with which credit was obtained in the time of the revolution.
the moment the day arrived when all discovered that things were fast returning to normal and that the indolent lazy persons and improvident unwise persons would soon experience the evils of their idleness and sloth many startled panicked and complained ofthe weight of public taxes and at the cruelty of creditors those to whom money is owed to call for their just dues rightful payment.
the disaffected unhappy people attempted to stop the courts of law and to suspend the operations of government.
this they hoped to do until an end should thereby be put to public and private debts lincoln s background as a general state official and leader against the rebels likely gave him a negative point of view on the revolt.
his reference to the rebels as lazy and unwise also provides clues to his attitude.
you should weigh such factors when evaluating the accuracy of his statement.
practice the skill the following statement about shays s rebellion came from a massachusetts farmer.
read it and apply the guidelines to answer the questions.
1 have labored hard all my days.
i have been obliged to do more than my part in the revolution been loaded with rates taxes have been abused by sheriffs and debt collectors.
i have lost a great deal t he great men are going to get all we have and i think it is time for us to put a stop to it.
from what point of view is this person commenting on the revolt.
what is his opinion of it.
how does his view of himself differ from lincoln s view of people like him.
is this view of the revolt likely to be more accurate than lincoln s view.
why or why not.
i chapter 5 chapter review visual summary use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas ofthe chapter.
reviewing vocabulary terms and people match the numbered person or term with the correct lettered definition.
bill of rights 2 checks and balances 3 constitution 4.
constitutional convention 5.
federalist papers 6 inflation 7.
northwest territory 8.
george mason 9 tariffs 10.
three fifths compromise a agreement that stated that each slave would be counted as three fifths of a person when determining representation b delegate to the constitutional convention who became an antifederalist c increased prices for goods and services combined with the reduced value of money d area including present day illinois indiana michigan ohio wisconsin and part of minnesota e meetings held in philadelphia at which delegates from the states attempted to improve the existing government f series of essays in support of the constitution g set of basic principles that determines the powers and duties of a government h system that prevents any branch of government from becoming too powerful i taxes on imports or exports j the first 10 amendments to the constitution forming a government 175 comprehension and critical thinking section 1 pages 152 155 11 a.
describe what powers did the articles of confederation give the national government.
b summarize what did the confederation congress do to strengthen the united states.
c evaluate which document or institution do you think had the greatest influence on the development of the united states.
d explain what policies and procedures did the northwest ordinance establish for future territories and states.
section 2 pages 158 162 12 a.
recall what was shays s rebellion.
draw conclusions what was the general attitude of foreign nations toward the new government of the united states.
c evaluate of the problems experienced by the confederation congress which do you think was the most harmful.
section 3 pages 163 168 13 a.
describe in what ways did the constitution strengthen the central government.
explain how did the two compromises reached during the constitutional convention satisfy competing groups.
c elaborate in your opinion were there any weaknesses in the constitution.
d summarize explain the purposes and process for amending the constitution.
section 4 pages 170 173 14 a.
recall why was the bill of rights added to the constitution.
draw conclusions why were some americans opposed to the constitution.
c evaluate would you have supported the federalists or the antifederalists.
d analyze identify and explain the ideas of federalists and antifederalists using quotations from the writings and speeches of hamilton madison jay henry and mason.
e explain summarize the rights protected by the bill of rights.
f6 chapter 5 reviewing themes 15.
politics summarize the strengths and weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
what political problems resulted from its weak government.
how did the constitution address these.
politics how did political disagreements lead to compromises in the creation of the constitution.
politics what year was the constitution created.
when was it ratified.
politics how did the constitution and the bill of rights address the grievances listed in the declaration of independence.
reading skills understanding chronological order use the reading skills taught in this chapter to answer the question.
i til flu ef a w the federalist papers are published the constitution is ratified the articles of confederation are ratified shays s rebellion occurs the constitutional convention meets in philadelphia twmhmmwnmnmmmnmmihbminniimm 19.
use absolute chronology to organize the events chronologically according to the chapter.
then write a paragraph that sequences the events using relative chronology.
social studies skills determining different points of view use the social studies skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
describe the different opinions of the federalists and the antifederalists.
discuss how each side s viewpoint was influences by the historical context in which they lived.
mywritesmart 21.
writing your editorial you should start your editorial with a strong statement of your opinion about the constitution.
end your editorial with a call to action ask delegates to ratify the constitution.
remember that you are trying to persuade people to make a very important decision.
chapter texas test practice directions read each question and write the letter of the best response.
1 which term would best describe the newly independent nation in the 1780s.
a strong b united c troubled d confident 2 under the articles of confederation the greatest amount of power was in the hands of the f congress.
g american people.
h national government.
3 the structure of the u s congress was created at the constitutional convention by the a virginia plan.
b great compromise.
c new jersey plan.
d three fifths compromise.
4 the nations most widespread problems under the articles of confederation involved f trade.
g suffrage.
j rebellion.
5 the main objective of the northwest ordinance of 1787 was to a establish a national government with limited powers.
b create a system for bringing new states into the union.
c settle border disputes between the united states and canada.
d regulate interstate commerce and curb inflation.
6 which of the following documents influenced the system of government established by the u s constitution.
f bill of rights g mayflower compact h federalist papers j olive branch petition 7 read the following passage from one of the federalist papers and use it to answer the question below.
z the powers delegated by the proposed constitution to the federal government are few and defined.
those which are to remain in the state governments are numerous and.
will extend to all objects which.
concern the lives liberties and properties of the people.
the operations of the federal government will be most extensive and important in times of war and danger those of the state governments in times of peace and security.
james madison federalist paper no.
45 document based question what point was madison making about the system of government created by the proposed u s constitution.
forming a government 177 chapter 1787 present iqtlq writesmart citizenship gdq qs20gqqg essential question how do the ideas in the constitution affect the lives of americans.
texas essential knowledge and skills teks 1a 19c 19d 19e 19f 21b 22a 22b 25c 29a 29b 29e section 1 understanding the constitution 182 the big idea the u s constitution balances the powers of the federal government among the legislative executive and judicial branches.
the constitution of the united states 188 section 2 the bill of rights 216 the big idea the bill of rights was added to the constitution to define clearly the rights and freedoms of citizens.
section 3 rights and responsibilities of citizenship 222 the big idea american citizenship involves great privileges and serious responsibilities.
i pamphlet everyone in the united states benefits from our constitution.
however many people don t know the constitution as well as they should.
in this chapter you will read about the constitution and the rights and responsibilities it grants to citizens.
then you ll create a four page pamphlet to share this information with your fellow citizens.
1954 in brown v bo education the supremi declares segregation ir schools to be unconstit reading social studies economics geography politics society and culture science and technology 1 focus on themes in this chapter you will read about the three branches of government the bill of rights and the duties and responsibilities of a united states citizen.
as you read about each of these topics you will see the american political system at work not only in the bill of rights but also through the responsibilities u s citizens have as they vote for leaders and work to help their communities and nation.
t summarizing historical texts i focus on reading history books are full of information.
sometimes the sheer amount of information they contain can make processing what you read difficult.
in those cases it may be helpful to stop for a moment and summarize what you ve read.
writing a summary a summary is a short restatement of the most important ideas in a text.
the example below shows three steps used in writing a summary.
first underline important details.
then write a short summary of each paragraph.
finally combine these paragraph summa ries into a short summary of the whole passage.
the constitution article ii section 1 1.
the executive power shall be vested in a president of the united states of america.
he shall hold his office during the term of four years and together with the vice president chosen for the same term be elected as follows 2.
each state shall appoint in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct a number of electors equal to the whole number of senators and representatives to which the state may be entitled in the congress but no senator or representative or person holding an office of trust or profit under the united states shall be appointed an elector.
summary of paragraph 1 the executive branch is headed by a president and vice president each elected for four year terms.
summary of paragraph 2 the electors who choose the president and vice president are appointed.
each state has the same number of electors as it has members of congress.
t t combined summary the president and vice president who run the executive branch are elected every four years by state appointed electors.
chapter 6 making war and republican governments 1776 1789 american forces montreal fort st john british forces 30 kilometers new york new york conn pennsylvania kingston oct 15 fort montgomery oct 6 west r point a nn a eh su s qu r bennington aug 15 mass.
conn new jersey new hampshire r i new york r germantown oct 4 brandywine creek philadelphia sept 11 re la wa d e r fort burgoyne stanwix surrenders saratoga oct 17 oriskany aug 6 albany fort herkimer 30 miles hudso n r fort ticonderoga connectic ut fort oswego maine vermont housatoni c r lake ontario burgoyne br itis h lake huron n r british victory new jersey morristown fort lee white plains oct 28 nov.
1 princeton jan 3 1777 trenton dec 26 1776 e w s del.
harlem heights long island aug 27 30 n maryland chesapeake bay ho we canada nce r r re ge aw.
l t le t s s hu ds o american victory delaware atlantic ocean atlantic ocean 100 miles 100 kilometers map 6 2 the war in the north 1776 1777 in 1776 the british army drove washingtons forces across new jersey into pennsylvania.
the americans counterattacked successfully at trenton and princeton and then set up winter headquarters in morristown.
in 1777 british forces stayed on the offensive.
general howe attacked the patriot capital philadelphia from the south and captured it in early october.
meanwhile general burgoyne and colonel st leger launched simultaneous invasions from canada.
with the help of thousands of new england militiamen american troops commanded by general horatio gates defeated burgoyne in august at bennington vermont and in october at saratoga new york the military turning point in the war.
not mask british military superiority.
these are the times wrote thomas paine that try mens souls armies and strategies thanks in part to general howe the rebellion survived.
howe had opposed the coercive acts of 1774 and still hoped for a political compromise.
so he did not try to destroy the american army but instead tried to show its weakness and persuade the continental congress to give up the struggle.
howes restrained tactics cost britain the opportunity to nip the rebellion in the bud.
for his part washington acted cautiously to avoid a major defeat on our side the war should be defensive he told congress.
his strategy was to draw the british away from the seacoast extend their lines of supply and sap their morale.
congress had promised washington a regular force of 75 000 men but the continental army never reached even a third of that number.
yeomen refusing to be part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 the battle of princeton black smoke from burning buildings partially obscures the sun as the muzzle flash from an american cannon lights up the battlefield.
pursued by cornwallis after his surprise attack and victory at nearby trenton washington on horseback to the right of the flag confronted three regiments of redcoats at princeton.
the americans had an advantage in numbers and put the british to flight but only after withstanding the bayonet charge depicted in the right center of william mercers painting.
courtesy of the historical society of pennsylvania collection atwater kent museum of philadelphia.
harasd with callouts that took them away from their families and farms would serve only in local militias.
when the virginia gentry imposed a military draft and three years of service on propertyless men the lazy fellows who lurk about and are pests to society they resisted so fiercely that the legislature had to pay them substantial bounties and agree to shorter terms of service.
the identify causes continental soldiers recruited in what factors made it difmaryland by general william ficult for the continental congress to create an smallwood were poor american effective army.
youths and older foreign born men often british ex convicts and former indentured servants.
most enlisted for the 20 cash bonus about 2 000 today and the promise of 100 acres of land.
molding such recruits into an effective fighting force was nearly impossible.
inexperienced soldiers panicked in the face of british attacks thousands deserted unwilling to submit to the discipline of military life.
the soldiers who stayed resented the contempt their officers had for the camp followers the women who made do with the meager supplies provided to feed and care for the troops.
general philip schuyler of new york complained that his troops were destitute of provisions without camp equipage with little ammunition and not a single piece of cannon the continental army was not only poorly supplied but was also held in suspicion by radical whig patriots who believed that a standing army was a threat to liberty.
even in wartime they preferred militias to a professional fighting force.
given these handicaps washington and his army were fortunate to have escaped an overwhelming defeat.
victory at saratoga after howe failed to achieve an overwhelming victory lord north and his colonial secretary lord george germain launched another major military campaign in 1777.
isolating new england remained the primary goal.
to achieve it germain planned a three pronged chapter 6 attack converging on albany new york.
general john burgoyne would lead a large contingent of regulars south from quebec colonel barry st leger and a force of iroquois would attack from the west and general howe would lead troops north from new york city.
howe instead decided to attack philadelphia the home of the continental congress hoping to end the rebellion with a single decisive blow.
but instead of marching quickly across new jersey howe loaded his troops onto boats and sailed up the chesapeake bay to attack philadelphia from the south.
the plan worked.
howes troops easily outflanked the american positions along brandywine creek in delaware and in late september marched triumphantly into philadelphia.
however the capture of the rebels capital did not end the uprising the continental congress determined to continue the struggle fled to the countryside.
howes slow campaign against philadelphia contributed to the defeat of burgoynes army at saratoga.
burgoynes troops had at first advanced quickly overwhelming the american defenses at fort ticonderoga in early july and driving south toward the hudson river.
then they stalled.
burgoyne nicknamed gentleman johnny was used to high living and had fought in europe in a leisurely fashion believing his large army would easily dominate the rebels he stopped early each day to pitch comfortable tents and eat elaborate dinners with his officers.
the american troops led by general horatio gates also slowed burgoynes progress by felling huge trees in his path and raiding british supply lines to canada.
at summers end burgoynes army of 6 000 british and german troops and 600 loyalists and indians was stuck near saratoga new york.
desperate for food and horses in august the british raided nearby bennington vermont but were beaten back by 2 000 american militiamen.
patriot forces in the mohawk valley also threw st leger and the iroquois into retreat.
making matters worse the british commander in new york city recalled 4 000 troops he had sent toward albany and ordered them to philadelphia to bolster howes force.
while burgoyne waited in vain for help thousands of patriot militiamen from massachusetts new hampshire and new york joined gates blocking burgoyne in a series of skirmishes that finally gave the british no avenue of escape.
the patriots swarmed around the army like birds of prey reported an english sergeant and in october 1777 they forced burgoyne to surrender.
the victory at saratoga was the turning point of the war.
the patriots captured more than 5 000 british making war and republican governments 1776 1789 joseph brant mohawk chief thayendanegea known to whites as joseph brant was a devout member of the church of england and helped to translate the bible into the mohawk language.
brant persuaded four of the six iroquois nations to support britain in the war.
in 1778 and 1779 he led iroquois warriors and tory rangers in devastating attacks on american settlements in the wyoming valley of pennsylvania and cherry valley in new york.
in this 1797 portrait artist charles willson peale has portrayed brant with european features.
independence national historic park.
troops and ensured the diplomatic success of american representatives in paris who won a military alliance with france.
the perils of war the patriots triumph at saratoga was tempered by wartime difficulties.
a british naval blockade cut off supplies of european manufactures and disrupted the new england fishing industry meanwhile the british occupation of boston new york and philadelphia reduced trade.
as patriots along with unemployed artisans and laborers moved to the countryside new york citys population declined from 21 000 to 10 000.
the british blockade cut tobacco exports in the chesapeake so planters grew grain to sell to the contending armies.
all across the land farmers and artisans adapted to a war economy.
with goods now scarce governments requisitioned military supplies directly from the people.
in 1776 connecticut officials asked the citizens of hartford to part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 american militiamen beset by continuing shortages of cloth the patriot army dressed in a variety of uniforms and fabrics.
this german engraving taken from a drawing by a hessian officer shows two american militiamen one of them barefoot wearing hunting shirts and trousers made of ticking the strong linen fabric often used to cover mattresses and pillows.
anne s k brown military collection brown university.
provide 1 000 coats and 1 600 shirts and soldiers echoed their pleas.
after losing all his shirts except the one on my back in the battle of long island captain edward rogers told his wife that the making of cloath.
must go on patriot women responded in elizabeth new jersey they promised upwards of 100 000 yards of linnen and woolen cloth other women assumed the burdens of farmwork while their men were away at war and acquired a taste for decision making.
we have sowd our oats as you desired sarah cobb paine wrote to her absent husband.
had i been master i should have planted it to corn their selfesteem boosted by wartime activities some women expected greater legal rights in the new republican society.
still goods remained scarce and pricey.
hardpressed consumers assailed shopkeepers as enemies extortioners and monopolizers and called for government regulation.
but when the new england states imposed price ceilings in 1777 many farmers and artisans refused to sell their goods.
ultimately a government official admitted consumers had to pay the higher market prices or submit to starving the fighting endangered tens of thousands of civilians.
a british officer lord rawdon favored giving free liberty to the soldiers to ravage the country at will that these infatuated creatures may feel what a calamity war is as british and american armies marched back and forth across new jersey they forced patriot and loyalist families to flee their homes to escape arrest or worse.
soldiers and partisans looted farms and disorderly troops harassed and raped women and girls.
an army even a friendly one are a dreadful scourge to any people wrote one connecticut soldier.
you cannot imagine what devastation and distress mark their steps the war divided many farm communities.
patriots formed committees of safety to collect taxes and seized the property of those who refused to pay.
every body submitted to our sovereign lord the mob lamented a loyalist preacher.
in parts of maryland the number of nonassociators those who refused to join either side was so large that they successfully defied patriot mobs.
stand off you dammed rebel sons of bitches shouted robert davis of anne arundel county i will shoot you if you come any nearer financial crisis such defiance exposed the weakness of patriot governments.
most states were afraid to raise taxes so officials issued bonds to secure gold or silver from wealthy individuals.
when those funds ran out individual states financed the war by issuing so much paper money some 260 million all told that it lost worth and most people refused to accept it at face value.
in north carolina even tax collectors eventually rejected the states currency.
the finances of the continental congress collapsed too despite the efforts of philadelphia merchant robert morris the governments chief treasury official.
because the congress lacked the authority to impose taxes morris relied on funds requisitioned from the states but the states paid late or not at all.
so morris secured loans from france and holland and sold continental loan certificates to some thirteen thousand firms and individuals.
all the while the congress was issuing paper money some 200 million between 1776 and 1779 which like state currencies quickly fell in value.
in 1778 a family needed 7 in continental bills to buy goods worth 1 in gold or silver.
as the exchange rate deteriorated to 42 to 1 in chapter 6 making war and republican governments 1776 1789 paper currency testifying to their independent status the new state governments printed their own currencies.
rejecting the english system of pounds and shillings virginia used the spanish gold dollar as its basic unit of currency although the equivalent in english pounds is also shown.
initially 1 200 was equal to 360 a ratio of 3 3 to 1.
by 1781 virginia had printed so much paper money to pay its soldiers and wartime expenses that the value of its currency had depreciated.
it now took 40 in virginia currency to buy the same amount of goods as 1 sterling.
the american numismatic society.
1779 100 to 1 in 1780 and 146 to 1 in 1781 it sparked social upheaval.
in boston a mob of women accosted merchant thomas boyleston seazd him by his neck and forced him to sell his wares at traditional prices.
in rural ulster county new york women told the committee of safety to lower food prices or their husbands and sons shall fight no more as morale crumbled patriot leaders feared the rebellion would collapse.
valley forge fears reached their peak during the winter of 1777.
while howes army lived comfortably in philadelphia washingtons army retreated 20 miles to valley forge where 12 000 soldiers and hundreds of camp followers suffered horribly.
now begins to grow sickly a surgeon confided to his diary.
poor food hard lodging cold weather fatigue nasty clothes nasty cookery.
why are we sent here to starve and freeze nearby farmers refused to help.
some were pacifists quakers and german sectarians unwilling to support either side.
others looked out for their own families selling grain for gold from british quartermasters but refusing depreciated continental currency.
such a dearth of public spirit and want of public virtue lamented washington.
by spring more than 200 officers had resigned 1 000 hungry soldiers had deserted and another 3 000 had died from malnutrition and disease.
that winter at valley forge took as many american lives as had two years of fighting.
in this dark hour baron von steuben raised the readiness of the american army.
a former prussian military officer von steuben was one of a handful of republican minded foreign aristocrats who joined the american cause.
appointed as inspector general of the continental army he instituted a strict drill system and encouraged officers to become more professional.
thanks to von steuben the smaller army that emerged from valley forge in the spring of 1778 was a much tougher and better disciplined force.
the path to victory 1778 1783 wars are often won by astute diplomacy and so it was with the war of independence.
the patriots prospects improved dramatically in 1778 when the continental congress concluded a military alliance with france the most powerful nation in europe.
the alliance gave the americans desperately needed money supplies and eventually troops.
and it confronted britain with an international war that challenged its domination of the atlantic and indian oceans.
the french alliance france and america were unlikely partners.
france was catholic and a monarchy the united states was protestant and a federation of republics.
from 1689 to 1763 the two peoples had been enemies new englanders had brutally uprooted the french population from acadia nova scotia in 1755 and the french and their indian allies had raided british settlements.
but the comte de vergennes the french foreign minister was determined to avenge the loss of canada during the great war for empire see chapter 4 and persuaded king louis xvi to provide the rebellious colonies with a secret loan and much needed gunpowder.
when part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 news of the rebel victory at saratoga reached paris in december 1777 vergennes sought a formal alliance.
benjamin franklin and other american diplomats craftily exploited frances rivalry with britain to win an explicit commitment to american independence.
the treaty of alliance of february 1778 specified that once france entered the war neither partner would sign a separate peace without the liberty sovereignty and independence of the united states.
in return the continental congress agreed to recognize any french conquests in the west indies.
france and america warned britains lord stormont were indissolubly leagued for our destruction the alliance gave new life to the patriots cause.
there has been a great change in this state since the news from france a patriot soldier reported from pennsylvania.
farmers mercenary wretches he called them were as eager for continental money now as they were a few weeks ago for british gold its confidence bolstered the continental congress addressed the demands of the officer corps.
most officers were gentlemen who equipped themselves and raised volunteers in return they insisted on lifetime military pensions at half pay.
john adams condemned the officers for scrambling for rank and pay like apes for nuts but general washington urged the congress to grant the pensions the salvation of the cause depends upon it the congress reluctantly granted the officers half pay but only for seven years.
meanwhile the war had become unpopular in britain.
at first george iii was determined to crush the rebellion.
if america won independence he warned lord north the west indies must follow them.
ireland would soon follow the same plan and be a separate state then this island would be reduced to itself and soon would be a poor island indeed stunned by the defeat at saratoga explain however the king changed his consequences mind.
to thwart an american alliwhat were the most ance with france he authorized important results of the patriot victory at saratoga.
north to seek a negotiated settlement.
in february 1778 north persuaded parliament to repeal the tea and prohibitory acts and amazingly to renounce its power to tax the colonies.
but the patriots now allied with france and committed to independence rejected norths overture.
war in the south the french alliance did not bring a rapid end to the war.
when france entered the conflict in june 1778 it hoped to seize all of britains sugar islands.
spain which joined the war against britain in 1779 aimed to regain florida and the fortress of gibraltar at the entrance to the mediterranean sea.
britains southern strategy for its part the british government revised its military strategy to defend the west indies and capture the rich tobacco and ricegrowing colonies virginia the carolinas and georgia.
once conquered the ministry planned to use the scottish highlanders in the carolinas and other loyalists to hold them.
it had already mobilized the cherokees and delawares against the land hungry americans and knew that the patriots fears of slave uprisings weakened them militarily map 6 3.
as south carolina patriots admitted to the continental congress they could raise only a few recruits by reason of the great proportion of citizens necessary to remain at home to prevent insurrection among the negroes the large number of slaves in the south made the revolution a triangular war in which african americans constituted a strategic problem for patriots and a tempting if dangerous opportunity for the british.
britain actively recruited slaves to its cause.
the effort began with dunmores controversial proclamation in november 1775 recruiting slaves to his ethiopian regiment see chapter 5.
in 1779 the philipsburg proclamation declared that any slave who deserted a rebel master would receive protection freedom and land from great britain.
together these proclamations led some 30 000 african americans to take refuge behind british lines.
george washington initially barred blacks from the continental army but he relented in 1777.
by wars end african americans could enlist in every state but south carolina and georgia and some 5 000 slave and free fought for the patriot cause thinking like a historian p 192.
it fell to sir henry clinton acutely aware of the role slaves might play to implement britains southern strategy.
from the british armys main base in new york city clinton launched a seaborne attack on savannah georgia.
troops commanded by colonel archibald campbell captured the town in december 1778.
mobilizing hundreds of blacks to transport supplies campbell moved inland and captured augusta early in 1779.
by years end clintons forces and local loyalists controlled coastal georgia and had 10 000 troops poised for an assault on south carolina.
in 1780 british forces marched from victory to victory map 6 4.
in may clinton forced the surrender of charleston south carolina and its garrison of 5 000 troops.
then lord charles cornwallis assumed control of the british forces and at camden defeated an chapter 6 making war and republican governments 1776 1789 map 6 3 american forces 1779 d dhea bro y r hr g hen i leh ft augusta.
na r han qu e su s al le g wilkes barre.
minisink wa llki l cr.
ym en gh west point conn n r fren c w b kingston st ea del forty ft r american force commanded by general horatio gates the hero of saratoga.
only 1 200 patriot militiamen joined gates at camden a fifth of the number at saratoga.
cornwallis took control of south carolina and hundreds of african americans fled to freedom behind british lines.
the southern strategy was working.
then the tide of battle turned.
thanks to another republican minded european aristocrat the marquis de lafayette france finally dispatched troops to the american mainland.
a longtime supporter of the american cause lafayette persuaded king louis xvi to send general comte de rochambeau and 5 500 men ft anne r r tb pittsburgh pot om ac may j ul nt newtown aug 29 1779 ft sullivan tioga s ul liva n 1 w es ft kittanning 100 kilometers hu d s o catherines town est b new york unadilla on i r o q u o i s pennsylvania 100 miles.
venango r r ar e aw er e se conewango old fort ft stanwix ft dayton ohawk r schenectady m oneida canajonarie ft herkimer onondaga cherry schohariealbany valley mass.
chemung n ge ie er ke la monongah ela r i r m ft oswego cayuga canadasaga canandaigua genesee castle s.
ft george ft niagara e dy r virginia 50 miles n an boonesborough 50 kilometers redstone r ha ft massac gs.
louisville pittsburgh kan aw gr.
bi yr ft nelson ft randolph lic ki n harrods town en r gre lake ontario w ck ntu ke kask ask ia r r ia m w a bash r.
illin o pi.
ip mr i ss oh i o r ft mcintosh ft henry shawnee y c l ar k vincennes ft sackville 17 1778 dec.
feb 25 1779 rk cla 79 b e f ft jefferson ng u ski mu v i r g i n i a.
to r r is sci o miami b y pennsylvania de c c l a i m e d misso u r i r.
cahokia july 9 1778 prairie du rocher kaskaskia july 4 1778 law ar r huron e.
m e k t u a c ma o ka n k ft miami n i l to oct 24 1778 ham s a e st ft st joseph e w le n ie er ke ny la ghe hr osep.
j ll e ft detroit lake michigan al american victory miss many indian peoples remained neutral but others fearing land hungry patriot farmers used british supplied guns to raid american settlements.
to thwart attacks by militant shawnees cherokees and delawares a patriot militia led by george rogers clark captured the british fort and supply depot at vincennes on the wabash river in february 1779.
to the north patriot generals john sullivan and james clinton defeated probritish indian forces near tioga on the new york pennsylvania border in august 1779 and then systematically destroyed villages and crops throughout the lands of the iroquois.
ottawa british forces cl i native americans and the war in the west 1778 1779 stony point morristown new york easton american forces american victory indian village british forts tory and indian raids to newport rhode island in 1780.
there they threatened the british forces holding new york city.
guerrilla warfare in the carolinas meanwhile washington dispatched general nathanael greene to recapture the carolinas where he found a country that has been ravaged and plundered by both friends and enemies greene put local militiamen who had been without discipline and addicted to plundering under strong leaders and unleashed them on less mobile british forces.
in october 1780 patriot militia defeated a regiment of loyalists at kings mountain south carolina taking about one thousand prisoners.
thinking like a historian the black soldiers dilemma for african american slaves the revolution offered no clear path to freedom.
some slaves agreed to fight for britain because of its promise to liberate slaves who fought against their masters.
while some were freed many others died fighting were forced into servitude in the army or even sold into slavery in the west indies.
patriots at first refused the service of black soldiers then enlisted them in small numbers but always upheld the property rights of masters.
dunmores proclamation 1775.
virginias governor dunmore issued this proclamation in response to the emerging rebellion and formed his recruits into the so called ethiopian regiment.
to defeat such unreasonable purposes.
that the peace and good order of this colony may be again restored.
i have thought fit to issue this my proclamation hereby declaring that until the aforesaid good purposes can be obtained i do in virtue of the power and authority to me given by his majesty determine to execute martial law and cause the same to be executed throughout this colony and to the end that peace and good order may the sooner be effected i do require every person capable of bearing arms to resort to his majestys standard or be looked upon as traitors to his majesty.
i do hereby further declare all indentured servants negroes or others appertaining to rebels free that are able and willing to bear arms they joining his majestys troops as soon as may be for the more speedily reducing this colony to a proper sense of their duty.
virginias response to dunmores proclamation 1775.
a month later virginias general assembly issued the following response.
whereas lord dunmore by his proclamation dated on board the ship william off norfolk the 7th day of november 1775 hath offered freedom to such ablebodied slaves as are willing to join him and take up arms against the good people of this colony giving thereby encouragement to a general insurrection.
it is enacted that all negro or other slaves conspiring to rebel or make insurrection shall suffer death.
we think it proper to declare that all slaves who have been or shall be seduced by his lordships proclamation or other arts to desert their masters service and take up arms against the inhabitants of this colony shall be liable to such punishment as shall hereafter be directed by the general convention.
a ll such who have taken this unlawful and wicked step may return in safety to their duty and escape the punishment due their crimes.
and we do farther earnestly recommend it to all humane and benevolent persons in this colony to explain and make known this our offer of mercy to those unfortunate people.
runaway advertisement 1775.
titus or as he was later known captain tye of the ethiopian regiment abandoned his delaware master in response to dunmores proclamation.
source courtesy american antiquarian society.
report of bernardo de glvez 1780.
fighting against the british in support of the patriots louisiana governor bernardo de glvez raised a mixed regiment almost half of whom were slaves and free people of color from new orleans.
he praised their efforts in this report of his campaign.
no less deserving of eulogy are the companies of negroes and free mulattoes who were continually occupied in the outposts in false attacks and discoveries exchanging shots with the enemy.
conduct ing themselves with as much valor and generosity as the whites.
boston king gains his freedom 1783.
in 1780 boston king like many other southern slaves escaped to the british army.
here he describes his experiences at wars end.
about this time peace was restored between america and great britain which diffused universal joy among all parties except us who had escaped slavery and taken refuge in the english army for a report prevailed at newyork that all the slaves in number two thousand were to be delivered up to their masters altho some of them had been three or four years among the english.
this dreadful rumour filled us with inexpressible anguish and terror especially when we saw our old masters coming from virginia north carolina and other parts and seizing upon slaves in the streets of new york or even dragging them out of their beds.
many of the slaves had very cruel masters so that the thought of returning home with them embittered life to us.
for some days we lost our appetite for food and sleep departed from our eyes.
the english had compassion upon us in the day of our distress and issued out a proclamation importing that all slaves should be free who had taken refuge in the british lines and claimed the sanction and privileges of the proclamations respecting the security and protection of negroes in consequence of this each of us received a certificate from the commanding officer at new york which dispelled our fears and filled us with joy and gratitude.
jehu grant is re enslaved 1778.
jehu grant of narragansett rhode island was owned by a loyalist.
in august 1777 he escaped and joined the patriot side ten months later his master tracked him down and reclaimed him.
in 1837 grant applied for a pension from the u s government and supplied the following narrative of his experience.
his application was denied.
i enlisted as a soldier but was put to the service of a teamster in the summer and a waiter in the winter.
i was then grown to manhood in the full vigor and strength of life and heard much about the cruel and arbitrary things done by the british.
their ships lay within a few miles of my masters house which stood near the shore and i was confident that my master traded with them and i suffered much from fear that i should be sent aboard a ship of war.
this i disliked.
but when i saw liberty poles and the people all engaged for the support of freedom i could not but like and be pleased with such thing god forgive me if i sinned in so feeling.
and living on the borders of rhode island where whole companies of colored people enlisted it added to my fears and dread of being sold to the british.
these considerations induced me to enlist into the american army where i served faithful about ten months when my master found and took me home.
had i been taught to read or understand the precepts of the gospel servants obey your master i might have done otherwise notwithstanding the songs of liberty that saluted my ear thrilled through my heart.
sources 1 lord dunmores proclamation learn nc north carolina digital history revolutionary north carolina 2 j n brenaman a history of virginia conventions richmond j l hill printing company 1902 p 30 4 thomas truxtun moebs black soldiers black sailors black ink research guide on african americans in u s military history 1526 1900 chesapeake bay paris moebs publishing company 1994 1125 5 boston king book of negroes new york 1783 in simon schama rough crossings britain the slaves and the american revolution new york harpercollins 2006 107 150 6 jehu grant to hon.
j l edwards commissioner of pension 1836 in the revolution remembered eyewitness accounts of the war for independence ed.
john c dann chicago university of chicago press 1980 27 28.
analyzing the evidence 1.
why was dunmore willing to offer freedom to slaves source 1 when they were a recognized form of property under the british empire.
what assumptions about the loyalties of slaves underlie the response of the virginia assembly source 2.
why might louisiana governor bernardo de glvez source 4 have made a point of praising the contributions of black soldiers to the patriot cause.
compare the runaway ad for titus source 3 and the narratives of boston king and jehu grant sources 5 and 6.
what goals did british officers hope to achieve in their relations with slaves.
what patriot values trumped slaves individual liberties during and after the war.
putting it all together considering these sources along with the chapter contents and what youve learned in class write a short essay that explains how the presence of slaves created a triangular war in the south assesses the choices that individual slaves had to make during the revolution and considers how the differences in the institution of slavery between northern and southern colonies shaped slaves experiences in the war.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 in e r es ai nt u o yorktown oct 1781 g 17 81 li s allis c o rnw 1 fo rc e.
on r ah rn is si al nn va co ll wa wilmington a tigu an om fr.
south carolina charleston may 1780 georgia 7 81 r aug 1780 e r ar e nte sa camden d 1 1 es t ga north carolina from west indies kings mt.
oct 1780 f cape sa guilford court house w 8 rn 0 co 17 8 charlotte cowpens jan 1781 augusta march 1781 h oo e u atl a n t i c o c e an e bl s de ss m virginia ra an e w s richmond ene gre e chesapeake bay g mo rg d ri n te ja m charlottesville jersey delaware et ay pro cl a ma t io r n hi as w l af nl n ha r ka aw maryland n o gt new ba ac om po t of 1 763 100 kilometers rochambeau o rra york g ra ve s h 100 miles ns philadelphia r h io.
pennsylvania british victory new york american victory new york.
ood french forces su british forces ar ann ueh sq delaware r american forces b is r it h va in savannah dec 1778 map 6 4 the war in the south 1778 1781 britains southern military strategy started well.
british forces captured savannah in december 1778 took control of georgia during 1779 and vanquished charleston in may 1780.
over the next eighteen months brutal warfare between the british troops and loyalist units and the continental army and militia raged in the interior of the carolinas and ended in a stalemate.
hoping to break the deadlock british general charles cornwallis carried the battle into virginia in 1781.
a francoamerican army led by washington and lafayette with the help of the french fleet under admiral de grasse surrounded cornwalliss forces on the yorktown peninsula and forced their surrender.
american guerrillas commanded by the swamp fox general francis marion also won a series of small but fierce battles.
then in january 1781 general daniel morgan led an american force to a bloody victory at cowpens south carolina.
in march greenes soldiers fought cornwalliss seasoned army to a draw at north carolinas guilford court house.
weakened by this war of attrition the british general decided to concede the carolinas to greene and seek a decisive victory in virginia.
there many patriot militiamen had refused to take up arms claiming that the rich wanted the poor to fight for them exploiting these social divisions cornwallis moved easily through the tidewater region of virginia in the chapter 6 making war and republican governments 1776 1789 francis marion crossing the pedee river francis marion was a master of the ferocious guerrilla fighting that characterized the war in south carolina.
though patriot general horatio gates had little confidence in him marion led an irregular militia brigade in several successful attacks.
after chasing marion into a swamp british general banastre tarleton declared as for this damned old fox the devil himself could not catch him soon patriots began calling marion the swamp fox.
in 1851 william t ranney painted marion on horseback in a white shirt and blue coat and his men crossing the pedee river in flatboats.
ranney included an unidentified and possibly fictionalized black oarsman.
amon carter museum fort worth texas william t ranney 1813 1857.
marion crossing the peedee oil on canvas 1850 early summer of 1781.
reinforcements sent from new york and commanded by general benedict arnold the infamous patriot traitor bolstered his ranks.
as arnold and cornwallis sparred with an american force led by lafayette near the york peninsula washington was informed that france had finally sent its powerful west indian fleet to north america and he devised an audacious plan.
feigning an assault on new york city he secretly marched general rochambeaus army from rhode island to virginia.
simultaneously the french fleet took control of chesapeake bay.
by the time the british discovered washingtons scheme cornwallis was surrounded his 9 500 man army outnumbered 2 to 1 on land and cut off from reinforcement or retreat by sea.
in a hopeless position cornwallis surrendered at yorktown in october 1781.
the franco american victory broke the resolve of the british government.
it is all over lord north exclaimed.
isolated diplomatically in europe stymied militarily in america and lacking public support at home the british ministry gave up active prosecution of the war on the american mainland.
identify causes what were the keys to the patriot victory in the south.
the patriot advantage how could mighty britain victorious in the great war for empire lose to a motley rebel army.
the british ministry pointed to a series of blunders by the military leadership.
why had howe not ruthlessly pursued washingtons army in 1776.
why had howe and burgoyne failed to coordinate their attacks in 1777.
why had cornwallis marched deep into the patriotdominated state of virginia in 1781.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 historians acknowledge british mistakes but they also attribute the rebels victory to french aid and the inspired leadership of george washington.
astutely deferring to elected officials washington won the support of the continental congress and the state governments.
confident of his military abilities he pursued a defensive trace change strategy that minimized casualties over time and maintained the morale of his despite being at a clear disadvantage at the start officers and soldiers through five of the war the american difficult years of war.
moreover the patriots won.
patriots control of local governments gave washington a greater margin for error than the british generals had.
local militiamen provided the edge in the 1777 victory at saratoga and forced cornwallis from the carolinas in 1781.
in the end it was the american people who decided the outcome especially the one third of the white colonists who were zealous patriots.
tens of thousands of these farmers and artisans accepted continental bills in payment for supplies and thousands of soldiers took them as pay even as the currency literally depreciated in their pockets.
rampant inflation meant that every paper dollar held for a week lost value imposing a hidden currency tax on those who accepted the paper currency.
each individual tax was small a few pennies on each dollar.
but as millions of dollars changed hands multiple times the currency taxes paid by ordinary citizens financed the american military victory.
diplomatic triumph after yorktown diplomats took two years to conclude a peace treaty.
talks began in paris in april 1782 but the french and spanish still hoping to seize a west indian island or gibraltar stalled for time.
their tactics infuriated american diplomats benjamin franklin john adams and john jay.
so the americans negotiated secretly with the british prepared if necessary to ignore the treaty of alliance and sign a separate peace.
british ministers were equally eager parliament wanted peace and they feared the loss of a rich sugar island.
consequently the american diplomats secured extremely favorable terms.
in the treaty of paris signed in september 1783 great britain formally recognized american independence and relinquished its claims to lands south of the great lakes and east of the mississippi river.
the british negotiators did not insist on a separate territory for their indian allies.
in endeavouring to assist you a wea indian complained to a british general it seems we have wrought our own ruin the cherokees were forced to relinquish claims to 5 million acres three quarters of their territory in treaties with georgia the carolinas and virginia while new york and the continental congress pressed the iroquois and ohio indians to cede much of their land as well.
british officials like those of other early modern empires found it easy to abandon allies they had never really understood america compared p 197.
the paris treaty also granted americans fishing rights off newfoundland and nova scotia prohibited the british from carrying away any negroes or other property and guaranteed freedom of navigation on the mississippi to american citizens forever in return the american government allowed british merchants to pursue legal claims for prewar debts and encouraged the state legislatures to return confiscated property to loyalists and grant them citizenship.
in the treaty of versailles signed simultaneously britain made peace with france and spain.
neither american ally gained very much.
spain reclaimed florida from britain but not the strategic fortress at gibraltar.
france received the caribbean island of tobago small consolation for a war that had sharply raised taxes and quadrupled frances national debt.
just six years later cries for tax relief and political liberty would spark the french revolution.
only americans profited handsomely the treaties gave them independence and access to the trans appalachian west.
creating republican institutions 1776 1787 when the patriots declared independence they confronted the issue of political authority.
which of us shall be the rulers asked a philadelphia newspaper.
the question was multifaceted.
would power reside in the national government or the states.
who would control the new republican institutions traditional elites or average citizens.
would women have greater political and legal rights.
what would be the status of slaves in the new republic.
the state constitutions how much democracy.
in may 1776 the second continental congress urged americans to reject royal authority and establish republican governments.
most states quickly complied.
constitutions employ every pen an observer noted.
within six months virginia maryland north carolina new jersey delaware and pennsylvania had all ratified america c o m pa r e d chinas growing empire as britain was losing control of its multiethnic empire in north america chinas qing pronounced ching dynasty was consolidating its authority over borderlands peoples during the eighteenth century.
and just as europeans relied on ethnographic descriptions of native americans to understand the peoples and territories they hoped to control chinese authorities used ethnographic manuals that included prose poetry and illustrations to make sense of their new subjects.
these excerpts from a set of miao albums illustrate the cultural characteristics they observed in or ascribed to one such group of these nonchinese or non han peoples.
bulong basket repairing zhongjia gedou miao the bulong zhongjia are located in dinfan and guangshun districts.
their customs are similar to those of the kayou.
for them the new year begins in the twelfth month.
they greet it by striking a bronze drum.
when they dig in the ground and find a drum they consider it to be the legacy of zhuge liang an ancient chinese hero claimed as a forebear.
the rich must pay a high price to buy the drum.
at funerals cattle are butchered and dressed and relatives and friends are invited.
drinking from the ox horn of happiness the guests often get drunk and sometimes even wind up killing each other.
the host does not usually eat meat but only fish and shrimp.
after burial the grave is covered by an umbrella.
by nature the bulong are alert and fierce.
when coming and going they carry sharp knives.
they will avenge even an angry look.
the gedou miao are found in zhenyuan shibing and huangping.
they are as good at hunting as the turen.
women wear their hair up inclined toward one side with a comb inserted.
their short tunics are collarless and their skirts do not reach beyond the knee.
they embroider in five colors on the bust and the sleeves and ornament themselves with seashells shaped like silkworm cocoons stringing them together like real pearls.
if a man is injured by one of their poisoned arrows he will die immediately.
they are not however given to thievery.
nong agricultural miao the nong miao are located in the zhenfeng district which once belonged to guangxi.
men shave their heads and dress just like han people.
women wear short tunics and long skirts and cover their heads with colorful scarves.
they still follow miao customs.
their nature is fierce and cruel they enjoy killing.
new constitutions and connecticut and rhode island had revised their colonial charters to delete references to the king.
republicanism meant more than ousting the king.
the declaration of independence stated the principle of popular sovereignty governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed in the heat of revolution many patriots gave this clause a further democratic twist.
in north carolina the backcountry farmers of mecklenburg county told their delegates to the states constitutional convention to oppose source from the art of ethnography a chinese miao album translated by david m deal and laura hostetler seattle university of washington press 2006.
reprinted by permission of the university of washington press.
questions for analysis 1.
what attributes seemed especially meaningful to the authors of these descriptions.
why would the authors have singled out the particular qualities that are remarked upon here.
how does this compare to the ways in which the british viewed their native americans.
everything that leans to aristocracy or power in the hands of the rich in virginia voters elected a new assembly in 1776 that an eyewitness remarked was composed of men not quite so well dressed nor so politely educated nor so highly born as colonial era legislatures figure 6 1.
to see a longer excerpt of the mecklenburg delegates document along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 figure 6 1 north 1765 1775 36 47 1783 1790 17 12 26 62 south 1765 1775 1783 1790 52 36 28 over 5 000 12 42 30 2 000 5 000 under 2 000 pennsylvanias controversial constitution this democratic impulse flowered in pennsylvania thanks to a coalition of scots irish farmers philadelphia artisans and enlightenment influenced intellectuals.
in 1776 these insurgents ousted every officeholder of the penn familys proprietary government abolished property ownership as a qualification for voting and granted all taxpaying men the right to vote and hold office.
the pennsylvania constitution of 1776 also created a unicameral one house legislature with complete power there was no governor to exercise a veto.
other provisions mandated a system of elementary education and protected citizens from imprisonment for debt.
pennsylvanias democratic constitution alarmed many leading patriots.
from boston john adams denounced the unicameral legislature as so democratical that it must produce confusion and every evil work compare and along with other conservative contrast patriots adams wanted to restrict what aspects of the office holding to men of learning pennsylvania constitution leisure and easy circumstances were most objectionable to adams and what did he and warned of oppression under advocate instead.
majority rule if you give ordinary citizens the command or preponderance in the.
legislature they will vote all property out of the hands of you aristocrats tempering democracy to counter the appeal of the pennsylvania constitution adams published thoughts on government 1776.
in that treatise he adapted the british whig theory of mixed government a sharing of power among the monarch the house of lords and the commons to a republican society.
to disperse authority and preserve liberty he insisted on separate institutions legislatures would make laws the executive would administer them and the judiciary would middling men enter the halls of government 1765 1790 before the revolution wealthy men with assets of 2 000 or more as measured by tax lists and probate records dominated most colonial assemblies.
the power of money was especially apparent in the southern colonies where representatives worth at least 5 000 formed a majority of the legislators.
however in the new american republic the proportion of middling legislators yeomen farmers and others worth less than 2 000 increased dramatically especially in the northern states.
adapted from jackson t main government by the people the american revolution and the democratization of the legislatures by jackson t main in william and mary quarterly series 3 23 1966.
used by permission of william and mary quarterly omohundro institute of early history and culture.
enforce them.
adams also demanded a bicameral twohouse legislature with an upper house of substantial property owners to offset the popular majorities in the lower one.
as further curbs on democracy he proposed an elected governor with veto power and an appointed not elected judiciary.
conservative patriots endorsed adamss governmental system.
in new yorks constitution of 1777 property qualifications for voting excluded 20 percent of white men from assembly elections and 60 percent from casting ballots for the governor and the upper house.
in south carolina elite planters used property rules to disqualify about 90 percent of white men from office holding.
the 1778 constitution required candidates for governor to have a debt free estate of 10 000 about 700 000 today senators to be worth 2 000 and assemblymen to own property valued at 1 000.
even in traditionally democratic massachusetts the 1780 constitution authored primarily by adams raised property qualifications for voting and office holding and skewed the lower house toward eastern mercantile interests.
the political legacy of the revolution was complex.
only in pennsylvania and vermont were radical patriots able to create truly democratic institutions.
yet in all the new states representative legislatures had acquired more power and average citizens now had greater power at the polls and greater influence in the halls of government.
women seek a public voice the extraordinary excitement of the revolutionary era tested the dictum that only men could engage in politics.
men controlled all public institutions legislatures juries government offices but upperclass women engaged in political debate and defying chapter 6 mens scorn filled their letters diaries and conversations with opinions on public issues.
the men say we have no business with politics eliza wilkinson of south carolina complained in 1783.
they wont even allow us liberty of thought and that is all i want as wilkinsons remark suggests most women did not insist on civic equality with men many sought only an end to restrictive customs and laws.
abigail adams demanded equal legal rights for married women who under common law could not own property enter into contracts or initiate lawsuits.
the war bonds she purchased had to be held in a trust run by a male relative.
men would be tyrants if they continued to hold such power over women adams declared to her husband john criticizing him and other patriots for emancipating all nations from monarchical despotism while retaining absolute power over wives most politicians ignored womens requests and most men insisted on traditional sexual and political prerogatives.
long married husbands remained patriarchs who dominated their households and even young men who embraced the republican ideal of companionate marriage did not support legal equality for their wives and daughters.
except in new jersey which until 1807 allowed unmarried and widowed female property holders to vote women remained disenfranchised.
in the new american republic only white men enjoyed full citizenship.
nevertheless the republican belief in an educated citizenry created opportunities for some women.
in her 1779 essay on the equality of the sexes judith sargent murray argued that men and women had equal capacities for memory and that women had superior imaginations.
she conceded that most women were inferior to men in judgment and reasoning but only from lack of training we can only reason from what we know she argued and most women had been denied the opportunity of acquiring knowledge that situation changed in the 1790s when the attorney general of massachusetts declared that girls had an equal right to schooling under the state constitution.
by 1850 the literacy rates of women and men in the northeastern states were equal and educated women again challenged their subordinate legal and political status.
the wars losers loyalists native americans and slaves the success of republican institutions was assisted by the departure of as many as 100 000 loyalists many of whom suffered severe financial losses.
some patriots demanded revolutionary justice the seizure of making war and republican governments 1776 1789 judith sargent murray judith sargent murray was perhaps the most accomplished female essayist of the revolutionary era.
publishing under various pen names she advocated for economic independence and better educational opportunities for women.
two years before mary wollstonecrafts a vindication of the rights of woman 1792 she published on the equality of the sexes in the massachusetts magazine.
her letter books which run to twenty volumes were discovered only in 1984 the judith sargent murray society is now transcribing and indexing them for publication.
this striking portrait by john singleton copley hints at her intelligence and sardonic wit.
terra foundation for american art chicago art resource ny.
all loyalist property and its distribution to needy americans.
but most officials were unwilling to go so far.
when state governments did seize loyalist property they often auctioned it to the highest bidders only rarely did small scale farmers benefit.
in the cities patriot merchants replaced loyalists at the top of the eco identify causes nomic ladder supplanting a tradi what impact did republitional economic elite who often can ideals have on gender invested profits from trade in real roles and expectations durestate with republican entre ing the revolutionary era.
preneurs who tended to promote new trading ventures and domestic manufacturing.
this shift facilitated americas economic development in the years to come.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 though the revolution did not result in widespread property redistribution it did encourage yeomen middling planters and small time entrepreneurs to explain believe that their new republican consequences governments would protect their how did the revolutionary property and ensure widespread commitment to liberty and access to land.
in western counthe protection of property ties former regulators demanded affect enslaved african americans and western that the new governments be indians.
more responsive to their needs beyond the appalachians thousands of squatters who had occupied lands in kentucky and tennessee expected their claims to be recognized and lands to be made available on easy terms.
if the united states were to secure the loyalty of westerners it would have to meet their needs more effectively than the british empire had.
this meant among other things extinguishing native american claims to land as quickly as possible.
at wars end george washington commented on the rage for speculating in ohio valley lands.
men in these times talk with as much facility of fifty a hundred and even 500 000 acres as a gentleman formerly would do of 1000 acres if we make a right use of our natural advantages a fourth of july orator observed we soon must be a truly great and happy people native american land claims stood as a conspicuous barrier to the natural advantages he imagined.
for southern slaveholders the revolution was fought to protect property rights and any sentiment favoring slave emancipation met with violent objections.
when virginia methodists called for general emancipation in 1785 slaveholders used revolutionary principles to defend their right to human property.
they risked their lives and fortunes and waded through seas of blood to secure the possession of their rights of liberty and property only to hear of a very subtle and daring attempt to dispossess us of a very important part of our property emancipation would bring want poverty distress and ruin to the free citizen the liberties coveted by ordinary white americans bore hard on the interests of native americans and slaves.
the articles of confederation a black loyalist pass 1783 white patriots claimed their freedom by fighting against the british thousands of black slaves won their liberty by fighting for them.
this pass certifies that cato rammsay actually ramsey a negro resorted to the british lines in search of the freedom promised by virginia royal governor dunmore and british commander henry clinton to slaves who escaped from patriot owners.
now age forty five and a slim fellow ramsey had escaped from his owner john ramsey of norfolk virginia in 1776 probably fleeing to dunmores ships.
seven years later he ended up in new york reunited with his wife china godfrey thirty five and their three children james twenty betsey fifteen and nelly ramsey ten who had fled subsequently from other owners.
as the british evacuated new york in 1783 ramsey and his family were free to go to nova scotia where they worked as farmers.
nova scotia archives and records management.
as patriots embraced independence in 1776 they envisioned a central government with limited powers.
carter braxton of virginia thought the continental congress should regulate the affairs of trade war peace alliances c but should by no means have authority to interfere with the internal police governance or domestic concerns of any colony that idea informed the articles of confederation which were approved by the continental congress in november 1777.
the articles provided for a loose union in which each state retains its sovereignty freedom and independence as an association of equals each state had one vote regardless of its size population or wealth.
important laws needed the approval of nine of the thirteen states and changes in the articles required unanimous consent.
though the confederation had significant powers on paper it could declare war make treaties with foreign nations adjudicate disputes between the states borrow and print money and requisition funds from the states for the common defense or general welfare it had major weaknesses as well.
it had neither a chief executive nor a judiciary.
though it could make treaties it could not enforce their provisions since the states remained sovereign.
most important it lacked the power to tax either the states or the people.
chapter 6 although the congress exercised authority from 1776 raising the continental army negotiating the treaty with france and financing the war the articles won formal ratification only in 1781.
the delay stemmed from conflicts over western lands.
the royal charters of virginia massachusetts connecticut and other states set boundaries stretching to the pacific ocean.
states without western lands maryland and pennsylvania refused to accept the articles until the land rich states relinquished these claims to the confederation.
threatened by cornwalliss army in 1781 virginia gave up its claims and maryland the last holdout finally ratified the articles map 6 5.
continuing fiscal crisis by 1780 the central government was nearly bankrupt and general washington called urgently for a national tax system without one he warned our cause is lost led by robert morris who became superintendent of finance in 1781 nationalist minded patriots tried to expand the confederations authority.
they persuaded congress to charter the bank of north america a private institution in philadelphia arguing that its notes would stabilize the inflated continental currency.
morris also created a central bureaucracy to manage the confederations finances and urged congress to enact a 5 percent import tax.
rhode island and new york rejected the tax proposal.
his state had opposed british import duties new yorks representative declared and it would not accept them from congress.
to raise revenue congress looked to the sale of western lands.
in 1783 it asserted that the recently signed treaty of paris had extinguished the indians rights to those lands and made them the property of the united states.
the northwest ordinance by 1784 more than thirty thousand settlers had already moved to kentucky and tennessee despite the uncertainties of frontier warfare and after the war their numbers grew rapidly.
in that year the residents of what is now eastern tennessee organized a new state called it franklin and sought admission to the confederation.
to preserve its authority over the west congress refused to recognize franklin.
subsequently congress created the southwest and mississippi territories the future states of tennessee alabama and mississippi from lands ceded by north carolina and georgia.
because these cessions carried the stipulation that no regulation.
shall tend to emancipate slaves these states and all those south of the ohio river allowed human bondage.
however the confederation congress banned slavery north of the ohio river.
between 1784 and making war and republican governments 1776 1789 1787 it issued three important ordinances organizing the old northwest the ordinance of 1784 written by thomas jefferson established the principle that territories could compare and become states as their populations contrast grew.
the land ordinance of in what ways did the 1785 mandated a rectangular confederation function grid system of surveying and effectively and what were specified a minimum price of 1 its greatest failings.
it also required that half of the townships be sold in single blocks of 23 040 acres each which only large scale speculators could afford and the rest in parcels of 640 acres each which restricted their sale to well to do farmers map 6 6.
finally the northwest ordinance of 1787 created the territories that would eventually become the states of ohio indiana illinois michigan and wisconsin.
the ordinance prohibited slavery and earmarked funds from land sales for the support of schools.
it also specified that congress would appoint a governor and judges to administer each new territory until the population reached 5 000 free adult men at which point the citizens could elect a territorial legislature.
when the population reached 60 000 the legislature could devise a republican constitution and apply to join the confederation.
the land ordinances of the 1780s were a great and enduring achievement of the confederation congress.
they provided for orderly settlement and the admission of new states on the basis of equality there would be no politically dependent colonies in the west.
but they also extended the geographical division between slave and free areas that would haunt the nation in the coming decades.
and they implicitly invalidated native american claims to an enormous swath of territory a corollary that would soon lead the newly independent nation once again into war.
shayss rebellion though many national leaders were optimistic about the long term prospects of the united states postwar economic conditions were grim.
the revolution had crippled american shipping and cut exports of tobacco rice and wheat.
the british navigation acts which had nurtured colonial commerce now barred americans from legal trade with the british west indies.
moreover low priced british manufactures and some from india as well were flooding american markets driving urban artisans and wartime textile firms out of business.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 claimed by u s great britain upe l s rior vermont claimed by n h n y.
ceded 1791 n o r t h w e s t o l ontari.
er nc maine part of mass.
new york new hampshire susquehanna r massachusetts claimed by mass.
ceded to n y claimed by conn rie l e claimed by conn and va.
ceded 1784 1786 rhode island connecticut pennsylvania t e r r i t o r y western reserve claimed by conn.
ceded 1800 claimed by virginia ceded 1784 missour ir.
o hi delaware claimed by north carolina ceded 1790 tennessee e w maryland s atlantic ocean cumberland gap north carolina iss boundary of territory ceded by new york 1782 boundary of territory ceded by virginia 1784 original thirteen states after their cessions states without land claims south carolina claimed by s c.
ceded 1787 claimed by georgia ceded 1802 n virginia i s si p pi r ceded by spain to france 1800 new jersey.
or ceded by virginia 1789 kentucky louisiana arkans as r.
l michig a n claimed by mass.
ceded 1784 1785 ron hu l claimed by virginia ceded 1784 st la wr e c a n a d a m georgia ceded by spain spanish land claims fl or d a gulf of mexico i 400 miles 400 kilometers map 6 5 the confederation and western land claims 1781 1802 the congress formed by the articles of confederation had to resolve conflicting state claims to western lands.
for example the territories claimed by new york and virginia on the basis of their royal charters overlapped extensively.
beginning in 1781 the confederation congress and after 1789 the u s congress persuaded all of the states to cede their western claims creating a national domain open to all citizens.
in the northwest ordinance 1787 the congress divided the domain north of the ohio river into territories and set up democratic procedures by which they could eventually join the union as states.
south of the ohio river the congress allowed the existing southern states to play a substantial role in settling the ceded lands.
the fiscal condition of the state governments was dire primarily because of war debts.
well to do merchants and landowners including abigail adams had invested in state bonds during the war others had speculated in debt certificates buying them on the cheap from hard pressed farmers and soldiers.
now creditors and speculators demanded that the state governments redeem the bonds and certificates quickly and at full value a policy that would require tax increases and a decrease in the amount of paper currency.
most legislatures now including substantial numbers of middling farmers and artisans refused.
instead they chapter 6 northwest ordinance 1787 with final state boundaries land ordinance 1785 with final sectional division r wisconsin michigan northwest ft detroit 1st range 2nd range 4th range 3rd range 6 miles l e rie territory illinois mi indiana ohio s s o u r i r 1 2 section 320 acres o hi o r 1 4 section 160 acres 80 acres 40 acres each detail of section 1 sq.
mile 640 acres 2 miles 2 kilometers schools detail of township 36 sq.
miles farms in an old eastern survey area baltimore county md.
farms in a rectangular survey area muskingum county ohio 1 mile 1 mile pi 6 miles ip ron hu l iss l michigan ft michilimackinac mi ss baseline virginia pennsylvania 5th range canada per l su ior 6th range 7th range the seven ranges first area survey minnesota making war and republican governments 1776 1789 2 miles 2 kilometers map 6 6 land division in the northwest territory throughout the northwest territory government surveyors imposed a rectangular grid on the landscape regardless of the local topography so that farmers bought neatly defined tracts of land.
the right angled property lines in muskingum county ohio lower left contrasted sharply with those in baltimore county maryland lower right where as in most of the eastern and southern states boundaries followed the contours of the land.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 authorized new issues of paper currency and allowed debtors to pay private creditors in installments.
although wealthy men deplored these measures as intoxicating draughts of liberty that destroyed the just rights of creditors such political intervention prevented social upheaval.
in massachusetts however the new constitution placed power in the hands of a mercantile elite that owned the bulk of the states war bonds.
ignoring the interests of ordinary citizens the legislature increased taxes fivefold to pay off wartime debts and it stipulated that they be paid in hard currency.
even for substantial farmers this was a crushing burden.
when cash strapped farmers could not pay both their taxes and their debts creditors threatened lawsuits.
debtor ephraim wetmore heard a rumor that merchant stephan salisbury would have my body dead or alive in case i did not pay to protect their livelihoods farmers called extralegal conventions to protest high taxes and property seizures.
then mobs of angry farmers including men of high status closed the courts by force.
i had no intensions to destroy the publick government declared captain adam wheeler a former town selectman his goal was simply to prevent valuable and industrious members of society being dragged from their families to prison because of their debts.
these crowd actions grew into a full scale revolt led by captain daniel shays a continental army veteran.
as a revolt against taxes imposed by an unresponsive government shayss rebellion resembled american resistance to the british stamp act.
consciously linking themselves to the patriot movement shayss men placed pine twigs in their hats just as continental troops had done.
the people have turned against their teachers the doctrines which were inculcated to effect the late revolution complained fisher ames a conservative massachusetts lawmaker.
some of the radical patriots of 1776 likewise condemned the shaysites men who would lessen the weight of government lawfully place events exercised must be enemies to our in context happy revolution and common how did the shaysites liberty charged samuel adams.
draw on the revolution for inspiration.
to put down the rebellion the massachusetts legislature passed the riot act and wealthy bondholders equipped a formidable fighting force which governor james bowdoin used to disperse shayss ragtag army during the winter of 1786 1787.
although shayss rebellion failed it showed that many middling patriot families felt that american oppressors had replaced british tyrants.
massachusetts voters turned governor bowdoin out of office and debt ridden farmers in new york northern pennsylvania connecticut and new hampshire closed courthouses and forced their governments to provide economic relief.
british officials in canada predicted the imminent demise of the united states and american leaders urged purposeful action to save their republican experiment.
events in massachusetts declared nationalist henry knox formed the strongest arguments possible for the creation of a strong general government the constitution of 1787 these issues ultimately led to the drafting of a national constitution.
from its creation the u s constitution was a controversial document both acclaimed for solving the nations woes and condemned for perverting its republican principles.
critics charged that republican institutions worked only in small political units the states.
advocates replied that the constitution extended republicanism by adding another level of government elected by the people.
in the new two level political federation created by the constitution the national government would exercise limited delegated powers and the existing state governments would retain authority over all other matters.
the rise of a nationalist faction money questions debts taxes and tariffs dominated the postwar political agenda.
americans who had served the confederation as military officers officials and diplomats viewed these issues from a national perspective and advocated a stronger central government.
george washington robert morris benjamin franklin john jay and john adams wanted congress to control foreign and interstate commerce and tariff policy.
however lawmakers in massachusetts new york and pennsylvania states with strong commercial traditions insisted on controlling their own tariffs both to protect their artisans from low cost imports and to assist their merchants.
most southern states opposed tariffs because planters wanted to import british textiles and ironware at the lowest possible prices.
nonetheless some southern leaders became nationalists because their state legislatures had cut taxes and refused to redeem state war bonds.
such policies lamented wealthy bondholder charles lee of virginia led taxpayers to believe they would never be compelled chapter 6 to pay the public debt.
creditors also condemned state laws that stayed delayed the payment of mortgages and other private debts.
while men are madly accumulating enormous debts their legislators are making provisions for their nonpayment complained a south carolina merchant.
to undercut the democratic majorities in the state legislatures creditors joined the movement for a stronger central government.
spurred on by shayss rebellion nationalists in congress secured a resolution calling for a convention to revise the articles of confederation.
only an efficient plan from the convention a fellow nationalist wrote to james madison can prevent anarchy first civil convulsions afterwards the philadelphia convention in may 1787 fifty five delegates arrived in philadelphia.
they came from every state except rhode island where the legislature opposed increasing central authority.
most were strong nationalists forty two had served in the confederation congress.
they were also educated and propertied merchants slaveholding planters and monied men there were no artisans backcountry settlers or tenants and only a single yeoman farmer.
some influential patriots missed the convention.
john adams and thomas jefferson were serving as american ministers to britain and france respectively.
the massachusetts general court rejected sam adams as a delegate because he opposed a stronger national government and his fellow firebrand from virginia patrick henry refused to attend because he smelt a rat the absence of experienced leaders and contraryminded delegates allowed capable younger nationalists to set the agenda.
declaring that the convention would decide for ever the fate of republican government james madison insisted on increased national authority.
alexander hamilton of new york likewise demanded a strong central government to protect the republic from the imprudence of democracy the virginia and new jersey plans the delegates elected george washington as their presiding officer and voted to meet behind closed doors.
then momentously they decided not to revise the articles of confederation but rather to consider the so called virginia plan a scheme for a powerful national government devised by james madison.
just thirty six years old madison was determined to fashion national political institutions run by men of high character.
a graduate of princeton he had read classical and making war and republican governments 1776 1789 modern political theory and served in both the confederation congress and the virginia assembly.
once an optimistic patriot madison had grown discouraged because of the narrow ambition and outlook of state legislators.
madisons virginia plan differed from the articles of confederation in three crucial respects.
first the plan rejected state sovereignty in favor of the supremacy of national authority including the power to overturn state laws.
second it called for the national government to be established by the people not the states and for national laws to operate directly on citizens of the various states.
third the plan proposed a three tier election system in which ordinary voters would elect only the lower house of the national legislature.
this lower house would then select the upper house and both houses would appoint the executive and judiciary.
from a political perspective madisons plan had two fatal flaws.
first most state politicians and james madison statesman throughout his long public life madison kept the details of his private life to himself.
his biography he believed should be a record of his public accomplishments not his private affairs.
future generations celebrated him not as a great man like hamilton or jefferson or as a great president like washington but as an original and incisive political thinker.
the chief architect of the u s constitution and the bill of rights madison was the preeminent republican political theorist of his generation.
mead art museum amherst college amherst massachusetts bequest of herbert l pratt class of 1895 1945 82.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 citizens resolutely opposed allowing the national government to veto state laws.
second the plan based representation in the lower house on population this provision a delaware delegate warned would allow the populous states to crush the small ones whenever they stand in the way of their ambitious or interested views so delegates from delaware and other small states rallied behind a plan devised by william paterson of new jersey.
the new jersey plan gave the confederation the power to raise revenue control commerce and make binding requisitions on the states.
but it preserved the states control of their own laws and guaranteed their equality as in the confederation congress each state would have one vote in a unicameral legislature.
delegates from the more populous states vigorously opposed this provision.
after a month long debate on the two plans a bare majority of the states agreed to use madisons virginia plan as the basis of discussion.
this decision raised the odds that the convention would create a more powerful national government.
outraged by this prospect two new york delegates robert yates and john lansing accused their colleagues of exceeding their mandate to revise the articles and left the convention.
the remaining delegates met six days a week during the summer of 1787 debating both high principles and practical details.
experienced politicians they looked for a plan that would be acceptable to most citizens and existing political interests.
pierce butler of south carolina invoked a classical greek precedent we must follow the example of solon who gave the athenians not the best government he could devise but the best they would receive the great compromise as the convention grappled with the central problem of the representation of large and small states the connecticut delegates suggested a possible solution.
they proposed that the national legislatures upper chamber the senate have two members from each state while seats in the lower chamber the house of representatives be apportioned by population determined every ten years by a national census.
after bitter debate delegates from the populous states reluctantly accepted this great compromise other state related issues were quickly settled by restricting or leaving ambiguous the extent of central authority.
some delegates opposed a national system of courts predicting that the states will revolt at such encroachments on their judicial authority.
this danger led the convention to vest the judicial power in one supreme court and allow the new national legislature to decide whether to establish lower courts within the states.
the convention also refused to set a property requirement for voting in national elections.
eight or nine states have extended the right of suffrage beyond the freeholders george mason of virginia pointed out.
what will people there say if they should be disfranchised finally the convention specified that state legislatures would elect members of the upper house or senate and the states would select the electors who would choose the president.
by allowing states to have important roles in the new constitutional system the delegates hoped that their citizens would accept limits on state sovereignty.
negotiations over slavery the shadow of slavery hovered over many debates and gouverneur morris of new york brought it into view.
to safeguard property rights morris wanted life terms for senators a property qualification for voting in national elections and a strong president with veto power.
nonetheless he rejected the legitimacy of two traditional types of property the feudal dues claimed by aristocratic landowners and the ownership of slaves.
an advocate of free markets and personal liberty morris condemned slavery as a nefarious institution many slave owning delegates from the chesapeake region including madison and george mason recognized that slavery contradicted republican principles and hoped for its eventual demise.
they supported an end to american participation in the atlantic slave trade a proposal the south carolina and georgia delegates angrily rejected.
unless the importation of african slaves continued these rice planters and merchants declared their states shall not be parties to the union at their insistence the convention denied congress the power to regulate immigration and so the slave trade until 1808 american voices p 208.
the delegates devised other slavery related compromises.
to mollify southern planters they wrote a fugitive clause that allowed masters to reclaim enslaved blacks or white indentured servants who fled to other states.
but in acknowledgment of the antislavery sentiments of morris and other northerners the delegates excluded the words slavery and slave from the constitution it spoke only of citizens and all other persons because slaves lacked the vote antislavery delegates wanted their census numbers excluded when apportioning seats in congress.
chapter 6 southerners ironically given that they considered slaves property demanded that slaves be counted in the census the same as full citizens to increase the souths representation.
ultimately the delegates agreed that each slave would count as three fifths of a free person for purposes of representation and taxation a compromise that helped southern planters dominate the national government until 1860.
national authority having addressed the concerns of small states and slave states the convention created a powerful national government.
the constitution declared that congressional legislation was the supreme law of the land.
it gave the new government the power to tax raise an army and a navy and regulate foreign and interstate commerce with the authority to make all laws necessary and proper to implement those and other provisions.
to assist creditors and establish the new governments fiscal integrity the constitution required the united states to honor the existing national debt and prohibited the states from issuing paper money or enacting any law impairing the obligation of contracts the proposed constitution was not a perfect production benjamin franklin admitted as he urged the delegates to sign it in september 1787.
but the great statesman confessed his astonishment at finding this system approaching so near to perfection his colleagues apparently agreed all but three signed the document.
the people debate ratification the procedure for ratifying the new constitution was as controversial as its contents.
knowing that rhode island and perhaps other states would reject it the delegates did not submit the constitution to the state legislatures for their unanimous consent as required by the articles of confederation.
instead they arbitrarily and cleverly declared that it would take effect when ratified by conventions in nine of the thirteen states.
as the constitutional debate began in early 1788 the nationalists seized the initiative with two bold moves.
first they called themselves federalists suggesting that they supported a federal union a loose decentralized system and obscuring their commitment to a strong national government.
second they launched a coordinated campaign in pamphlets and newspapers to explain and justify the philadelphia constitution.
making war and republican governments 1776 1789 the antifederalists the opponents of the constitution called by default the antifederalists had diverse backgrounds and motives.
some like governor george clinton compare and of new york feared that state gov contrast ernments would lose power.
rural how did the constitudemocrats protested that the pro tion in its final form posed document unlike most differ from the plan that state constitutions lacked a decla james madison originally ration of individual rights they proposed.
also feared that the central government would be run by wealthy men.
lawyers and men of learning and monied men expect to be managers of this constitution worried a massachusetts farmer.
t hey will swallow up all of us little folks.
just as the whale swallowed up jonah giving political substance to these fears melancton smith of new york argued that the large electoral districts prescribed by the constitution would restrict office holding to wealthy men whereas the smaller districts used in state elections usually produced legislatures composed principally of respectable yeomanry john quincy adams agreed if only eight men would represent massachusetts they will infallibly be chosen from the aristocratic part of the community smith summed up the views of americans who held traditional republican values.
to keep government close to the people they wanted the states to remain small sovereign republics tied together only for trade and defense not the united states but the states united citing the french political philosopher montesquieu antifederalists argued that republican institutions were best suited to small polities.
no extensive empire can be governed on republican principles declared james winthrop of massachusetts.
patrick henry worried that the constitution would recreate british rule high taxes an oppressive bureaucracy a standing army and a great and mighty president.
supported in extravagant munificence as another antifederalist put it i had rather be a free citizen of the small republic of massachusetts than an oppressed subject of the great american empire federalists respond in new york where ratification was hotly contested james madison john jay and alexander hamilton defended the proposed constitution in a series of eighty five essays written in 1787 and 1788 collectively titled the federalist.
this work influenced political leaders throughout the country and subsequently won acclaim as an important treatise of practical republicanism.
its authors denied that a american voices the first national debate over slavery in this part of the text we trace the impact of republican ideology on american politics and society.
what happened when republicanism collided head on with the well established practice of slavery.
after the revolution the massachusetts courts abolished slavery but in 1787 slavery was legal in the rest of the union and was the bedrock of social order and agricultural production in the southern states.
a look at the debates on the issue of the african slave trade at the philadelphia convention and in a state ratifying convention shows that slavery was an extremely divisive issue at the birth of the nation a dark cloud threatening the bright future of the young republic.
the constitutional convention slavery was not a major topic of discussion at the philadelphia convention but it surfaced a number of times notably in the important debate over representation which produced the three fifths clause.
a discussion of the atlantic slave trade began when luther martin a delegate from maryland proposed a clause allowing congress to impose a tax on or prohibit the importation of slaves.
mr martin proposed to vary article 7 sect.
4 so as to allow a prohibition or tax on the importation of slaves.
he believed it was inconsistent with the principles of the revolution and dishonorable to the american character to have such a feature promoting the slave trade in the constitution.
mr john rutledge of south carolina declared that religion and humanity had nothing to do with this question.
interest alone is the governing principle with nations.
the true question at present is whether the southern states shall or shall not be parties to the union.
mr oliver ellsworth of connecticut was for leaving the clause as it stands.
let every state import what it pleases.
the morality or wisdom of slavery are considerations belonging to the states themselves.
the old confederation had not meddled with this point and he did not see any greater necessity for bringing it within the policy of the new one.
mr charles c pinckney said south carolina can never receive the plan for a new constitution if it prohibits the slave trade.
in every proposed extension of the powers of congress that state has expressly and watchfully excepted that of meddling with the importation of negroes.
mr roger sherman of connecticut was for leaving the clause as it stands.
he disapproved of the slave trade yet as the states were now possessed of the right to import slaves.
and as it was expedient to have as few objections as possible to the proposed scheme of government he thought it best to leave the matter as we find it.
col george mason of virginia stated that this infernal trade originated in the avarice of british merchants.
the british government constantly checked the attempts of virginia to put a stop to it.
the present question concerns not the importing states alone but the whole union.
maryland and virginia he said had already prohibited the importation of slaves expressly.
north carolina had done the same in substance.
all this would be in vain if south carolina and georgia be at liberty to import.
the western people are already calling out for slaves for their new lands and will fill that country with slaves if they can be got through south carolina and georgia.
slavery discourages arts and manufactures.
the poor despise labor when performed by slaves.
they prevent the immigration of whites who really enrich and strengthen a country.
every master of slaves is born a petty tyrant.
they bring the judgment of heaven on a country.
as nations cannot be rewarded or punished in the next world they must be in this.
by an inevitable chain of causes and effects providence punishes national sins by national calamities.
he held it essential in every point of view that the general government should have power to prevent the increase of slavery.
mr ellsworth as he had never owned a slave could not judge of the effects of slavery on character.
he said however that if it was to be considered in a moral light we ought to go further and free those already in the country.
let us not intermeddle.
as population increases poor laborers will be so plenty as to render slaves useless.
slavery in time will not be a speck in our country.
gen charles c pinckney argued that south carolina and georgia cannot do without slaves.
as to virginia she will gain by stopping the importations.
her slaves will rise in value and she has more than she wants.
it would be unequal to require south carolina and georgia to confederate on such unequal terms.
he contended that the importation of slaves would be for the interest of the whole union.
the more slaves the more produce to employ the carrying trade the more consumption also and the more of this the more revenue for the common treasury.
he should consider a rejection of the present clause as an exclusion of south carolina from the union.
source max farrand ed the records of the federal convention of 1787 new haven yale university press 1911 2 364 365 369 372.
the massachusetts ratifying convention in philadelphia the delegates agreed on a compromise they gave congress the power to tax or prohibit slave imports as luther martin had proposed but withheld that power for twenty years.
in the massachusetts convention the delegates split on this issue and on many others.
they ratified the constitution by a narrow margin 187 to 168.
mr neal from kittery an antifederalist went over the ground of objection to.
the idea that slave trade was allowed to be continued for 20 years.
his profession he said obliged him to bear witness against any thing that should favor the making merchandize of the bodies of men and unless his objection was removed he could not put his hand to the constitution.
other gentlemen said in addition to this idea that there was not even a proposition that the negroes ever shall be free and gen thompson exclaimed mr.
president shall it be said that after we have established our own independence and freedom we make slaves of others.
washington.
he has immortalized himself.
but he holds those in slavery who have a good right to be free as he is.
on the other side gentlemen said that the step taken in this article towards the abolition of slavery was one of the beauties of the constitution.
they observed that in the confederation there was no provision whatever for its ever being abolished but this constitution provides that congress may after twenty years totally annihilate the slave trade.
mr heath federalist.
i apprehend that it is not in our power to do any thing for or against those who are in slavery in the southern states.
no gentleman within these walls detests every idea of slavery more than i do it is generally detested by the people of this commonwealth and i ardently hope that the time will soon come when our brethren in the southern states will view it as we do and put a stop to it but to this we have no right to compel them.
two questions naturally arise if we ratify the constitution shall we do any thing by our act to hold the blacks in slavery or shall we become the partakers of other mens sins.
i think neither of them each state is sovereign and independent to a certain degree and they have a right and will regulate their own internal affairs as to themselves appears proper.
we are not in this case partakers of other mens sins.
the federal convention went as far as they could the migration or immigration c is confined to the states now existing only new states cannot claim it.
congress by their ordnance for erecting new states some time since declared that there shall be no slavery in them.
but whether those in slavery in the southern states will be emancipated after the year 1808 i do not pretend to determine i rather doubt it.
source jonathan elliot ed the debates.
on the adoption of the federal constitution philadelphia j.
b lippincott 1836 1 103 105 107 112 117.
questions for analysis 1.
at the constitutional convention in philadelphia what were the main arguments for and against federal restrictions on the atlantic slave trade.
how do you explain the position taken by the connecticut delegates in philadelphia and mr heath in the massachusetts debate.
what argument does george mason a virginia slave owner make in favor of prohibiting the atlantic slave trade.
what evidence of regional tensions appears in the documents.
several men from different states mason from virginia ellsworth from connecticut and heath from massachusetts offered predictions about the future of slavery.
how accurate were they.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 centralized government would lead to domestic tyranny.
drawing on montesquieus theories and john adamss thoughts on government madison jay and hamilton pointed out that authority would be divided among the president a bicameral legislature and a judiciary.
each branch of government would check and balance the others and so preserve liberty.
in federalist no.
10 madison challenged the view that republican governments only worked in small polities arguing that a large state would better protect republican liberty.
it was sown in the nature of man madison wrote for individuals to seek power and form factions.
indeed a landed interest a manufacturing interest a mercantile interest a moneyed interest with many lesser interests grow up of necessity in civilized nations a free society should welcome all factions but keep any one of them from becoming dominant something best achieved in a large republic.
extend the sphere and you take in a greater variety of parties and interests madison concluded inhibiting the formation of a majority eager to invade the rights of other citizens the constitution ratified the delegates debating these issues in the state ratification conventions included untutored farmers and middling artisans as well as educated gentlemen.
generally backcountry delegates were antifederalists while those from coastal areas were federalists.
in pennsylvania philadelphia merchants and artisans joined commercial farmers to ratify the constitution.
other early federalist successes came in four less populous states delaware new jersey georgia and connecticut where delegates hoped that a strong national government would offset the power of large neighboring states map 6 7.
the constitutions first real test came in january 1788 in massachusetts a hotbed of antifederalist sentiment.
influential patriots including samuel adams and governor john hancock opposed the new constitution as did many followers of daniel shays.
but boston artisans who wanted tariff protection from british imports supported ratification.
to win over other delegates federalist leaders assured the convention that they would recommend a national bill of map 6 7 ratifying the constitution of 1787 l superior maine part of mass.
l michigan ron hu l new hampshire june 21 1788 l ontario l massachusetts feb 7 1788 rhode island may 29 1790 new york july 26 1788 e eri pennsylvania dec 12 1787 connecticut jan 9 1788 e new jersey dec 18 1787 virginia june 26 1788.
pi r sip mi ssi s o hi or tennessee district south carolina may 23 1788 georgia jan 2 1788 s at l a n t i c ocean maryland apr.
28 1788 north carolina nov 21 1789 w delaware dec 7 1787.
kentucky district n 200 miles 200 kilometers votes at district level with date of ratification by state convention delegates in support of ratification delegates opposed to ratification districts evenly divided no returns in 1907 geographer owen libby mapped the votes of members of the state conventions that ratified the constitution.
his map showed that most delegates from seaboard or commercial farming districts which sent many delegates to the conventions supported the constitution while those from sparsely represented subsistenceoriented backcountry areas opposed it.
subsequent research has confirmed libbys socioeconomic interpretation of the voting patterns in north and south carolina and in massachusetts.
however other states delegates were influenced by different factors.
for example in georgia delegates from all regions voted for ratification.
chapter 6 rights.
by a close vote of 187 to 168 the federalists carried the day.
spring brought federalist victories in maryland south carolina and new hampshire reaching the nine state quota required for ratification.
but it took the powerful arguments advanced in the federalist and more promises of a bill of rights to secure the constitutions adoption in the essential states of virginia and new york.
the votes were again close 89 to 79 in virginia and 30 to 27 in new york.
testifying to their respect for popular sovereignty and majority rule most americans accepted the verdict of the ratifying conventions.
a decided majority of the new hampshire assembly had opposed the new system reported joshua atherton but now they said it is adopted let us try it in virginia patrick henry vowed to submit as a quiet citizen and fight for amendments in a constitutional way unlike in france where the revolution of 1789 divided the society into irreconcilable factions for generations the american constitutional revolution of 1787 created a national republic that enjoyed broad popular support.
federalists celebrated their triumph by organizing great processions in the seaport cities.
by marching in an orderly fashion in conscious contrast to the riotous revolutionary mobs federalist minded citizens affirmed their allegiance to a self governing but elite ruled republican nation.
chapter review summary in this chapter we examined the unfolding of two related sets of events.
the first was the war between britain and its rebellious colonies that began in 1776 and ended in 1783.
the two great battles of saratoga 1777 and yorktown 1781 determined the outcome of that conflict.
surprisingly given the military might of the british empire both were american victories.
these triumphs testify to the determination of george washington the resilience of the continental army and support for the patriot cause from hundreds of local militias and tens of thousands of taxpaying citizens.
this popular support reflected the patriots second success building effective institutions of republican government.
these elected institutions of local and state governance evolved out of colonial era town meetings and representative assemblies.
they were defined in the state constitutions written between 1776 and 1781 and their principles informed the first national constitution the articles of confederation.
despite the challenges posed by conflicts over suffrage womens rights and fiscal policy these self governing political institutions carried the new republic successfully through the war torn era and laid the foundation for the constitution of 1787 the national charter that endures today.
c h a p t e r r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
key terms identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events battle of long island 1776 p 184 battle of saratoga 1777 p 187 valley forge p 189 philipsburg proclamation p 190 battle of yorktown 1781 p 195 currency tax p 196 treaty of paris of 1783 p 196 pennsylvania constitution of 1776 p 198 key people mixed government p 198 articles of confederation p 200 northwest ordinance of 1787 p 201 shayss rebellion p 204 virginia plan p 205 new jersey plan p 206 federalists p 207 antifederalists p 207 federalist no.
10 p 210 general george washington p 184 general william howe p 184 general horatio gates p 187 robert morris p 188 baron von steuben p 189 judith sargent murray p 199 james madison p 205 part 3 chapter review review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapters main ideas.
what were the principal reasons that great britain despite its enormous military advantages lost the war for independence.
the war had wrenching effects on the american economy.
what economic problems became especially acute during wartime.
how did the states and the second continental congress attempt to address them.
making connections resent the true spirit of the american revolution.
which of these competing visions of national identity do you think was right.
consider the events listed under work exchange and technology and politics and power for the period 1776 1787 on the thematic timeline on page 149.
how did war debt and inflation influence the development of political institutions during these years.
thematic understanding recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.
in chapter 5 we saw the way that protests against imperial policy grew until colonists chose to declare their independence rather than submit to parliaments authority.
by 1787 the problems created by the revolutionary war forced leaders of the newly independent states to consider plans for their own powerful central government.
what problems led nationalists to believe such a step was necessary.
how did antifederalists draw on revolutionary ideas to make their case against the constitution.
what claims did nationalists make in response to dampen antifederalist fears.
across time and place more to explore 3.
federalists and antifederalists both claimed to rep look again at map 6 5 on page 202 showing western land claims in the 1780s.
if these claims had not been ceded to the continental congress what would have been the likely result.
why was it so important to the survival of the confederation that individual states give up their claims to these western lands.
visual evidence start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.
colin g calloway the american revolution in indian country 1995.
tracks the experiences of numerous native american communities in the revolution.
saul cornell the other founders 1999.
explores the ideas and legacy of the antifederalists.
john c dann ed the revolution remembered 1980.
contains vivid eyewitness accounts of the revolution.
pauline maier ratification 2010.
a compelling narrative of the debate over the constitution.
michael mcdonnell the politics of war 2007.
a penetrating account of virginias mobilization for war.
leonard richards shayss rebellion 2003.
a persuasive interpretation of the rebellions participants and motives.
chapter 6 timeline chapter review ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
second continental congress declares independence howe forces washington to retreat from new york and new jersey pennsylvania approves democratic state constitution john adams publishes thoughts on government articles of confederation create central government howe occupies philadelphia september gates defeats burgoyne at saratoga october franco american alliance february lord north seeks political settlement congress rejects negotiations british adopt southern strategy british capture savannah december 1778 1781 severe inflation of continental currency british and american forces battle in georgia clinton seizes charleston may french troops land in rhode island cornwallis invades virginia april surrenders at yorktown october states finally ratify articles of confederation treaty of paris september 3 officially ends war 1784 1785 congress enacts political and land ordinances for new states nationalists hold convention in annapolis maryland shayss rebellion roils massachusetts congress passes northwest ordinance constitutional convention in philadelphia 1787 1788 jay madison and hamilton write the federalist eleven states ratify u s constitution key turning points gates defeats burgoyne at saratoga 1777 the franco american alliance 1778 and cornwallis surrenders at yorktown 1781.
how were these three events linked.
how important was the french alliance to the patriot victory.
hammering out a federal republic 1787 1820 c h a p t e r the political crisis of the 1790s the federalists implement the constitution hamiltons financial program jeffersons agrarian vision the french revolution divides americans the rise of political parties a republican empire is born sham treaties and indian lands migration and the changing farm economy the jefferson presidency jefferson and the west the war of 1812 and the transformation of politics conflict in the atlantic and the west the war of 1812 the federalist legacy l ike an earthquake the american identify the big idea revolution shook the european what was required to make the monarchical order and its afterunited states a strong viable indeshocks reverberated for decades.
by crependent republic in its early years ating a new republic based on the rights of and how did debates over the conthe individual the north americans introstitution shape relations between duced a new force into the world the the national government and the eminent german historian leopold von states.
ranke warned the king of bavaria in 1854 a force that might cost the monarch his throne.
before 1776 a king who ruled by the grace of god had been the center around which everything turned.
now the idea emerged that power should come from below from the people other republican inspired upheavals englands puritan revolution of the 1640s and the french revolution of 1789 ended in political chaos and military rule.
similar fates befell many latin american republics that won independence from spain in the early nineteenth century.
but the american states escaped both anarchy and dictatorship.
having been raised in a radical whig political culture that viewed standing armies and powerful generals as instruments of tyranny general george washington left public life in 1783 to manage his plantation astonishing european observers but bolstering the authority of elected patriot leaders.
tis a conduct so novel american painter john trumbull reported from london that it is inconceivable to people here the great task of fashioning representative republican governments absorbed the energy and intellect of an entire generation and was rife with conflict.
seeking to perpetuate the elite led polity of the colonial era federalists celebrated natural aristocrats such as washington and condemned the radical republicanism of the french revolution.
in response jefferson and his republican followers claimed the fourth of july as their holiday and we the people as their political language.
there was a grand democrat procession in town on the 4th of july came a report from baltimore all the farmers tanners black smiths shoemakers etc.
were there.
and afterwards they went to a grand feast many people of high status worried that the new state governments were too attentive to the demands of such ordinary workers and their families.
when considering a bill connecticut conservative ezra stiles grumbled every elected official instantly thinks how it will affect his constituents rather than how it would enhance the general welfare.
what stiles criticized as irresponsible however most americans welcomed.
the concerns of ordinary citizens were now paramount and traditional elites trembled.
an emblem of america 1800 in the first years of independence citizens of the united states searched for a symbolic representation of their new nation.
this engraving shows many of the choices should the symbol of america have an ideological meaning as in the goddess of liberty.
or should it enshrine national heroes as in the stone memorial to washington.
or should americas symbol be found among its unique features such as niagara falls pictured in the background or the presence of africans and indians as represented by the black youth to the right and the spear brandishing figure in front of the falls.
or finally should its symbol be the national flag.
courtesy of the john carter brown library at brown university.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 the political crisis of the 1790s the final decade of the eighteenth century brought fresh challenges for american politics.
the federalists split into two factions over financial policy and the french revolution and their leaders alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson offered contrasting visions of the future.
would the united states remain an agricultural nation governed by local officials as jefferson hoped.
or would hamiltons vision of a strong national government and an economy based on manufacturing become reality.
the federalists implement the constitution the constitution expanded the dimensions of political life by allowing voters to choose national leaders as well as local and state officials.
the federalists swept the election of 1788 winning forty four seats in the house of representatives only eight antifederalists won election.
as expected members of the electoral college chose george washington as president.
john adams received the second highest number of electoral votes and became vice president.
devising the new government once the military savior of his country washington now became its political father.
at age fifty seven the first president possessed great personal dignity and a cautious personality.
to maintain continuity he adopted many of the administrative practices of the confederation and asked congress to reestablish the existing executive departments foreign affairs state finance treasury and war.
to head the department of state washington chose thomas jefferson a fellow virginian and an experienced diplomat.
for secretary of the treasury he turned to alexander hamilton a lawyer and his former military aide.
the president designated jefferson hamilton and secretary of war henry knox as his cabinet or advisory body.
the constitution mandated a supreme court but the philadelphia convention gave congress the task of creating a national court system.
the federalists wanted strong national institutions and the judiciary act of 1789 reflected their vision.
the act established a federal district court in each state and three circuit courts to hear appeals from the districts with the supreme court having the final say.
the judiciary act also specified that cases arising in state courts that involved federal laws could be appealed to the supreme court.
this provision ensured that federal judges would have the final say on the meaning of the constitution.
the bill of rights the federalists kept their promise to add a declaration of rights to the constitution.
james madison now a member of the house of representatives submitted nineteen amendments to the first congress by 1791 ten had been approved by congress and ratified by the states.
these ten amendments known as the bill of rights safeguard fundamental personal rights including freedom of speech and religion and mandate legal procedures such as trial by jury.
by protecting individual citizens the amendments eased antifederalists fears of an oppressive national government and secured the legitimacy of the constitution.
they also addressed the issue of federalism the proper balance between the authority of the national and state governments.
but that question was constantly contested until the civil war and remains important today.
hamiltons financial program george washingtons most important decision was choosing alexander hamilton as secretary of the treasury.
an ambitious self made man of great intelligence hamilton married into the schuyler family influential hudson river valley landowners and was a prominent lawyer in new york city.
at the philadelphia convention he condemned the democratic spirit and called for an authoritarian government and a president with near monarchical powers.
as treasury secretary hamilton devised bold policies to enhance national authority and to assist financiers and merchants.
he outlined his plans in three pathbreaking reports to congress on public credit january 1790 on a national bank december 1790 and on manufactures december 1791.
these reports outlined a coherent program of national mercantilism government assisted economic development.
public credit redemption and assumption the financial and social implications of hamiltons report on the public credit made it instantly controversial.
hamilton asked congress to redeem at face value the 55 million in confederation securities held by foreign and domestic investors figure 7 1.
his reasons were simple as an underdeveloped nation the united states needed good credit to secure loans from dutch and chapter 5 the problem of empire 1763 1776 chapter 6 making war and republican governments 1776 1789 chapter 7 hammering out a federal republic 1787 1820 chapter 8 creating a republican culture 1790 1820 the american war is over philadelphia patriot benjamin rush declared in 1787 but this is far from being the case with the american revolution.
on the contrary nothing but the first act of the great drama is closed.
it remains yet to establish and perfect our new forms of government the changes that had already unfolded since 1763 were revolutionary in themselves britain had triumphed in the great war for empire only to see its american empire unravel and descend into war.
against all odds the thirteen rebelling colonies had pulled together and won their independence now they were forming a federal republic that would take its place among the nations of the world.
the republican revolution extended far beyond politics.
it challenged many of the values and institutions that had prevailed for centuries in europe and the atlantic world.
after 1776 americans reconsidered basic assumptions that structured their societies cultures families and communities.
here in summary are the three principal developments discussed in part 3 from british north america to the united states of america challenges to the social order after violently rejecting attempts to reform the british empire the patriots won independence and began constructing republican governments.
their experiments extended across an entire generation and it took still longer to decide how much power the federal republic should wield over the states.
the political culture spawned by the revolution was similarly unformed and slow to develop.
political parties for example were unanticipated by the founders and at first widely regarded as illegitimate.
however by 1820 they had become central to the adjudication of political conflict heightening some forms of competition while blunting others.
the united states also fought wars with native americans in the trans appalachian west to gain new territory and with great britain to ensure its independence.
across three generations american political culture was transformed national borders were secured and republican national and state governments commanded the allegiance of their citizens.
as patriots articulated values they associated with independence they aligned their movement with currents of reform eddying through the atlantic world antislavery womens rights religious liberty social equality.
each of these ideas was controversial and the american revolution endorsed none of them in an unqualified way.
but its idealism the sense that the revolution marked a memorable epoch in the annals of the human race as john adams put it made the era malleable and full of possibility.
legislatures abolished slavery in the north broadened religious liberty by allowing freedom of conscience and except in new england ended the system of legally established churches.
postwar evangelicalism gave enormous energy to a new wave of innovative religious developments.
however americans continued to argue over social equality in part because their republican creed placed family authority in the hands of men and political power in the hands of propertied individuals this arrangement denied power and status not only to slaves but also to free blacks women and middling and poor white men.
though the revolutions legacy was mixed its meaning would be debated for decades in american public life.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 conquest competition and consolidation thematic understanding one uncontested value of the revolutionary era was a commitment to economic opportunity.
to achieve this people migrated in large numbers and the united states dramatically expanded its boundaries first by conquest pushing west to the mississippi river then by purchase all the way to the pacific ocean.
northern merchants created a banking system and organized rural manufacturing.
state governments used charters and other privileges to assist businesses and to improve infrastructure.
southern planters used slaves to grow a new staple crop cotton.
many yeomen farm families moved west to farm and eastern laborers worked in burgeoning manufacturing enterprises.
by 1820 the young american republic was on the verge of achieving economic as well as political independence.
even as the borders of the united states expanded its diversity inhibited the effort to define an american culture and identity.
native americans still lived in their own clans and nations black americans were developing a distinct african american culture and white americans were enmeshed in vigorous regional ethnic communities.
over time political institutions began to unite americans of diverse backgrounds as did increasing participation in the market economy and in evangelical protestant churches.
by 1820 to be an american meant for many members of the dominant white population to be a republican a protestant and an enterprising individual.
this timeline arranges some of the important events of this period into themes.
consider the items listed under the theme ideas beliefs and culture how did the american revolution challenge existing social arrangements.
consider the role of religion in american life the status of women and the institution of slavery.
what tensions developed as a result of those challenges.
work exchange technology merchants defy sugar and stamp acts patriots mount three boycotts of british goods in 1765 1767 and 1774 peopling politics power migration into the ohio valley after pontiacs rebellion quebec act 1774 allows catholicism ideas beliefs culture stamp act congress 1765 patriots call for american unity first continental congress 1774 the idea of natural rights poses a challenge to the institution of chattel slavery second continental congress 1775 identity concept of popular sovereignty gains force in the colonies colonists lay claim to rights of englishmen boycotts spur patriot women to make textiles manufacturing expands during the war cutoff of trade and severe inflation threaten economy war debt grows declining immigration from europe 1775 1820 enhances american identity african american slaves seek freedom through military service the declaration of independence 1776 states adopt republican constitutions 1776 on articles of confederation ratified 1781 treaty of paris 1783 bank of north america founded 1781 land speculation increases in the west state cessions land ordinances and indian wars create national domain in the west the alien act makes it harder for immigrants to become citizens and allow for deporting aliens 1798 cotton output and demand for african labor expands farm productivity improves embargo encourages u s manufacturing second bank of the united states chartered 1816 1836 suffrage for white men expands new jersey retracts suffrage for propertied women 1807 atlantic slave trade ends 1808 american colonization society founded 1817 u s constitution drafted 1787 conflict over alexander hamiltons economic policies first national parties federalists and republicans judith sargent murray publishes on the equality of the sexes 1779 emancipation of slaves begins in the north virginia enacts religious freedom 1786 politicians and ministers deny vote to women praise republican motherhood bill of rights ratified 1791 sedition act limits freedom of the press 1798 jefferson reduces activism of national government free blacks enhance sense of african american identity chief justice marshall asserts federal judicial powers religious benevolence engenders social reform movements triumph of republican party and end of federalist party thomas paines common sense 1776 causes colonists to rethink political loyalties states rely on property qualifications to define citizenship rights in their new constitutions indians form western confederacy 1790 second great awakening 1790 1860 emerging political divide between south and north tenskwatawa and tecumseh revive western indian confederacy war of 1812 tests national unity state constitutions democratized supreme court guards property part 1 part 3 thematic timeline 1763 1820 transformations of north america 1450 1700 the problem of empire 1763 1776 c h a p t e r an empire transformed the costs of empire george grenville and the reform impulse an open challenge the stamp act the dynamics of rebellion 1765 1770 formal protests and the politics of the crowd the ideological roots of resistance another kind of freedom parliament and patriots square off again the problem of the west parliament wavers the road to independence 1771 1776 a compromise repudiated the continental congress responds the rising of the countryside loyalists and neutrals violence east and west lord dunmores war armed resistance in massachusetts the second continental congress organizes for war thomas paines common sense independence declared i n june 1775 the city of new york identif y the big idea faced a perplexing dilemma.
word consider whether the collapse of arrived that george washington who british authority in the thirteen had just been named commander in chief rebellious colonies might have of the newly formed continental army been avoided through compromise was coming to town.
but on the same measures and more astute leaderday william tryon the colonys crownship.
was colonial independence appointed governor was scheduled to inevitable and was war the only return from britain.
local leaders orchesway to achieve it.
trated a delicate dance.
though the provincial congress was operating illegally in the eyes of the crown it did not wish to offend governor tryon.
it instructed the citys newly raised volunteer battalion to divide in two.
one company awaited washingtons arrival while another prepared to greet the governor.
the residue of the battalion was to be ready to receive either the general or governour tryon which ever shall first arrive washington arrived first.
he was met by nine companies of the volunteer battalion and a throng of well wishers who escorted him to his rooms in a local tavern.
many of this same crowd then crossed town to join the large group assembled to greet the governor whose ship was just landing.
the crowd met him with universal shouts of applause and accompanied him home.
this awkward moment in the history of one american city reflects a larger crisis of loyalty that plagued colonists throughout british north america in the years between 1763 and 1776.
the outcome of the great war for empire left great britain the undisputed master of eastern north america.
but that success pointed the way to catastrophe.
convinced of the need to reform the empire and tighten its administration british policymakers imposed a series of new administrative measures on the colonies.
accustomed as they were to governing their own affairs colonists could not accept these changes.
yet the bonds of loyalty were strong and the unraveling of british authority was tortuous and complex.
only gradually as militancy slowly mounted on both sides were the ties of empire broken and independence declared.
the great new york fire of 1776 in the wake of the declaration of independence general william howes first objective was to capture new york with its strategic location and excellent harbor.
patriot forces under george washingtons command attempted to defend the city but were forced into retreat and abandoned it to the british in september 1776.
early in the morning of september 21 a fire broke out near the southern tip of manhattan and burned northwestward driven by a strong wind.
as many as a quarter of the towns buildings were destroyed residents already distressed by the fighting fled into the streets with whatever possessions they could carry.
each side accused the other of arson but that charge was never proven.
miriam and ira d wallach division of art prints and photographs the new york public library.
astor lenox and tilden foundations.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 an empire transformed the great war for empire of 1756 1763 chapter 4 transformed the british empire in north america.
the british ministry could no longer let the colonies manage their own affairs while it contented itself with minimal oversight of the atlantic trade.
its interests and responsibilities now extended far into the continental interior a much more costly and complicated proposition than it had ever faced before.
and neither its american colonies nor their native american neighbors were inclined to cooperate in the transformation.
british administrators worried about their american colonists who according to former georgia governor henry ellis felt themselves entitled to a greater measure of liberty than is enjoyed by the people of england ireland had been closely ruled for decades and recently the east india company set up dominion over explain millions of non british peoples consequences map 5 1 and america compared what was the impact of p 153.
britains american posthe great war for empire on british policymakers sessions were likewise filled with and the colonies.
aliens and undesirables french dutch germans innumerable indians africans and a multitude of felons from this country as one member of parliament put it.
consequently declared lord halifax the people of england considered americans as foreigners contesting that status wealthy philadelphia lawyer john dickinson argued that his fellow colonists were not east indian sea poys nor marattas but british subjects who are born to liberty who know its worth and who prize it high thus was the stage set for a struggle between the conceptions of identity and empire held by british ministers on the one hand and many american colonists on the other.
the costs of empire the great war for empire imposed enormous costs on great britain.
the national debt soared from 75 million to 133 million and was an observer noted becoming the alarming object of every british subject by wars end interest on the debt alone consumed 60 percent of the nations budget and the ministry had to raise taxes.
during the eighteenth century taxes were shifting from land owned by the gentry and aristocracy to consumables and successive ministries became ever more ingenious in devising new ways to raise money.
excise or sales taxes were levied on all kinds of ordinary goods salt and beer bricks and candles paper in the form of a stamp tax that were consumed by middling and poor britons.
in the 1760s the per capita tax burden was 20 percent of income.
to collect the taxes the government doubled the size of the tax bureaucracy figure 5 1.
customs agents patrolled the coasts of southern britain seizing tons of contraband french wines dutch tea and flemish textiles.
convicted smugglers faced heavy penalties including death or forced transportation to america as indentured servants.
despite colonial protests nearly fifty thousand english criminals had already been shipped to america to be sold as indentured servants.
the price of empire abroad was thus larger government and higher taxes at home.
members of two british opposition parties the radical whigs and the country party complained that the huge war debt placed the nation at the mercy of the monied interests the banks and financiers who reaped millions of pounds interest from government bonds.
to reverse the growth of government and the threat to personal liberty and property rights british reformers demanded that parliament represent a broader spectrum of the property owning classes.
the radical whig john wilkes condemned rotten boroughs sparsely populated aristocratic controlled electoral districts and demanded greater representation for rapidly growing commercial and manufacturing cities.
the war thus transformed british politics.
the war also revealed how little power britain wielded in its american colonies.
in theory royal governors had extensive political powers including command of the provincial militia in reality they shared power with the colonial assemblies which outraged british officials.
the board of trade complained that in massachusetts almost every act of executive and legislative power is ordered and directed by votes and resolves of the general court to enforce the collection of trade duties which colonial merchants had evaded for decades by bribing customs officials parliament passed the revenue act of 1762.
the ministry also instructed the royal navy to seize american vessels carrying food crops from the mainland colonies to the french west indies.
it was absurd declared a british politician that french armies attempting to destroy one english province.
are actually supported by bread raised in another britains military victory brought another fundamental shift in policy a new peacetime deployment of 15 royal battalions some 7 500 troops in north america c o m pa r e d britains atlantic and asian empires the following table enumerates the economic benefits derived by great britain from its various colonies which sent a wide variety of goods to britain and also served as markets for british exports.
table 5 1 english british imports and exports annual averages in pounds sterling england 1700 01 britain 1750 51 1772 73 1789 90 imports from asia africa and america north america 372 000 877 000 1 997 000 1 351 000 the fisheries 7 000 27 000 188 000 785 000 1 484 000 3 222 000 4 045 000 24 000 43 000 80 000 87 000 775 000 1 101 000 2 203 000 3 256 000 1 956 000 3 512 000 7 529 000 8 927 000 west indies africa east indies total exports to america asia and africa north america 362 000 1 355 000 3 254 000 3 763 000 west indies 336 000 589 000 1 402 000 1 892 000 africa 145 000 188 000 777 000 799 000 east india 125 000 653 000 893 000 2 173 000 total 968 000 2 785 000 6 326 000 8 627 000 the england column shows data for england and wales britain includes scotland as well.
includes massachusetts bay maine and newfoundland by the 1760s more than 500 000 worth of fish was being sent annually to the west indies and southern europe.
source adapted from the oxford history of the british empire vol.
p j marshall oxford oxford university press 1998 101.
questions for analysis 1.
compare britains colonies in their roles as producers of british imports to their roles as consumers of british exports.
why are the mainland colonies of north america a distant third as producers of imports but ranked first as consumers of exports.
the ministers who served under george iii r 1760 1820 feared a possible rebellion by the 60 000 french residents of canada britains newly conquered colony map 5 2.
native americans were also a concern pontiacs rebellion had nearly overwhelmed 2.
how did the american revolution 1776 1783 impact the economic relationship between great britain and its mainland colonies.
is it reasonable to conclude that political independence did not bring economic independence.
britains frontier forts.
moreover only a substantial military force would deter land hungry whites from defying the proclamation of 1763 and settling west of the appalachian mountains see chapter 4.
finally british politicians worried about the colonists loyalty a ian uis o l new orleans georgia florida br.
1763 83 s e recife rio de janeiro bahia 1 000 1 000 2 000 kilometers 2 000 miles capetown angola lagos benin beira china bengal canton pacific ocean formosa japan runion sumatra british control c 1770 french control c 1770 dutch control c 1770 indian ocean fort dauphin ceylon new guinea new holland timor portuguese control spanish control russian empire in 1763 java indonesia moluccas calcutta macau diu daman rangoon da nang philippines india bombay manila goa annam madras persia madagascar mauritius mozambique mombasa mogadishu ethiopia ottoman empire russian empire by 1770 the western european nations that had long dominated maritime trade had created vast colonial empires and spheres of influence.
spain controlled the western halves of north and south america portugal owned brazil and holland ruled indonesia.
britain a newer imperial power boasted settler societies in north america rich sugar islands in the west indies slave ports in west africa and a growing presence on the indian subcontinent.
only france had failed to acquire and hold on to a significant colonial empire.
to trace changes in empire and trade routes see map 1 4 on p 24 and map 2 2 on p.
1763 65 br.
1765 70 sp.
1770 falkland islands rio de buenos aires la plata brazil 1630 54 dutch brazil bordeaux poland france seville accra lisbon cdiz canary atlantic is.
cayenne eurasian trade and european colonies c 1770 map 5 1 w n pacific ocean spanish transcontinental route peru granada surinam bristol st malo portugal spain ocean bahamas cuba santo domingo veracruz jamaica acapulco st louis lesser antilles haiti fr.
gore curaao belize fort new trinidad james porto bello new spain newfoundland montreal st pierre boston miquelon philadelphia new york jamestown quebec great sweden britain denmark den.
iceland part 3 canada den.
greenland revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 chapter 5 the problem of empire 1763 1776 figure 5 1 the cost of empire 1690 1790 it cost money to build and maintain an empire.
as britain built a great navy subsidized the armies of european allies and fought four wars against france and spain between 1702 and 1783 military expenditures soared.
tax revenues did not keep pace so the government created a large national debt by issuing bonds for millions of pounds.
this policy created a class of wealthy financiers led to political protests and eventually prompted attempts to tax the american colonists.
military spending civil spending net tax income sterling millions american war of independence 1775 1783 war of the spanish succession 1702 1713 seven years war 1756 1763 war of the austrian succession 1740 1748 now that they no longer faced a threat from french canada.
the cost of stationing these troops estimated at 225 000 per year compounded britains fiscal crisis and it seemed clear that the burden had to be shared by the colonies.
they had always managed their own finances but the kings ministers agreed that parliament could no longer let them off the hook for the costs of empire.
the greatest gains from the war had come in north america where the specter of french encirclement had finally been lifted and the greatest new postwar expenses were being incurred in north america as well.
george grenville and the reform impulse the challenge of raising revenue from the colonies fell first to george grenville.
widely regarded as one of the ablest men in great britain grenville understood the need for far reaching imperial reform.
he first passed the currency act of 1764 which banned the american colonies from using paper money as legal tender.
colonial shopkeepers planters and farmers had used local currency which was worth less than british pounds sterling to pay their debts to british merchants.
the currency act ensured that merchants would no longer be paid in money printed in the colonies boosting their profits and british wealth.
the sugar act grenville also won parliamentary approval of the sugar act of 1764 to replace the widely ignored molasses act of 1733 see chapter 3.
the earlier act had set a tax rate of 6 pence per gallon on french molasses a rate so high that it made the trade unprofitable.
rather than pay it colonial merchants bribed customs officials at the going rate of 1 5 pence per gallon.
grenville settled on a duty of 3 pence per gallon which merchants could pay and still turn a profit and then tightened customs enforcement so that it could actually be collected.
this carefully crafted policy garnered little support in america.
new england merchants among them john hancock of boston had made their fortunes smuggling french molasses.
in 1754 boston merchants paid customs duties on a mere 400 hogsheads of molasses yet they imported 40 000 hogsheads for use by 63 massachusetts rum distilleries.
publicly the merchants claimed that the sugar act would ruin the distilling industry privately they vowed to evade the duty by smuggling or by bribing officials.
the end of salutary neglect more important colonists raised constitutional objections to the sugar act.
in massachusetts the leader of the assembly argued that the new legislation was contrary to a fundamental principall of our constitution that all taxes ought to originate with the people in rhode island governor stephen hopkins warned they who are taxed at part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 the treaty of paris allowed the british run hudsons bay company to expand its territory and influence.
hudson bay hudson s bay company newfoundland maine part of mass.
quebec m n y s pa n i s h louisiana tio n l ine britain gained much more american territory from the treaty of paris 1763 than it had from the treaty of utrecht 1713.
the new treaty gave britain control of spanish florida and all of new france east of the mississippi river.
o pr nova scotia at l a n t i c ocean r i conn n j del.
british colonies comparisons va royal n c.
proprietary corporate population average annual white black exports in 1770 in 1770 s c ga 40 000 west indian islands 600 000 southern mainland northern mainland 1 092 000 flor ida ba h a 330 000 394 000 45 000 exports per white shillings 1 856 000 1 703 776 1 105 376 928s.
20 shillings 1 one english pound 1 about 400 in 2010 prices.
m as r b gulf of mexico n santo domingo sp.
guadeloupe cuba fr.
belize jamaica st dominique br.
puerto rico sp.
caribbean sea e w martinique s fr.
barbados br.
in 1763 west indian sugar was still britains primary colonial export crop but its value was now less than the combined worth of the tobacco rice and flour exported from the mainland colonies.
500 miles 500 kilometers map 5 2 britains american empire in 1763 the treaty of paris gave britain control of the eastern half of north america and returned a few captured sugar islands in the west indies to france.
to protect the empires new mainland territories british ministers dispatched troops to florida and quebec.
they also sent troops to uphold the terms of the proclamation of 1763 which prohibited anglo american settlement west of the appalachian mountains.
pleasure by others cannot possibly have any property and they who have no property can have no freedom the sugar act raised other constitutional issues as well.
merchants prosecuted under the act would be tried in vice admiralty courts tribunals governing the high seas and run by british appointed judges.
previously merchants accused of navigation acts violations were tried by local common law courts where friendly juries often acquitted them.
the sugar act closed this legal loophole by extending the jurisdiction of the viceadmiralty courts to all customs offenses.
the sugar act revived old american fears.
the influential virginia planter richard bland emphasized that the american colonists were not sent out to be the slaves but to be the equals of those that remained behind john adams the young massachusetts lawyer defending john hancock on a charge of smuggling to see a longer excerpt of the richard bland document along with other primary sources from this period see sources for americas history.
chapter 5 argued that the vice admiralty courts diminished this equality by degrad ing every american.
below the rank of an englishman in fact accused smugglers in britain were also tried in vice admiralty courts so there was no discrimination against americans.
the real issue was the growing power of the british state.
americans had lived for decades under an administrative policy of salutary neglect.
now they saw that the new imperial regime would deprive them of some of their most essential rights as british subjects as a committee of the massachusetts assembly put it.
in response royal governor francis bernard replied the rule that a british subject shall not be bound by laws or liable to taxes but what he has consented to by his representatives must be confined to the inhabitants of great britain only to bernard grenville and other imperial reformers americans were second class subjects of the king with rights limited by the navigation acts parliamentary laws and british interests.
an open challenge the stamp act another new tax the stamp act of 1765 sparked the first great imperial crisis.
the new levy was to cover part of the cost of keeping british troops in america which turned out to be 385 000 a year about 150 million today 70 percent more than the initial estimate.
grenville hoped the stamp act would raise 60 000 per year.
the act would require a tax stamp on all printed items from college diplomas court documents land titles and contracts to newspapers almanacs and playing cards.
it was ingeniously designed.
like its counterpart in england it bore more heavily on the rich since it charged only a penny a sheet for newspapers and other common items but up to 10 for a lawyers license.
it also required no new bureaucracy stamped paper would be delivered to colonial ports and sold to printers in lieu of unstamped stock.
benjamin franklin agent of the pennsylvania assembly proposed a different solution american representation in parliament.
if you chuse to tax us he wrote give us members in your legislature and let us be one people with the exception of william pitt british politicians rejected franklins idea as too radical.
they argued that the colonists already had virtual representation in parliament because some of its members were transatlantic merchants and west indian sugar planters.
colonial leaders were equally skeptical of franklins plan.
americans were situate at a great distance from their mother country the connecticut the problem of empire 1763 1776 assembly declared and therefore cannot participate in the general legislature of the nation asserting the right of parliament to lay an internal tax upon the colonies the house of commons ignored american opposition and passed the act by an overwhelm understand ing majority of 205 to 49.
at points of view the request of general thomas why did most british and gage the british military com colonial leaders reject mander in america parliament the idea that the colonies also passed the quartering act should be represented in parliament.
of 1765 which required colonial governments to provide barracks and food for british troops.
finally parliament approved grenvilles proposal that violations of the stamp act be tried in vice admiralty courts.
using the doctrine of parliamentary supremacy grenville had begun to fashion a centralized imperial system in america much like that already in place in ireland british officials would govern the colonies with little regard for the local assemblies.
consequently the prime ministers plan provoked a constitutional confrontation on the specific issues of taxation jury trials and military quartering as well as on the general question of representative self government.
the dynamics of rebellion 1765 1770 in the name of reform grenville had thrown down the gauntlet to the americans.
the colonists had often resisted unpopular laws and aggressive governors but they had faced an all out attack on their institutions only once before in 1686 when james ii had unilaterally imposed the dominion of new england.
now the danger to colonial autonomy was even greater because both the king and parliament backed reform.
but the patriots as the defenders of american rights came to be called met the challenge posed by grenville and his successor charles townshend.
they organized protests formal and informal violent as well as peaceful and fashioned a compelling ideology of resistance.
formal protests and the politics of the crowd virginias house of burgesses was the first formal body to complain.
in may 1765 hotheaded young patrick henry denounced grenvilles legislation and attacked part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 protesting the stamp act in portsmouth new hampshire throughout the colonies disciplined mobs protesting the stamp act forced stamp distributors to resign their offices.
in this engraving protesters in the small city of portsmouth new hampshire stone an effigy of the distributor as other members of the mob carry off a coffin representing the death of american liberty illustration from interesting events in the history of the u s by j w barber 1829 picture research consultants archives.
george iii for supporting it.
he compared the king to charles i whose tyranny had led to his overthrow and execution in the 1640s.
these remarks which bordered on treason frightened the burgesses nonetheless they condemned the stamp acts manifest tendency to destroy american freedom in massachusetts james otis another republican minded firebrand persuaded the house of representatives to call a meeting of all the mainland colonies to implore relief from the act.
the stamp act congress nine assemblies sent delegates to the stamp act congress which met in new york city in october 1765.
the congress protested the loss of american rights and liberties especially the right to trial by jury.
and it challenged the constitutionality of both the stamp and sugar acts by declaring that only the colonists elected representatives could tax them.
still moderate minded delegates wanted compromise not confrontation.
they assured parliament that americans glory in being subjects of the best of kings and humbly petitioned for repeal of the stamp act.
other influential americans favored active but peaceful resistance they organized a boycott of british goods.
crowd actions popular opposition also took a violent form however.
when the stamp act went into effect on november 1 1765 compare and disciplined mobs demanded the contrast resignation of stamp tax collecwhy did the stamp act tors.
in boston a group calling arouse so much more resisitself the sons of liberty burned tance than the sugar act.
an effigy of collector andrew oliver and then destroyed olivers new brick warehouse.
two weeks later bostonians attacked the house of lieutenant governor thomas hutchinson olivers brother in law and a prominent defender of imperial authority breaking his furniture looting his wine cellar and setting fire to his library.
wealthy merchants and patriot lawyers such as john hancock and john adams encouraged the mobs which were usually led by middling artisans and minor merchants.
in new york city nearly three thousand shopkeepers artisans laborers and seamen marched through the streets breaking windows and crying liberty resistance to the stamp act spread far beyond the port cities in nearly every colony angry crowds the rabble their detractors called them intimidated royal officials.
near wethersfield connecticut five hundred farmers seized tax collector jared ingersoll and forced him to resign his office in the cause of the people the motives of the crowd such crowd actions were common in both britain and america and protesters had many motives.
roused by the great awakening evangelical protestants resented arrogant british military officers and corrupt royal bureaucrats.
in new england where rioters invoked the antimonarchy sentiments of their great grandparents an anonymous letter sent to a boston newspaper promising to save all the freeborn sons of america was signed oliver cromwell the english republican revolutionary of the 1650s.
in new york city sons of liberty leaders isaac sears and alexander mcdougall were minor merchants and radical whigs who feared chapter 5 that imperial reform would undermine political liberty.
the mobs also included apprentices day laborers and unemployed sailors young men with their own notions of liberty who especially if they had been drinking were quick to resort to violence.
nearly everywhere popular resistance nullified the stamp act.
fearing an assault on fort george new york lieutenant governor cadwallader colden called on general gage to use his small military force to protect the stamps.
gage refused.
fire from the fort might disperse the mob but it would not quell them he told colden and the result would be an insurrection the commencement of civil war the tax was collected in barbados and jamaica but frightened collectors resigned their offices in all thirteen colonies that would eventually join in the declaration of independence.
this popular insurrection gave a democratic cast to the emerging patriot movement.
nothing is wanting but your own resolution declared a new york rioter for great is the authority and power of the people the ideological roots of resistance some americans couched their resistance in constitutional terms.
many were lawyers or well educated merchants and planters.
composing pamphlets of remarkable political sophistication they gave the resistance movement its rationale its political agenda and its leaders.
patriot writers drew on three intellectual traditions.
the first was english common law the centuries old body of legal rules and procedures that protected the lives and property of the monarchs subjects.
in the famous writs of assistance case of 1761 boston lawyer james otis invoked english legal precedents to challenge open ended search warrants.
in demanding a jury trial for john hancock in the late 1760s john adams appealed to the magna carta 1215 the ancient document that said adams has for many centuries been esteemed by englishmen as one of the.
firmest bulwarks of their liberties other lawyers protested that new strictures violated specific liberties and privileges granted in colonial charters or embodied in britains ancient constitution enlightenment rationalism provided patriots with a second important intellectual resource.
virginia planter thomas jefferson and other patriots drew on the writings of john locke who had argued that all individuals possessed certain natural rights life liberty and property that governments must protect see chapter 4.
and they turned to the works of the problem of empire 1763 1776 french philosopher montesquieu who had maintained that a separation of powers among government departments prevented arbitrary rule.
the republican and whig strands of the english political tradition provided a third ideological source for american patriots.
puritan new england had long venerated the commonwealth era 1649 1660 when england had been a republic see chapter 2.
after the glorious revolution of 1688 1689 many colonists praised the english whigs for creating a constitutional monarchy that prevented the king from imposing taxes and other measures.
joseph warren a physician and a radical whig patriot suggested that the stamp act was part of a ministerial plot to force the colonies into rebellion and justify the use of military power to reduce them to servitude john dickinsons letters from a farmer in pennsylvania 1768 urged colonists to remember your ancestors and your posterity and oppose parliamentary taxes.
the letters circulated widely and served as an early call to resistance.
if parliament could tax the colonies without their consent he wrote our boasted liberty is but a sound and nothing else such arguments widely publicized in newspapers and pamphlets gave intellectual substance to the patriot movement and turned a series of impromptu riots tax protests and boycotts of british manufactures into a formidable political force.
another kind of freedom we are taxed without our own consent dickinson wrote in one of his letters.
we are therefore slaves as patriot writers argued that taxation without representation made colonists the slaves of parliament many including benjamin franklin in philadelphia and james otis in massachusetts also began to con compare and demn the institution of chattel contrast slavery itself as a violation of why were southerners slaves natural rights.
african more threatened by chalamericans made the connection lenges to the institution of as well.
in massachusetts slaves slavery than northerners.
submitted at least four petitions to the legislature asking that slavery be abolished.
as one petition noted slaves have in common with other men a natural right to be free and without molestation to enjoy such property as they may acquire by their industry in the southern colonies where slaves constituted half or more of the population and the economy depended on their servitude the quest for freedom part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 alarmed slaveholders.
in november 1773 a group of virginia slaves hoped to win their freedom by supporting british troops that they heard would soon arrive in the colony.
their plan was uncovered and as james madison wrote proper precautions were taken to prevent the infection from spreading.
he fully understood how important it was to defend the colonists liberties without allowing the idea of natural rights to undermine the institution of slavery.
it is prudent he wrote such things should be concealed as well as suppressed throughout the revolution the quest for african american rights and liberties would play out alongside that of the colonies but unlike national independence the liberation of african americans would not be fulfilled for many generations.
parliament and patriots square off again phillis wheatley born in west africa and enslaved as a child phillis wheatley was purchased by boston merchant and tailor john wheatley when she was eight.
tutored by wheatleys children phillis learned to read english greek and latin by the age of twelve.
this engraving which pictures her at a writing desk was the frontispiece for her poems on various subjects religious and moral 1773 which was praised by george washington and gained attention in both britain and the colonies.
freed upon the death of her master wheatley married john peters a free black man.
he was later imprisoned for debt forcing wheatley to take employment as a maid.
she died in 1784 at age thirty one none of her three children survived infancy.
library of congress.
table 5 2 ministerial instability in britain 1760 1782 leading minister dates of ministry american policy lord bute 1760 1763 mildly reformist george grenville 1763 1765 ardently reformist lord rockingham 1765 1766 accommodationist william pitt charles townshend 1766 1770 ardently reformist lord north 1770 1782 coercive when news of the stamp act riots and the boycott reached britain parliament was already in turmoil.
disputes over domestic policy had led george iii to dismiss grenville as prime minister table 5 2.
however grenvilles allies demanded that imperial reform continue if necessary at gunpoint.
the british legislature declared chief justice sir james mansfield has authority to bind every part and every subject whether such subjects have a right to vote or not yet a majority in parliament was persuaded that the stamp act was cutting deeply into british exports and thus doing more harm than good.
the avenues of trade are all shut up a bristol merchant told parliament we have no remittances and are at our witts end for want of money to fulfill our engagements with our tradesmen grenvilles successor the earl of rockingham forged a compromise.
to mollify the colonists and help british merchants he repealed the stamp act and reduced the duty on molasses imposed by the sugar act to a penny a gallon.
then he pacified imperial reformers and hard liners with the declaratory act of 1766 which explicitly reaffirmed parliaments full power and authority to make laws and statutes.
to bind the colonies and people of america.
in all cases whatsoever by swiftly ending the stamp act crisis rockingham hoped it would be forgotten just as quickly.
charles townshend steps in often the course of history is changed by a small event an illness a personal grudge a chance remark.
that was the case in 1767 when george iii named william pitt to head a new government.
pitt chronically ill and often absent chapter 5 the problem of empire 1763 1776 celebrating repeal this british cartoon mocking supporters of the stamp act the repeal or the funeral procession of miss americ stamp was probably commissioned by merchants trading with america.
preceded by two flag bearers george grenville the author of the legislation carries a miniature coffin representing the act to a tomb as a dog urinates on the leader of the procession.
two bales on the wharf labeled stamps from america and black cloth returnd from america testify to the failure of the act.
the granger collection new york.
from parliamentary debates left chancellor of the exchequer charles townshend in command.
pitt was sympathetic toward america townshend was not.
as a member of the board of trade townshend had sought restrictions on the colonial assemblies and strongly supported the stamp act.
in 1767 he promised to find a new source of revenue in america.
the new tax legislation the townshend act of 1767 had both fiscal and political goals.
it imposed duties on colonial imports of paper paint glass and tea that were expected to raise about 40 000 a year.
though townshend did allocate some of this revenue for american military expenses he earmarked most of it to pay the salaries of royal governors judges and other imperial officials who had always previously been paid by colonial assemblies.
now he hoped royal appointees could better enforce parliamentary laws and carry out the kings instructions.
townshend next devised the revenue act of 1767 which created a board of customs commissioners in boston and viceadmiralty courts in halifax boston philadelphia and charleston.
by using parliamentary taxes to finance imperial administration townshend intended to undermine american political institutions.
the townshend duties revived the constitutional debate over taxation.
during the stamp act crisis some americans including benjamin franklin distinguished between external and internal taxes.
they suggested that external duties on trade such as those long mandated by the navigation acts were acceptable to americans but that direct or internal taxes were not.
townshend thought this distinction was perfect nonsense but he indulged the americans and laid duties only on trade.
a second boycott and the daughters of liberty even so most colonial leaders rejected the legitimacy of townshends measures.
in february 1768 the massachusetts assembly condemned the townshend act and boston and new york merchants began a new boycott of british goods.
throughout puritan new england ministers and public officials discouraged the purchase of foreign superfluities and promoted the domestic manufacture of cloth and other necessities.
american women ordinarily excluded from public affairs became crucial to the nonimportation movement.
they reduced their households consumption of imported goods and produced large quantities of homespun cloth.
pious farmwives spun yarn at their ministers homes.
in berwick maine true daughters of liberty celebrated american products by drinking rye coffee and dining on bear venison other womens groups supported the boycott with charitable work spinning flax and wool for the needy.
just as patriot men followed tradition by joining crowd actions so womens protests reflected their customary concern for the well being of the community.
newspapers celebrated these exploits of the daughters of liberty.
one massachusetts town proudly claimed an annual output of 30 000 yards of cloth east hartford connecticut reported 17 000 yards.
this part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 surge in domestic production did not offset the loss of british imports which had averaged how did the nonimporabout 10 million yards of cloth tation movement bring annually but it brought thouwomen into the political sands of women into the public sphere.
the boycott mobilized many american men as well.
in the seaport cities the sons of liberty published the names of merchants who imported british goods and harassed their employees and customers.
by march 1769 the nonimportation movement had spread to philadelphia two months later the members of the virginia house of burgesses vowed not to buy dutied articles luxury goods or imported slaves.
reflecting colonial self confidence benjamin franklin called for a return to the pre 1763 mercantilist system repeal the laws renounce the right recall the troops refund the money and return to the old method of requisition explain consequences despite the enthusiasm of patriots nonimportation accompanied by pressure on merchants and consumers who resisted it opened fissures in colonial society.
not only royal officials but also merchants farmers and ordinary folk were subject to new forms of surveillance and coercion a pattern that would only become more pronounced as the imperial crisis unfolded.
troops to boston american resistance only increased british determination.
when the massachusetts assemblys letter opposing the townshend duties reached london lord hillsborough the secretary of state for american affairs branded it unjustifiable opposition to the constitutional authority of parliament to strengthen the hand of government in massachusetts hillsborough dispatched general thomas gage and 2 000 british troops to boston map 5 3.
once in massachusetts gage accused its leaders of treasonable and desperate resolves and edenton ladies tea party in october 1774 a group of fifty one women from edenton north carolina led by penelope barker created a local association to support a boycott of british goods.
patriots in the colonies praised the edenton tea party which was one of the first formal female political associations in north america but it was ridiculed in britain where this cartoon appeared in march 1775.
the women are given a mannish appearance and the themes of promiscuity and neglect to their female duties are suggested by the presence of a slave and an amorous man the neglected child and the urinating dog.
library of congress.
chapter 5 louisbourg.
quebec quebec.
trois rivires.
michilimackinac.
ft detroit.
ft frontenac.
ft niagara ft pitt.
halifax annapolis nova royal crown point scotia.
ticonderoga.
new york quebec.
michilimackinac.
ft frontenac.
ft niagara.
ft pitt w nova crown point scotia.
ticonderoga 11 battalions.
albany boston.
philadelphia at l a n t i c ocean ft.
prince george mobile.
charleston 2 3 companies 4 5 companies battalion 350 men gulf of me x ico.
company st augustine e w ft chartres small detachment.
charleston n s s.
ft detroit ft chartres quebec trois rivires n.
philadelphia the problem of empire 1763 1776.
pensacola at l a n t i c ocean.
st augustine 300 miles 150 300 kilometers gul f of me x ico after shy map 5 3 british troop deployments 1763 and 1775 as the imperial crisis deepened british military priorities changed.
in 1763 most british battalions were stationed in canada to deter indian uprisings and french canadian revolts.
after the stamp act riots of 1765 the british placed large garrisons in new york and philadelphia.
by 1775 eleven battalions of british regulars occupied boston the center of the patriot movement.
advised the ministry to quash this spirit at a blow in 1765 american resistance to the stamp act had sparked a parliamentary debate in 1768 it provoked a plan for military coercion.
the problem of the west at the same time that successive ministries addressed the problem of raising a colonial revenue they quarreled over how to manage the vast new inland territory about half a billion acres acquired in the treaty of paris in 1763 see chapter 4.
the proclamation line had drawn a boundary between the colonies and indian country.
the line was originally intended as a temporary barrier.
it prohibited settlement for the present and until our further pleasure be known the proclamation also created three new mainland colonies quebec east florida and west florida and thus opened new opportunities at the northern and southern extremities of british north america.
but many colonists looked west rather than north or south.
four groups in the colonies were especially interested in westward expansion.
first gentlemen who had invested in numerous land speculation companies were petitioning the crown for large land grants in the ohio country.
second officers who served in the seven years war were paid in land warrants up to 5 000 acres identify causes for field officers and some led what groups were most by george washington were interested in western exploring possible sites beyond lands and why did the appalachians.
third indian hillsborough oppose traders who had received large them.
grants from the ohio indians hoped to sell land titles.
and fourth thousands of squatters were following the roads cut to the ohio by the braddock and forbes campaigns during the seven years war to take up lands in the hope that they could later receive a title to them.
the roads are.
alive with men women children and cattle from jersey pennsylvania and maryland wrote one astonished observer thinking like a historian p 164.
all of this activity antagonized the ohio indians.
in 1770 shawnees invited hundreds of indian leaders to thinking like a historian beyond the proclamation line though the royal proclamation of 1763 called the territory between the appalachian mountains and the mississippi river indian country the reality was more complex than this phrase indicates.
the following documents illustrate some of the patterns that shaped life beyond the proclamation line between 1763 and 1776.
colonel john bradstreets thoughts on indian affairs 1764.
colonel john bradstreet led a force of british redcoats to fort niagara in response to pontiacs rebellion.
he drafted these remarks shortly afterward.
of all the savages upon the continent the most knowing the most intriguing the less useful and the greatest villains are those most conversant with the europeans and deserve most the attention of govern men t by way of correction and these are the six nations shawanese and delawares they are well acquainted with the defenceless state of the inhabitants who live on the frontiers and think they will ever have it in their power to distress and plunder them and never cease raising the jealousy of the upper nations against us by propagating amongst them such stories as make them believe the english have nothing so much at heart as the extirpation of all savages.
the apparent design of the six nations is to keep us at war with all savages but themselves that they may be employed as mediators between us and them.
william johnson to the british lords of trade 1763.
william johnson a new yorker with extensive experience in indian relations was the crowns superintendent for indian affairs in the northern colonies.
t he colonies had all along neglected to cultivate a proper understanding with the indians and from a mistaken notion have greatly dispised them without considering that it is in their power at pleasure to lay waste and destroy the frontiers.
without any exageration i look upon the northern indians to be the most formidable of any uncivilized body of people in the world.
hunting and war are their sole occupations and the one qualifies them for the other they have few wants and those are easily supplied their properties of little value consequently expeditions against them however successful cannot distress them and they have courage sufficient for their manner of fighting the nature and situation of their countrys require not more.
indians giving a talk to colonel bouquet 1766.
based on a painting by benjamin west this engraving from a book about bouquets campaign to the ohio following pontiacs rebellion depicts a meeting with delaware seneca and shawnee representatives in october 1764.
source the granger collection new york.
david joness journal 1773.
david jones was a baptist minister who traveled down the ohio river in 1772 and 1773.
his journal offers a compelling glimpse of life in the valleys trading communities.
friday january 22 in company with mr irwine set out for chillicaathee.
here mr irwine kept an assortment of goods and for that purpose rented an house from an indian whose name is waappee monneeto often called the white devil.
went to see mr moses henry a gunsmith and trader from lancaster.
this gentleman has lived for some years in this town and is lawfully married to a white woman who was captivated so young that she speaks the language as well as any indian.
mr henry lives in a comfortable manner having plenty of good beef pork milk c chillicaathee is the chief town of the shawannee indians it is situated north of a large plain adjacent to a branch of paint creek.
this plain is their corn field which supplies great part of their town.
their houses are made of logs.
wednesday february 10.
this is a small town consisting of delawares and shawanees.
the chief is a shawanee woman who is esteemed very rich she entertains travelers there were four of us in company and for our use her negro quarter was evacuated this night which had a fire in the middle without any chimney.
this woman has a large stock and supplied us with milk.
here we also got corn for our horses at a very expensive price.
friday february 12.
we passed the delaware chief captain white eyes town.
he told me that he intended to be religious and have his children educated.
he saw that their way of living would not answer much longer game grew scarce they could not much longer pretend to live by hunting but must farm c but said he could not attend to matters of religion now for he intended to make a great hunt down ohio and take the skins himself to philadelphia.
killbuck to the governors of pennsylvania maryland and virginia december 1771.
john killbuck jr or gelelemend a delaware headman aired grievances on behalf of ohio delaware munsie and mahican indians.
great numbers more of your people have come over the great mountains and settled throughout this country and we are sorry to tell you that several quarrels have happened between your people and ours in which people have been killed on both sides and that we now see the nations round us and your people ready to embroil in a quarrel which gives our nations great concerns as we on our parts want to live in friendship with you.
as you have always told us you have laws to govern your people by but we do not see that you have therefore brethren unless you can fall upon some method of governing your people who live between the great mountains and the ohio river and who are now very numerous it will be out of the indians power to govern their young men for we assure you the black clouds begin to gather fast in this country.
we find your people are very fond of our rich land.
we see them quarrelling every day about land and burning one anothers houses so that we do not know how soon they may come over the river ohio and drive us from our villages nor do we see you brothers take any care to stop them.
aeneas mackay to pennsylvania governor john penn april 4 1774.
mackay a magistrate of pennsylvanias westmoreland county reported on virginias effort to create a competing jurisdiction in the vicinity of pittsburgh.
dr john connolly appointed by governor dunmore as commander of the militia in pittsburgh was at the center of the controversy.
since the return of the celebrated doctor connelly from virginia last to this place which he did on the 28th of march our village is become the scene of anarchy and confusion.
the doctor now is in actual possession of the fort with a body guard of militia about him invested as we are told with both civil military power to put the virginia law in force in these parts and a considerable number of the inhabitants of these back parts of this country ready to join him on any emergency every artifice are used to seduce the people some by being promoted to civil or military employments and others with the promises of grants of lands on easy terms the giddy headed mobs are so infatuated as to suffer themselves to be carried away by these insinuating delusions.
the indians are greatly alarmed at seeing parties of armed men patrolling through our streets daily not knowing but there is hostility intended against them and their country.
sources 1 2 e b ocallaghan and berthold fernow eds documents relative to the colonial history of the state of new york 15 vols.
albany 1856 1887 7 690 694 574 4 david jones a journal of two visits made to some nations of indians on the west side of the river ohio in the years 1772 and 1773 burlington 1774 rep ny 1971 5 k g davies ed documents of the american revolution 1770 1783 19 vols.
shannon and dublin 1972 1981 3 254 255 6 samuel hazard ed pennsylvania archives series 1 12 vols.
philadelphia joseph severns co 1856 4 484 486.
analyzing the evidence 1.
john bradstreet a career british army officer based his observations source 1 on his wartime experiences in the west.
william johnson source 2 had lived in close proximity to iroquois indians for many years.
compare their views what do they agree upon and where do they differ.
charles grignions engraving source 3 appeared in print a short time after pontiacs rebellion.
how does it portray the ohio indians.
compare grignions image with the descriptions in sources 1 and 2 and john killbucks speech source 5.
what parallels or differences do you see.
what do you find most surprising about source 4.
what evidence of european influence do you see in the indian towns jones describes.
sources 5 and 6 describe the state of affairs on the upper ohio shortly before the outbreak of dunmores war.
what concerns does killbuck express.
why was virginias willingness to organize a militia so important to the residents of the region.
putting it all together using these documents and what you have learned in chapter 5 write a short essay that surveys british and anglo american attitudes toward the ohio indians and explores the contradictions between these attitudes and the reality of life in the ohio country.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 gather at the town of chillicothe on the scioto river.
there they formed the scioto confederacy which pledged to oppose any further expansion into the ohio country.
meanwhile in london the idea that the proclamation line was only temporary gave way to the view that it should be permanent.
hillsborough who became colonial secretary in 1768 adamantly opposed westward expansion believing it would antagonize the indians without benefitting the empire.
moreover he owned vast irish estates and he was alarmed by the number of tenants who were leaving ireland for america.
to preserve britains laboring class as well as control costs hillsborough wanted to make the proclamation line permanent.
for colonists who were already moving west to settle in large numbers this shift in policy caused confusion and frustration.
eventually like the patriots along the seaboard they would take matters into their own hands.
parliament wavers in britain the colonies nonimportation agreement was taking its toll.
in 1768 the colonies had cut imports of british manufactures in half by 1769 the mainland colonies had a trade surplus with britain of 816 000.
hard hit by these developments british merchants and manufacturers petitioned parliament to repeal the townshend duties.
early in 1770 lord north became prime minister.
a witty man and a skillful politician north designed a new compromise.
arguing that it was foolish to tax british exports to america thereby raising their price and decreasing consumption he persuaded parliament to repeal most of the townshend duties.
however north retained the tax on tea as a symbol of parliaments supremacy figure 5 2.
the boston massacre even as parliament was debating norths repeal events in boston guaranteed that reconciliation between patriots and parliament would be hard to achieve.
between 1 200 and 2 000 troops had been stationed in boston for a year and a half.
soldiers were also stationed in new york philadelphia several towns in new jersey and various frontier outposts in these years with a minimum of conflict or violence.
but in boston a small port town on a tiny peninsula the troops numbered 10 percent of the local population and their presence wore on the locals.
on the night of march 5 1770 a group of nine british redcoats fired into a crowd and killed five townspeople.
a subsequent trial exonerated the soldiers but bostons radical whigs convinced of a ministerial conspiracy against liberty labeled the incident a massacre and used it to rally sentiment against imperial power.
sovereignty debated when news of norths compromise arrived in the colonies in the wake of the boston massacre the reaction was mixed.
most of britains colonists remained loyal to the empire but five years of conflict had taken their toll.
in 1765 american leaders had accepted parliaments authority the stamp act resolves had opposed only certain unconstitutional legislation.
by 1770 the most outspoken patriots benjamin franklin in pennsylvania patrick henry in virginia and samuel adams in massachusetts repudiated parliamentary supremacy and claimed equality for the american assemblies within the empire.
franklin suggested that the colonies figure 5 2 imports from britain boycott periods credit crisis 4 5 repeal of townshend act 4 0 3 5 3 0 2 5 trade as a political weapon 1763 1776 exports to britain millions tea act townshend act colonial trade deficit stamp act 2 0 1 5 1 0 0 5 political upheaval did not affect the mainland colonies exports to britain which rose slightly over the period but imports fluctuated greatly.
the american boycott of 1765 1766 prompted a dip in imports but the second boycott of 1768 1770 led to a sharp drop in imports of british textiles metal goods and ceramics.
imports of manufactures soared after the repeal of the townshend duties only to plummet when the first continental congress proclaimed a third boycott in 1774.
chapter 5 the problem of empire 1763 1776 patriot propaganda silversmith paul revere issued this engraving of the confrontation between british redcoats and snowballthrowing bostonians in the days after it occurred.
to whip up opposition to the military occupation of their town revere and other patriots labeled the incident the boston massacre the shooting confirmed their radical whig belief that standing armies were instruments of tyranny.
library of congress.
were now distinct and separate states with the same head or sovereign the king franklins suggestion outraged thomas hutchinson the american born royal governor of massachusetts.
hutchinson emphatically rejected the idea of two independent legislatures in one and the same state he told the massachusetts assembly i know of no line that can be drawn between the supreme authority of parliament and the total independence of the colonies there the matter rested.
the british had twice imposed revenue acts on the colonies and american patriots had twice forced a retreat.
if parliament insisted on a policy of constitutional absolutism by imposing taxes a third time some americans were prepared to pursue violent resistance.
nor did they flinch when reminded that george iii condemned their agitation.
as the massachusetts house replied to hutchinson there is more reason to dread the consequences trace change of absolute uncontrolled supreme over time power whether of a nation or a what was benjamin monarch than those of total inde franklins position on colonial representation pendence fearful of civil war in 1765 and why had his lord norths ministry hesitated to view changed by 1770.
force the issue.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 the road to independence 1771 1776 repeal of the townshend duties in 1770 restored harmony to the british empire but strong feelings and mutual distrust lay just below the surface.
in 1773 those emotions erupted destroying any hope of compromise.
within two years the americans and the british clashed in armed conflict.
despite widespread resistance among loyal colonists patriot legislators created provisional governments and military forces the two essentials for independence.
a compromise repudiated once aroused political passions are not easily quieted.
in boston samuel adams and other radical patriots continued to warn americans of imperial domination and late in 1772 persuaded the town meeting to set up a committee of correspondence to state the rights of the colonists of this province soon eighty massachusetts towns had similar committees.
when british officials threatened to seize the americans responsible for the burning of the customs vessel gaspe and prosecute them in britain the virginia house of burgesses and several other assemblies set up their own committees of correspondence.
these standing committees allowed patriots to communicate with leaders in other colonies when new threats to liberty occurred.
by 1774 among the colonies that would later declare independence only pennsylvania was without one.
the east india company and the tea act these committees sprang into action when parliament passed the tea act of may 1773.
the act provided financial relief for the east india company a royally chartered private corporation that served as the instrument of british imperialism.
the company was deeply in debt it also had a huge surplus of tea as a result of high import duties which led britons and colonists alike to drink smuggled understand dutch tea instead.
the tea act points of view gave the company a government why did colonists react so loan and to boost its revenue strongly against the tea act which imposed a small canceled the import duties on tea tax and actually lowered the company exported to ireland the price of tea.
and the american colonies.
now even with the townshend duty of 3 pence a pound on tea high quality east india company tea would cost less than the dutch tea smuggled into the colonies by american merchants.
radical patriots accused the british ministry of bribing americans with the cheaper east india companys tea so they would give up their principled opposition to the tea tax.
as an anonymous woman wrote to the massachusetts spy the use of british tea is considered not as a private but as a public evil.
a handle to introduce a variety of.
oppressions amongst us merchants joined the protest because the east india company planned to distribute its tea directly to shopkeepers excluding american wholesalers from the trades profits.
the fear of an introduction of a monopoly in this country british general frederick haldimand reported from new york has induced the mercantile part of the inhabitants to be very industrious in opposing this step and added strength to a spirit of independence already too prevalent the tea party and the coercive acts the sons of liberty prevented east india company ships from delivering their cargoes in new york philadelphia and charleston.
in massachusetts royal governor hutchinson was determined to land the tea and collect the tax.
to foil the governors plan artisans and laborers disguised as indians boarded three ships the dartmouth the eleanor and the beaver on december 16 1773 broke open 342 chests of tea valued at about 10 000 or about 900 000 today and threw them into the harbor.
this destruction of the tea.
must have so important consequences john adams wrote in his diary that i cannot but consider it as an epoch in history the king was outraged.
concessions have made matters worse george iii declared.
the time has come for compulsion early in 1774 parliament passed four coercive acts to force massachusetts to pay for the tea and to submit to imperial authority.
the boston port bill closed boston harbor to shipping the massachusetts government act annulled the colonys charter and prohibited most town meetings a new quartering act mandated new barracks for british troops and the justice act allowed trials for capital crimes to be transferred to other colonies or to britain.
patriot leaders throughout the colonies branded the measures intolerable and rallied support for massachusetts.
in georgia a patriot warned the freemen of the province that every privilege you at present claim as a birthright may be wrested from you by the same authority that blockades the town of boston the cause of boston george washington declared in virginia now is and ever will be considered as the cause of america the committees of correspondence had created a firm sense of patriot unity.
chapter 5 the problem of empire 1763 1776 the boston tea party led by radical patriots disguised as mohawk indians bostonians dumped the east india companys taxed tea into the harbor.
the rioters made clear their pure political motives by punishing those who sought personal gain one son of liberty who stole some of the tea was stripped of his booty and his clothes together and sent home naked library of congress.
in 1774 parliament also passed the quebec act which allowed the practice of roman catholicism in quebec.
this concession to quebecs predominantly catholic population reignited religious passions in new england where protestants associated catholicism with arbitrary royal government.
because the act extended quebecs boundaries into the ohio river valley it likewise angered influential land speculators in virginia and pennsylvania and ordinary settlers by the thousands map 5 4.
although the ministry did not intend the quebec act as a coercive measure many colonists saw it as further proof of parliaments intention to control american affairs.
the continental congress responds in response to the coercive acts patriot leaders convened a new continent wide body the continental congress.
twelve mainland colonies sent representatives.
four recently acquired colonies florida quebec nova scotia and newfoundland refused to send delegates as did georgia where the royal governor controlled the legislature.
the assemblies of barbados jamaica and the other sugar islands although wary of british domination were even more fearful of revolts by their predominantly african populations and therefore declined to attend.
the delegates who met in philadelphia in september 1774 had different agendas.
southern representatives fearing a british plot to overturn the constitution and introduce a system of arbitrary government advocated a new economic boycott.
independence minded representatives from new england demanded political union and defensive military preparations.
many delegates from the middle atlantic colonies favored compromise.
led by joseph galloway of pennsylvania these men of loyal principles proposed a new political system similar to benjamin franklins proposal at the albany congress of 1754 each colony would retain its assembly to legislate on local matters and a new continent wide body would handle general american affairs.
the king would appoint a president general to preside over a legislative council selected by the colonial assemblies.
galloways plan failed by a single vote a bare majority thought it was too conciliatory american voices p 172.
instead the delegates demanded the repeal of the coercive acts and stipulated that british control part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 50 hudso n s b ay c map 5 4 n british western policy 1763 1774 gulf of st lawrence ny o m pa louisbourg.
aw ke superior la ren ce r quebec.
lake m ichi gan n uro eh virginia st la k s pa n and mass.
l ak tario l on rie ee ish louis o hi o albany.
conn transylvania sipp i r mis s is iana north carolina georgia.
charleston by spain and georgia 90w gulf of mexico.
new york n 40 s atl a n t i c o cean vandalia virginia w r i md.
south carolina e n h new boston york mass.
virginia r l philadelphia n j.
and conn port royal n 300 miles the proclamation of 1763 prohibited white settlement west of the appalachian mountains.
nonetheless anglo american settlers and land speculators proposed the new colonies of vandalia and transylvania to the west of virginia and north carolina.
the quebec act of 1774 designated most western lands as indian reserves and vastly enlarged the boundaries of quebec dashing speculators hopes and eliminating the old sea to sea land claims of many seaboard colonies.
the act especially angered new england protestants who condemned it for allowing french residents to practice catholicism and colonial political leaders who protested its failure to provide quebec with a representative assembly.
300 kilometers boundaries after treaty of paris 1763 british trading company 13 colonies other british possessions spain 30n quebec in 1763 quebec in 1774 proclamation line of 1763 state boundaries including western claims proposed western colonies 80w be limited to matters of trade.
it also approved a program of economic retaliation americans would stop importing british goods in december 1774.
if parliament did compare and not repeal the coercive acts by contrast september 1775 the congress why did parliament prefer vowed to cut off virtually all colonorths solution to the boston tea party to nial exports to britain ireland william pitts.
and the british west indies.
ten years of constitutional conflict had culminated in a threat of all out commercial warfare.
a few british leaders still hoped for compromise.
in january 1775 william pitt now sitting in the house of lords as the earl of chatham asked parliament to renounce its power to tax the colonies and to recognize the continental congress as a lawful body.
in return he suggested the congress should acknowledge parliamentary supremacy and provide a permanent source of revenue to help defray the national debt.
the british ministry rejected pitts plan.
twice it had backed down in the face of colonial resistance a third retreat was impossible.
branding the continental congress an illegal assembly the ministry rejected 70w lord dartmouths proposal to send commissioners to negotiate a settlement.
instead lord north set stringent terms americans must pay for their own defense and administration and acknowledge parliaments authority to tax them.
to put teeth in these demands north imposed a naval blockade on american trade with foreign nations and ordered general gage to suppress dissent in massachusetts.
now the case seemed desperate the prime minister told thomas hutchinson whom the patriots had forced into exile in london.
parliament would not could not concede.
for aught he could see it must come to violence the rising of the countryside the fate of the urban led patriot movement would depend on the colonies large rural population.
most farmers had little interest in imperial affairs.
their lives were deeply rooted in the soil and their prime allegiance was to family and community.
but imperial policies had increasingly intruded into the lives of farm families by sending their sons to war and raising their taxes.
in 1754 farmers on long island new york had paid an average tax of 10 shillings by 1756 thanks to chapter 5 the great war for empire their taxes had jumped to 30 shillings.
the continental association the boycotts of 1765 and 1768 raised the political consciousness of rural americans.
when the first continental congress established the continental association in 1774 to enforce a third boycott of british goods it quickly set up a rural network of committees to do its work.
in concord massachusetts 80 percent of the male heads of families and a number of single women signed a solemn league and covenant supporting nonimportation.
in other farm towns men blacked their faces disguised themselves in blankets like indians and threatened violence against shopkeepers who traded in rum molasses sugar c in violation of the boycott.
patriots likewise warned that british measures threatened the yeoman tradition of landownership.
in petersham massachusetts the town meeting worried that new british taxes would drain this people of the fruits of their toil arable land was now scarce and expensive in older communities and in new settlements merchants were seizing farmsteads for delinquent the problem of empire 1763 1776 debts.
by the 1770s many northern yeomen felt personally threatened by british policies which a patriot pamphlet warned were paving the way for reducing the country to lordships table 5 3.
southern planters fear dependency despite their higher standard of living southern slave owners had similar fears.
many chesapeake planters were deeply in debt to british merchants.
accustomed to being absolute masters on their slave labor plantations and seeing themselves as guardians of english liberties planters resented their financial dependence on british creditors and dreaded the prospect of political subservience to british officials.
that danger now seemed real.
if parliament used the coercive acts to subdue massachusetts then it might turn next to virginia dissolving its representative assembly and assisting british merchants to seize debt burdened properties.
consequently the virginia gentry supported demands by indebted yeomen farmers to close the law courts so that they could bargain with merchants over debts without the threat of legal action.
the spark of liberty is not yet extinct among our people declared one planter and if properly table 5 3 patriot resistance 1762 1776 date british action patriot response revenue act merchants complain privately proclamation line land speculators voice discontent sugar act merchants and massachusetts legislature protest stamp act sons of liberty riot stamp act congress first boycott of british goods quartering act new york assembly refuses to fund until 1767 1767 1768 townshend act military occupation of boston second boycott of british goods harassment of pro british merchants royal commission to investigate gaspe affair committees of correspondence form tea act widespread resistance boston tea party coercive acts quebec act first continental congress third boycott of british goods british raids near boston kings proclamation for suppressing rebellion and sedition armed resistance second continental congress invasion of canada cutoff of colonial exports military attacks led by royal governors in south paines common sense declaration of independence american voices the debate over representation and sovereignty speaking before the house of commons benjamin franklin declared that before 1763 americans had paid little attention to the question of parliaments right to lay taxes and duties in the colonies.
the reason was simple franklin said a right to lay internal taxes was never supposed to be in parliament as we are not represented there franklin recognized that representation was central to the imperial debate.
as the following selections show the failure to solve the problem of representation and the closely related issue of parliamentary sovereignty led to the american rebellion.
jared ingersoll report on the debates in parliament 1765 connecticut lawyer jared ingersoll 1722 1781 served as his colonys agent or lobbyist in britain.
in this 1765 letter to the governor of connecticut ingersoll summarizes the debate then under way in parliament over the stamp act.
when the act passed he returned home to become the stamp distributor in connecticut.
a mob forced him to resign that post.
ingersoll later served as a vice admiralty judge in philadelphia and during the revolution remained loyal to britain.
the principal attention has been to the stamp bill that has been preparing to lay before parliament for taxing america.
the point of the authority of parliament to impose such tax i found on my arrival here was so fully and universally yielded accepted that there was not the least hopes of making any impressions that way.
i beg leave to give you a summary of the arguments which are made use of in favour of such authority.
the house of commons say they is a branch of the supreme legislature of the nation and which in its nature is supposed to represent or rather to stand in the place of the commons that is of the great body of the people.
that this house of commons therefore is now.
a part of the supreme unlimited power of the nation as in every state there must be some unlimited power and authority.
they say a power to tax is a necessary part of every supreme legislative authority and that if they have not that power over america they have none and then america is at once a kingdom of itself.
on the other hand those who oppose the bill say it is true the parliament have a supreme unlimited authority over every part and branch of the kings dominions and as well over ireland as any other place.
yet they say we believe a british parliament will never think it prudent to tax ireland or america.
tis true they say that the commons of england and of the british empire are all represented in and by the house of commons but this representation is confessedly on all hands by construction and virtual because most british subjects.
have no hand in choosing the representatives.
they say further that the effects of this implied representation here and in america must be infinitely different in the article of taxation.
by any mistake an act of parliament is made that prove injurious and hard the member of parliament here in britain sees with his own eyes and is moreover very accessible to the people.
also the taxes are laid equally by one rule and fall as well on the member himself as on the people.
but as to america from the great distance in point of situation they are not represented in the same way.
finally the opponents of the act say we already by the regulations upon their trade draw from the americans all that they can spare.
this step of taxation should not take place until or unless the americans are allowed to send members to parliament.
thus i have given you i think the substance of the arguments on both sides of that great and important question of the right and also of the expediency of taxing america by authority of parliament.
but upon a division of the house upon the question there was about 250 to about 50 in favour of the bill.
source new haven colony historical society papers 1918 9 306 315.
joseph galloway plan of union 1775 speaker of the pennsylvania assembly joseph galloway was a delegate to the first continental congress where he proposed a plan that addressed the issue of representation.
the colonies would remain british but operate under a continental government with the power to veto parliamentary laws that affected america.
radical patriots in the congress who favored independence prevented a vote on galloways plan and suppressed mention of it in the records.
galloway remained loyal to the crown fought on the british side in the war for independence and moved to england in 1778.
if we sincerely mean to accommodate the difference between the two countries.
we must take into consideration a number of facts which led the parliament to pass the acts complained of.
you will recall the dangerous situation of the colonies from the intrigues of france and the incursions of the canadians and their indian allies at the commencement of the last war.
great britain sent over her fleets and armies for their protection.
in this state of the colonies it was not unreasonable to expect that parliament would have levied a tax on them proportionate to their wealth.
parliament was naturally led to exercise the power which had been by its predecessors so often exercised over the colonies and to pass the stamp act.
against this act the colonies petitioned parliament and denied its authority.
declaring that the colonies could not be represented in that body.
this justly alarmed the british senate.
it was thought and called by the ablest men in britain a clear and explicit declaration of the american independence and compelled the parliament to pass the declaratory act in order to save its ancient and incontrovertible right of supremacy over all the parts of the empire.
having thus briefly stated the arguments in favour of parliamentary authority.
i am free to confess that the exercise of that authority is not perfectly constitutional in respect to the colonies.
we know that the whole landed interest of britain is represented in that body while neither the land nor the people of america hold the least participation in the legislative authority of the state.
representation or a participation in the supreme councils of the state is the great principle upon which the freedom of the british government is established and secured.
i wish to see.
the right to participate in the supreme councils of the state extended in some form.
to america.
and therefore have prepared the draught of a plan for uniting america more intimately in constitutional policy with great britain.
i am certain when dispassionately considered it will be found to be the most perfect union in power and liberty with the parent state next to a representation in parliament and i trust it will be approved of by both countries.
the plan that the several colonial assemblies shall form an american union and choose members for the grand council.
that the grand council.
shall hold and exercise all the like rights liberties and privileges as are held and exercised by and in the house of commons of great britain.
that the president general shall hold his office during the pleasure of the king and his assent shall be requisite to all acts of the grand council and it shall be his office and duty to cause them to be carried into execution.
that the president general by and with the advice and consent of the grand council hold and exercise all the legislative rights powers and authorities necessary for regulating and administering all the general police and affairs of the colonies.
that the said president general and the grand council be an inferior and distinct branch of the british legislature united and incorporated with it.
and that the assent of both parliament and the grand council shall be requisite to the validity of all such general acts or statutes that affect the colonies.
source joseph galloway historical and political reflections on the rise and progress of the american rebellion london 1780 70.
questions for analysis 1.
according to ingersoll what were the main arguments of those in parliament who opposed the stamp act.
did those opposing the stamp act agree with the acts supporters that parliament had the right to tax the colonies.
how did galloways plan solve the problem of colonial representation in parliament.
how would the british ministers who advocated parliamentary supremacy have reacted to the plan.
the framers of the u s constitution addressed the problem of dividing authority between state governments and the national government by allowing the states to retain legal authority over most matters and delegating limited powers to the national government.
could such a solution have been implemented in the british empire.
why or why not.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 fanned by the gentlemen of influence will i make no doubt burst out again into a flame loyalists and neutrals yet in many places the patriot movement was a hard sell.
in virginia patriot leaders were nearly all wealthy planters and many of their poorer neighbors regarded the movement with suspicion.
in regions where great landowners became patriots the hudson river valley of new york for example many tenant farmers supported the king because they hated their landlords.
similar social conflicts prompted some regulators in the north carolina backcountry and many farmers in eastern maryland to oppose the patriots there.
there were many reasons to resist the patriot movement.
skeptics believed that patriot leaders were subverting british rule only to advance their own selfish interests.
peter oliver wrote of samuel adams for example he was so thorough a machiavilian that he divested himself of every worthy principle would stick at no crime to accomplish his ends some gentlemen of influence worried that resistance to britain would undermine all political institutions and introduce anarchy and disorder and render life and property here precarious their fears increased when the sons of liberty used intimidation and violence to uphold the boycotts.
one well to do new yorker complained no man can be in a more abject state of bondage than he whose reputation property and life are exposed to the discretionary violence.
of the community as the crisis deepened such men became loyalists so called because they remained loyal to the british crown.
many other colonists simply hoped to stay out of the fray.
some did so on principle in new jersey and pennsylvania thousands of pacifist quakers and germans resisted conscription and violence out of religious conviction.
others were ambivalent or confused about the political crisis unfolding around them.
the delegate elected to new yorks provincial congress from queens county on long island chose not to attend since the people he represented seemed to be much inclined to remain peaceable and quiet more than three fourths of queens county voters in fact opposed sending any delegate at all.
many loyal or neutral colonists hoped above all to preserve their families property and independence whatever the outcome of the imperial crisis.
historians estimate that some 15 to 20 percent of the white population perhaps as many as 400 000 colonists were loyal to the crown.
some managed to avoid persecution but many were pressured by their neighbors to join the boycotts and subjected to violence and humiliation if they refused.
as patriots took over the reins of local government throughout the colonies loyalists were driven out of their homes or forced into silence.
at this crucial juncture patriots commanded the allegiance or at least the acquiescence of the majority of white americans.
violence east and west by 1774 british authority was wavering.
at the headwaters of the ohio the abandonment of fort pitt left a power vacuum that was filled by opportunistic men led by a royally appointed governor acting in defiance of his commission.
in massachusetts the attempt to isolate and punish boston and the surrounding countryside backfired as patriots resisted military coercion.
violence resulted in both places and with it the collapse of imperial control.
lord dunmores war in the years since the end of pontiacs rebellion at least 10 000 people had traveled along braddocks and forbess roads to the headwaters of the ohio river where fort pitt had replaced fort duquesne during the great war for empire and staked claims to land around pittsburgh map 5 5.
they relied for protection on fort pitt which remained one of britains most important frontier outposts.
but the revenue crisis forced general gage to cut expenses and in october 1772 the army pulled down the forts log walls and left the site to the local population.
settler relations with the neighboring ohio indians were tenuous and illdefined and the forts abandonment left them exposed and vulnerable.
in the ensuing power vacuum pennsylvania and virginia both claimed the region.
pennsylvania had the better claim on paper.
it had organized county governments established courts and collected taxes there.
but in keeping with its pacifist quaker roots it did not organize a militia.
in this decision virginias royal governor the earl of dunmore recognized an opportunity.
appointed to his post in 1771 dunmore was an irascible and unscrupulous man who clashed repeatedly with the house of burgesses.
but when it suited him he was just as willing to defy the crown.
in 1773 he traveled to pittsburgh where he later wrote the people flocked about me and beseeched me.
to chapter 5 map 5 5 fort niagara fort erie potawatomi um ohi o r ng ski mu to scio.
r r shawnee e an fort pitt na po to m ac r philadelphia r delaware bay.
che mia mi r de la w ar wya fort sandusky ndo t e fort venango fort miami miami ca ne se susqueh u ma.
er me fort presque isle re r ie er ke fort la le boeuf wa la fort detroit de ina abeg allegh n yr.
ish m in monong go ahel a r an fort ontario lake ontario lake huron the ohio country 1774 1775 sap lexington boonesborough appoint magistrates and officers of militia he organized a local militia soon men armed by virginia were drilling near the ruins of fort pitt.
in the summer of 1774 dunmore took the next step.
in defiance of both his royal instructions and the house of burgesses he called out virginias militia and led a force of 2 400 men against the ohio shawnees who had a long standing claim to kentucky as a hunting ground.
they fought a single battle at point pleasant the shawnees were defeated and dunmore and his militia forces claimed kentucky as their own.
a participant justified his actions shortly afterward when without a king he wrote one doeth according to the freedom of his own will years of neglect left many colonists in the backcountry feeling abandoned by the crown.
dunmores war was their declaration of independence.
armed resistance in massachusetts meanwhile as the continental congress gathered in philadelphia in september 1774 massachusetts was also defying british authority.
in august a middlesex county congress had urged patriots to close the existing royal courts and to transfer their political allegiance to the popularly elected house of representatives.
subsequently armed crowds harassed loyalists and ensured patriot rule in most of new england.
in response general thomas gage now the military governor of massachusetts ordered british troops in boston in september 1774 to seize patriot armories bay braddocks road forbes road ohio r e eak the erosion of british imperial authority caused chaos in the ohio country.
pennsylvania and virginia each claimed pittsburgh and the surrounding countryside while the indian communities on the upper ohio increasingly feared colonist aggression.
their fears were realized in the summer of 1774 when lord dunmore led a force of virginia militia into the valley.
after defeating a shawnee force in the battle of point pleasant many virginians began surveying and staking claims to land in the kentucky bluegrass.
in the summer of 1775 perhaps a dozen new towns were settled there in violation of the royal proclamation of 1763 and the quebec act of 1774.
the problem of empire 1763 1776 100 miles 100 kilometers in nearby charlestown and cambridge.
an army of 20 000 militiamen quickly mobilized to safeguard other massachusetts military depots.
the concord town meeting raised a defensive force the famous minutemen to stand at a minutes warning in case of alarm increasingly gages authority was limited to boston where it rested on the bayonets of his 3 500 troops.
meanwhile the patriot controlled massachusetts assembly met in nearby salem in open defiance of parliament collecting taxes bolstering the militia and assuming the responsibilities of government.
in london the colonial secretary lord dartmouth proclaimed massachusetts to be in open rebellion and ordered gage to march against the rude rabble on the place events night of april 18 1775 gage dis in context patched 700 soldiers to capture what led to dunmores colonial leaders and supplies at war and why did western concord.
however paul revere settlers support it.
and a series of other riders warned patriots in many towns and at dawn militiamen confronted the british regulars first at lexington and then at concord.
those first skirmishes took a handful of lives but as the british retreated to boston militia from neighboring towns repeatedly ambushed them.
by the end of the day 73 british soldiers were dead 174 wounded and 26 missing.
british fire had killed 49 massachusetts militiamen and wounded 39.
twelve years of economic and constitutional conflict had ended in violence.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 the second continental congress organizes for war a month later in may 1775 patriot leaders gathered in philadelphia for the second continental congress.
as the congress opened 3 000 british troops attacked american fortifications on breeds hill and bunker hill overlooking boston.
after three assaults and 1 000 casualties they finally dislodged the patriot militia.
inspired by his countrymens valor john adams exhorted the congress to rise to the defense of american liberty by creating a continental army.
he nominated george washington to lead it.
after bitter debate the congress approved the proposals but adams lamented only by bare majorities congress versus king george despite the bloodshed in massachusetts a majority in the congress still hoped for reconciliation.
led by john dickinson of pennsylvania these moderates won approval of a petition expressing loyalty to george iii and asking for repeal of oppressive parliamentary legislation.
but samuel adams patrick henry and other zealous patriots drummed up support for a declaration of the causes and necessities of taking up arms.
americans dreaded the calamities of civil war the declaration asserted but were resolved to die freemen rather than to live as slaves george iii failed to exploit the divisions among the patriots instead in august 1775 he issued a proclamation for suppressing rebellion and sedition.
before the kings proclamation reached america the radicals in the congress had won support for an invasion of canada to prevent a british attack from the north.
patriot forces easily defeated the british at montreal but in december 1775 they failed to capture quebec explain consequences city and withdrew.
meanwhile how did the violence american merchants waged the around boston in the financial warfare promised at the spring of 1775 affect first continental congress by cutproceedings in the second ting off exports to britain and its continental congress.
west indian sugar islands.
parliament retaliated with the prohibitory act which outlawed all trade with the rebellious colonies.
fighting in the south skirmishes between patriot and loyalist forces now broke out in the southern colonies.
in virginia patriots ousted governor dunmore and forced him to take refuge on a british warship in chesapeake bay.
branding the rebels traitors the governor organized two military forces one white the george iii 1771 king george iii was a young man of twenty seven when the american troubles began in 1765.
six years later as this portrait by johann zoffany suggests the king had aged.
initially george had been headstrong and tried to impose his will on parliament but he succeeded only in generating political confusion and inept policy.
he strongly supported parliaments attempts to tax the colonies and continued the war in america long after most of his ministers agreed that it had been lost.
the royal collection 2011 her majesty queen elizabeth ii the bridgeman art library.
queens own loyal virginians and one black the ethiopian regiment which enlisted 1 000 slaves who had fled their patriot owners.
in november 1775 dunmore issued a controversial proclamation promising freedom to black slaves and white indentured servants who joined the loyalist cause.
white planters denounced this diabolical scheme claiming it point ed a dagger to their throats a new rising of the black and white underclasses as in bacons rebellion in the 1670s seemed a possibility.
in fincastle county in southwestern virginia loyalist planter john hiell urged workers to support the king promising a servant man that soon he and all the negroes would get their freedom frightened by dunmores aggressive tactics patriot yeomen and tenants called for a final break with britain.
in north carolina too military clashes prompted demands for independence.
early in 1776 josiah martin the colonys royal governor raised a loyalist force of 1 500 scottish highlanders in the backcountry.
in response patriots mobilized the lowcountry militia chapter 5 the problem of empire 1763 1776 and in february defeated martins army at the battle of moores creek bridge capturing more than 800 highlanders.
following this victory radical patriots in the north carolina assembly told its representatives to the continental congress to join with other colonies in declaring independence and forming foreign alliances in may the virginia gentry followed suit led by james madison edmund pendleton and patrick henry the patriots met in convention and resolved unanimously to support independence.
would include the kentucky settlements.
they had fought and bled for the land in dunmores war and now wanted to fight against the crown and its indian allies in the ohio country.
virginia agreed in 1776 it organized six new frontier counties and sent arms and ammunition to kentucky.
in july the continental congress followed suit dispatching troops and arms to the ohio river as well.
occupying kentucky beginning in the spring of 1775 in the wake of dunmores war independent parties of adventurers began to occupy the newly won lands of kentucky.
daniel boone led one group to the banks of the kentucky river where they established the town of boonesborough nearby was lexington named in honor of the massachusetts town that had resisted the redcoats a few months earlier.
the shawnees and other ohio indians opposed the settlers and colonists built their tiny towns in the form of stations to protect themselves groups of cabins connected by palisades to form small forts.
these western settlers had confused political loyalties.
many had marched under dunmore and hoped to receive recognition for their claims from the crown.
but as the rebellion unfolded most recognized that the patriots emphasis on liberty and equality squared with their view of the world.
they soon petitioned virginias rebel government asking it to create a new county that as military conflicts escalated americans were divided in their opinions of king george iii.
many blamed him for supporting oppressive legislation and ordering armed retaliation but other influential colonists held out the hope that he might mediate their conflict with parliament.
john dickinson whose letters did so much to arouse patriot resistance in 1768 nevertheless believed that war with great britain would be folly.
in july 1775 he persuaded congress to send george iii the olive branch petition which pleaded with the king to negotiate.
john adams a staunch supporter of independence was infuriated by dickinsons waffling.
but dickinson had many supporters both inside and outside of congress.
for example many of philadelphias quaker and anglican merchants were neutrals or loyalists.
in response to their passivity patriot artisans in the city organized a mechanics association to protect americas just rights and privileges daniel boone escorting settlers through the cumberland gap in 1775 daniel boone led a group of prospective settlers into kentucky on behalf of richard henderson a north carolina judge and self appointed proprietor of a land speculation venture called the transylvania colony.
hendersons venture soon collapsed but boonesborough was one of perhaps a dozen towns founded in kentucky in violation of crown policy that summer.
boone became a folk hero and in the mid nineteenth century george caleb bingham painted this memorable scene.
using biblical imagery the woman on horseback recalls mary riding into bethlehem on a donkey and dramatic lighting bingham portrays boone as an agent of progress bringing civilization to a howling and dangerous wilderness.
george caleb bingham daniel boone escorting settlers through the cumberland gap 1851 52.
oil on canvas 36 x 50.
mildred lane kemper art museum washington university in st louis.
gift of nathanial phillips 1890.
thomas paines common sense part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 with popular sentiment in flux a single brief pamphlet helped tip the balance.
in january 1776 thomas paine published common sense a rousing call for independence and a republican form of government.
paine had served as a minor customs official in england until he was fired for joining a protest against low wages.
in 1774 paine migrated to philadelphia where he met benjamin rush and other patriots who shared his republican sentiments.
in common sense paine assaulted the traditional monarchical order in stirring language.
monarchy and hereditary succession have laid the world in blood and ashes paine proclaimed leveling a personal attack at george iii the hard hearted sullen pharaoh of england mixing insults with biblical quotations paine blasted the british system of mixed government that balanced power among the three estates of king lords and commoners.
paine granted that the system was noble for the dark and slavish times of the past but now it yielded only monarchical tyranny in the person of the king and aristocratical tyranny in the persons of the peers paine argued for american independence by turning the traditional metaphor of patriarchal authority on its head is it the interest of a man to be a boy all his life he asked.
within six months common sense had gone through twenty five editions and reached hundreds of thousands of people.
there is great talk of independence a worried new york loyalist noted the unthinking multitude are mad for it.
a pamphlet called common sense has carried off.
thousands paine urged americans to create independent republican states a government of our own is our natural right tis time to part independence declared inspired by paines arguments and beset by armed loyalists patriot conventions urged a break from britain.
in june 1776 richard henry lee presented virginias resolution to the continental congress that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states faced with certain defeat staunch loyalists and anti independence moderates withdrew from the congress leaving committed patriots to take the fateful step.
on july 4 1776 the congress approved the declaration of independence see documents p d 1.
the declarations main author thomas jefferson of virginia had mobilized resistance to the coercive acts with the pamphlet a summary view of the rights of british america 1774.
now in the declaration he justified independence and republicanism to americans and the world by vilifying george iii he has plundered our seas ravaged our coasts burned our towns and destroyed the lives of our people such a prince was a tyrant jefferson concluded and is unfit to be the ruler of a free people employing the ideas of the european enlightenment jefferson proclaimed a series of self evident truths that all men are created equal that they possess the unalienable rights of life liberty and the pursuit independence declared in this painting by john trumbull thomas jefferson and the other drafters of the declaration john adams of massachusetts roger sherman of connecticut robert livingston of new york and benjamin franklin of pennsylvania present the document to john hancock the president of the second continental congress.
one patriot observer reported that when the declaration was read at a public meeting in new york city on july 10 a massive statue of george iii was pulled down by the populace and its 4 000 pounds of lead melted down to make musquet balls for use against the british troops massed on staten island.
yale university art gallery art resource ny.
chapter 5 of happiness that government derives its just powers from the consent of the governed and can rightly be overthrown if it becomes destructive of these ends by linking these doctrines of individual liberty popular sovereignty the principle that ultimate power lies in the hands of the electorate and republican government with american independence jefferson established them as the defining political values of the new nation.
for jefferson as for paine the pen proved mightier than the sword.
the declaration won wide support in france and germany at home it sparked celebrations in rural hamlets and seaport cities as crowds burned effigies and toppled statues of the king.
on july 8 1776 in easton pennsylvania a great number of spectators heard a reading of the declaration gave their hearty assent with three loud huzzahs and cried out may god long preserve and unite the free and independent states of america summary chapters 4 and 5 have focused on a short span of time a mere two decades and outlined the plot of a political drama.
act i of that drama the great war chapter review for empire discussed in chapter 4 prompted british political leaders to implement a program of imperial reform and taxation.
act ii discussed in this chapter is full of dramatic action as colonial mobs riot colonists chafe against restrictions on western lands patriot pamphleteers articulate ideologies of resistance and british ministers search for compromise between claims of parliamentary sovereignty and assertions of colonial autonomy.
act iii takes the form of tragedy the once proud british empire dissolves into civil war an imminent nightmare of death and destruction.
why did this happen.
more than two centuries later the answers still are not clear.
certainly the lack of astute leadership in britain was a major factor.
but british leaders faced circumstances that limited their actions a huge national debt and deep commitments to both a powerful fiscal military state and the absolute supremacy of parliament.
moreover in america decades of salutary neglect strengthened patriots demands for political autonomy and economic opportunity.
artisans farmers and aspiring western settlers all feared an oppressive new era in imperial relations.
the trajectories of their conflicting intentions and ideas placed britain and its american possessions on course for a disastrous and fatal collision.
c h a p t e r r e v i e w m a k e i t s t i c k go to learningcurve to retain what youve read.
terms to know identify and explain the significance of each term below.
key concepts and events sugar act of 1764 p 155 vice admiralty courts p 156 stamp act of 1765 p 157 virtual representation p 157 quartering act of 1765 p 157 stamp act congress p 158 sons of liberty p 158 english common law p 159 natural rights p 159 declaratory act of 1766 p 160 townshend act of 1767 p 161 nonimportation movement p 161 key people committees of correspondence p 168 tea act of may 1773 p 168 coercive acts p 168 continental congress p 169 continental association p 171 dunmores war p 175 minutemen p 175 second continental congress p 176 declaration of independence p 178 popular sovereignty p 179 george grenville p 155 john dickinson p 159 charles townshend p 160 lord north p 166 samuel adams p 166 lord dunmore p 174 thomas paine p 178 thomas jefferson p 178 part 3 chapter review review questions answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapters main ideas.
as british administrators sought to increase colo nial revenues and tighten administrative control what might have led them to pursue a less confrontational course with the colonies.
what factors do you think are most important in explaining the failure of compromise.
what kinds of provocation caused colonists to riot or otherwise act directly even violently in defense of their interests.
how did common law enlightenment and republican ideas shape their thinking as they took action.
making connections as alternatives to independence.
why did patriots reject them.
consider the events listed under work exchange and technology and politics and power for the period 1763 1776 on the thematic timeline on page 149.
how important were the linkages between economic developments and political ones in these years.
thematic understanding recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.
across time and place chapter 4 pre sented a turbulent era marked by social and cultural conflict and imperial warfare during which the regions of british north america were disparate and without unity.
yet by 1776 only thirteen years after the treaty of paris ending the great war for empire thirteen of britains mainland colonies were prepared to unite in a declaration of independence.
what happened in that intervening time to strengthen and deepen colonists sense of common cause.
as they drew together to resist imperial authority what political and cultural resources did they have in common.
more to explore 3.
what compromises were proposed in the colonies visual evidence return to the paul revere engraving of the boston massacre on page 167.
this image was an instrument of political propaganda.
what features of the image are most important to its political purpose.
consider his depiction of both the soldiers and the townspeople.
look too at the buildings surrounding the crowd especially the custom house on the right.
list the ways in which revere invokes the idea of tyranny in this image.
start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.
david armitage the declaration of independence a global history 2007.
traces the international impact of the declaration.
jack p greene and j r pole eds a companion to the american revolution 2000.
a useful compendium of short essays on topics related to the revolution.
woody holton forced founders 1999.
considers the coming of the revolution in virginia.
maya jasanoff libertys exiles 2011.
a compelling narrative of loyalist experiences in the revolution.
andrew oshaughnessy the men who lost america 2013.
a british view of the crisis.
the american revolution pbs video and its companion web site pbs org ktca liberty.
a useful overview of the revolutionary movement.
chapter 5 timeline chapter review ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.
proclamation line limits white settlement sugar act and currency act colonists oppose vice admiralty courts stamp act imposes direct tax quartering act requires barracks for british troops stamp act congress meets americans boycott british goods first compromise stamp act repealed declaratory act passed townshend duties second american boycott second compromise partial repeal of townshend act boston massacre committees of correspondence form tea act leads to boston tea party coercive acts punish massachusetts dunmores war against the shawnees continental congress meets third american boycott general gage marches to lexington and concord second continental congress creates continental army lord dunmore recruits loyalist slaves patriots invade canada and skirmish with loyalists in south western settlers occupy kentucky thomas paines common sense declaration of independence key turning points the boston tea party 1773 the coercive acts 1774 and the first continental congress 1774.
what did parliament hope to achieve with the coercive acts.
how did the decision to convene a continent wide congress demonstrate the failure of parliaments efforts.
making war and republican governments 1776 1789 c h a p t e r the trials of war 1776 1778 war in the north armies and strategies victory at saratoga the perils of war financial crisis valley forge the path to victory 1778 1783 the french alliance war in the south the patriot advantage diplomatic triumph creating republican institutions 1776 1787 the state constitutions how much democracy.
women seek a public voice the wars losers loyalists native americans and slaves the articles of confederation shayss rebellion the constitution of 1787 the rise of a nationalist faction the philadelphia convention the people debate ratification w hen patriots in frederick identify the big idea county maryland demanded how revolutionary was the amerhis allegiance to their cause in ican revolution.
what political 1776 robert gassaway would have none social and economic changes did it of it.
it was better for the poor people to produce and what stayed the same.
lay down their arms and pay the duties and taxes laid upon them by king and parliament than to be brought into slavery and commanded and ordered about by you he told them.
the story was much the same in farmington connecticut where patriot officials imprisoned nathaniel jones and seventeen other men for remaining neutral in pennsylvania quakers accused of loyalism were rounded up jailed and charged with treason and some were hanged for aiding the british cause.
everywhere the outbreak of fighting in 1776 forced families to choose the loyalist or the patriot side.
the patriots control of most local governments gave them an edge in this battle.
patriot leaders organized militia units and recruited volunteers for the continental army a ragtag force that surprisingly held its own on the battlefield.
i admire the american troops tremendously exclaimed a french officer.
it is incredible that soldiers composed of every age even children of fifteen of whites and blacks almost naked unpaid and rather poorly fed can march so well and withstand fire so steadfastly military service created political commitment and vice versa.
many patriot leaders encouraged americans not only to support the war but also to take an active role in government.
as more people did so their political identities changed.
previously americans had lived within a social world dominated by the links of family kinship and locality.
now the abstract bonds of citizenship connected them directly to more distant institutions of government.
from subjects to citizens the difference is immense remarked south carolina patriot david ramsay.
by repudiating monarchical rule and raising a democratic army the patriots launched the age of republican revolutions.
soon republicanism would throw france into turmoil and inspire revolutionaries in spains american colonies.
the independence of the anglo american colonies remarked the venezuelan political leader francisco de miranda who had been in new york and philadelphia at the end of the american revolution was bound to be.
the infallible preliminary to our own independence movement the patriot uprising of 1776 set in motion a process that gradually replaced an atlantic colonial system that spanned the americas with an american system of new nations.
general washington 1780 by wars end george washington was a hero on both sides of the atlantic.
this engraving printed in paris in 1780 shows him with various british bills and declarations in tatters at his feet while he holds copies of the declaration of independence and the treaty of alliance with france.
in the background of this vaguely orientalized scene a black slave presumably william lee washingtons valet and constant companion during the revolution saddles his horse.
anne s k brown military collection brown university library.
part 3 revolution and republican culture 1763 1820 the trials of war 1776 1778 the declaration of independence appeared just as the british launched a full scale military assault.
for two years british troops manhandled the continental army.
a few inspiring american victories kept the rebellion alive but during the winters of 1776 and 1777 the patriot cause hung in the balance.
once the british resorted to military force few europeans gave the rebels a chance.
the population of great britain was 11 million the colonies 2 5 million 20 percent of whom were enslaved africans.
moreover the british government had access to the immense wealth generated by the south atlantic system and the emerging industrial revolution.
britain also had the most powerful navy in the world a standing army of 48 000 britons plus thousands of german hessian soldiers and the support of thousands of american loyalists and powerful indian coalitions.
in the carolinas the cherokees resisted colonists demands for their lands by allying with the british as did four of the six iroquois nations of new york map 6 1.
in the ohio country shawnees and their allies armed by the british attacked the new kentucky settlements.
by contrast the americans were economically and militarily weak.
they lacked a strong central government and a reliable source of tax revenue.
their new continental army commanded by general george washington consisted of 18 000 poorly trained and inexperienced recruits.
to demonstrate britains military superiority the prime minister lord north ordered general william howe to capture new york city.
his strategy was to seize control of the hudson river and thereby isolate the radical patriots in new england from the colonies to the south.
as the second continental congress declared independence in philadelphia in july 1776 howe landed 32 000 troops british regulars and german mercenaries outside new york city.
in august 1776 understand howe defeated the americans in points of view the battle of long island and why was control of new forced their retreat to manhattan york city britains first military objective in the island.
there howe outflanked emerging war.
washingtons troops and nearly trapped them.
outgunned and outmaneuvered the continental army again retreated eventually crossing the hudson river to new jersey.
nova scotia mass.
vt n h o ntari l o l war in the north halifax british canada boston new york mass.
conn newport n rhode island e w ie er s new york philadelphia pennsylvania new jersey delaware atlantic ocean maryland virginia norfolk north carolina wilmington south carolina savannah 300 miles 300 kilometers loyalist strongholds strongly contested areas indians loyalist or neutral patriot strongholds charles town georgia a scattering of loyalists could be found in many areas of patriot strength.
map 6 1 patriot and loyalist strongholds patriots were in the majority in most of the thirteen mainland colonies and used their control of local governments to funnel men money and supplies to the rebel cause.
although loyalists could be found in every colony their strongholds were limited to nova scotia eastern new york new jersey and certain areas in the south.
however most native american peoples favored the british cause and bolstered the power of loyalist militias in central new york see map 6 3 and in the carolina backcountry.
by december the british army had pushed the rebels across new jersey and over the delaware river into pennsylvania.
from the patriots perspective winter came just in time.
following eighteenth century custom the british halted their military campaign for the cold months allowing the americans to catch them off guard.
on christmas night 1776 washington crossed the delaware river and staged a successful surprise attack on trenton new jersey where he forced the surrender of 1 000 german soldiers.
in early january 1777 the continental army won a small victory at nearby princeton map 6 2.
but these minor triumphs could 246 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation arbitrary power had been the ideal guiding the american revolution while the freedom to pursue happiness became the ideal driving the new nation.
to ensure their new freedoms the revolutionaries wrestled with a fundamental question what is the proper role and scope of government.
in answering that question they eventually developed new ways to divide and balance power among the various branches of government so as to manage the tensions between ensuring liberty and maintaining order.
but even with victory in the war america was a nation in name only.
the quest for true nationhood after the revolution was the most significant political transformation in modern history for americans would insist that sovereignty ultimate power resided not with a king or an aristocracy but with the people the mass of ordinary citizens.
forging a new nation the unlikely american victory in the revolutionary war stunned the world but the patriots had little time to celebrate.
as alexander hamilton a brilliant young army officer turned congressman noted in 1783 we have now happily concluded the great work of independence but much remains to be done to reach the fruits of it the transition from war to peace was neither simple nor easy.
america was independent but it was not yet a s elf sustaining nation.
in fact the declaration of independence never mentioned the word nation.
its official title was the unanimous declaration of the thirteen united states of america during the war james madison of virginia predicted that the confederation government would be only temporary.
the present union will but little survive the present war he wrote.
the states must recognize he continued the necessity of the union during the war and its probable dissolution after it forging a new nation out of a confederation of thirteen rebellious colonies turned free and independent states posed huge challenges not the least of which was managing what george washington called a deranged economy suffocating in w ar related debts.
the accumulated war debt was 160 million a huge amount at the time amounting to the total national budget over the twenty years from 1790 to 1810.
such financial stress made for trying times in the first years of the american republic.
the period from the drafting of the declaration of independence in 1776 through the creation of the new federal constitution in 1787 and ending with the election of thomas jefferson as president in 1800 was fraught with instability and tension.
from the start the new nation experienced growing political divisions economic distress and foreign troubles.
three fundamental questions shaped political debate during the last quarter of the eighteenth century.
where would sovereignty reside in the new the confederation government 247 nation.
what was the proper relationship of the states to each other and to the national government.
and what was required for the new republic to flourish as an independent nation.
the efforts to answer those questions created powerful tensions that continue to complicate american life.
the confederation government young john quincy adams a future president called the years between 1783 and 1787 the critical period when american leaders developed sharp differences about economic policies international relations and the proper relationship of the states to the national government.
debates over those key issues unexpectedly gave birth to the nations first political parties and to this day continue to influence the american experiment in federalism the sharing of power among national state and local governments.
after the war many patriots who had feared government power and criticized british officials for abusing it now directed their attacks against the new state and national governments.
in 1783 after congress ran out of money some army officers upset at not being paid had threatened to march on congress and take over the government.
alexander hamilton reported that the unpaid soldiers had become a mob rather than an army without clothing without pay without provisions food without morals without discipline only george washingtons intervention stopped the rebellious officers from confronting congress.
at the same time state legislatures desperate for funds to pay off their war debts sparked unrest and riots by raising taxes.
the often violent clashes between the working poor and the state governments were a great disappointment to washington john adams and other revolutionary leaders.
for them and others disillusioned by the surge of democratic rebelliousness the critical period was a time of hopes frustrated a story shaded by regret at the absence of national loyalty and international respect.
the weaknesses of the articles of confederation in dealing with the postwar turmoil led political leaders to design an entirely new national constitution and federal government.
a loose alliance of states the articles of confederation formally approved in 1781 had created a loose alliance confederation of thirteen independent and often squabbling and ungovernable states.
the states were united only in theory in practice each state government acted on its own.
the first major provision of the articles insisted that each state retains its sovereignty freedom and independence the weak national government under the articles had only one component a one house legislature.
there was no national president no executive 248 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation branch no separate national judiciary court system.
state legislatures not voters appointed the members of the confederation congress in which each state regardless of size or population had one vote.
this meant that rhode island with 68 000 people had the same power in the confederation congress as virginia the largest and most prosperous state with more than 747 000 inhabitants.
george washington called the confederation a h alf starved limping government it could neither regulate trade nor create taxes to pay off the countrys large war debts.
it could approve treaties with other nations but had no power to enforce their terms.
it could call for raising an army but could not force men to fill the ranks.
the congress in short could not enforce its own laws and its budget relied on undependable voluntary contributions from the states.
in 1782 for example the confederation asked the states to provide 8 million for the national government they sent 420 000.
the lack of state support forced the confederation congress to print paper money called continentals whose value plummeted to two cents on the dollar as more and more were printed leading to the joking phrase not worth a continental virtually no gold and silver coins remained in circulation they had all gone abroad to purchase items for the war.
the confederation government ran up a budget deficit every year of its existence.
it was even hard to find people to serve in such a weak congress.
and people openly doubted the stability of the new american republic.
as john adams wrote to thomas jefferson the union is still to me an object of as much anxiety as ever independence was yet in spite of its limitations the confederation congress survived the war years while laying important foundations for the new national government.
the articles of confederation were crucially important in supporting the political concept of republicanism representative democracy which meant that america would be governed not by kings or queens or nobles but by the authority of the people whose elected representatives would make decisions on their behalf.
the confederation congress also created the national governments first executive departments and formulated the basic principles of land distribution and territorial government that would guide americas westward expansion.
land policy in ending the revolutionary war and transferring britains north american colonies to america the treaty of paris doubled the size of the united states extending the nations western boundary to the mississippi river.
under the articles of confederation land not included within the the confederation government 249 re nc er ive western land cessions 1781 1802 canada british r me mass.
s aw superio r lake la k ron hu lake michig an e vt e o nt lak k la r ceded by 1786 connecticut ve ri our i riv e r o hi o r riv e riv pennsylvania md virginia er de atlantic ocean ri ve r i da s p a n i sh nj altamaha river ain claimed by sp to 1795 ri south carolina georgia ma north carolina ceded by north carolina va nn ah fl or nh new york e sa mis sis sip pi ceded to france se nnes e te river louisiana spanish ri ee ceded by connecticut illino is is s ari o ct ceded by ts 1785 massachuset m l t 200 miles 200 kilometers ceded by new york 1781 ceded by virginia 1784 and 1792 ceded by south carolina to georgia 1787 ceded by georgia 1802 states with no western claims why were there so many overlapping claims to the western lands.
what were the key terms of the land ordinance of 1785.
how did the ordinance arrange for future states to enter the union.
wwn64 figure m6 1 first proof 31p0 x 31p6 boundaries of the thirteen original states became public domain owned and administered by the national government.
between 1784 and 1787 the confederation congress created three major ordinances policies detailing how the government owned lands in the west would be surveyed sold and developed.
these ordinances rank among the 250 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation confederations greatest achievements and among the most important in american history.
thomas jefferson drafted the land ordinance act of 1784 which urged states to drop their competing claims to indian held territory west of the appalachian mountains so that the vast unmapped area could be divided into as many as fourteen self governing territories of equal size.
in the new territories all adult white males would be eligible to vote hold office and write constitutions for their territorial governments.
when a territorys population equaled that of the smallest existing state rhode island it would be eligible for statehood.
before jeffersons plan could take effect however the confederation congress revised it through the land ordinance of 1785 which outlined a plan of land surveys and sales for the northwest territory the area that would become the states of ohio michigan indiana illinois and wisconsin and later on the great plains.
wherever indian lands were p urchased or taken they were surveyed and divided into six mile square townships laid out along a grid of lines running east west and north south.
each township was in turn divided into t hirty six sections one mile square 640 acres with each section divided into four farms.
the 640 acre sections of public lands were to be sold at auctions the proceeds of which went into the national treasury.
the northwest ordinance the third major land policy created by the confederation congress was the northwest ordinance of 1787.
it set forth two key principles the new western territories would eventually become states and slavery was banned from the region north of the ohio river slaves already there would remain slaves however.
the northwest ordinance also included a promise which would be repeatedly broken that indian lands shall never be taken from them without their consent for a new territory to become a state the northwest ordinance specified a three stage process.
first congress would appoint a territorial governor and other officials to create a legal code and administer justice.
second when the population of adult males reached 5 000 they could elect a territorial legislature.
third when a territorys population reached 60 000 free inhabitants it could draft a constitution and apply to congress for statehood.
diplomacy after the revolutionary war relations with great britain and spain remained tense because both nations kept trading posts forts and soldiers on american soil and both nations encouraged indians to resist american efforts to settle on their tribal lands.
the british refused to remove their troops south of the canadian border in protest of the failure of amer the confederation government 251 the old northwest 1785 british posts after 1783 present day state boundaries canada british r ri ve e su pe r i o ce lak la fort michilimackinac la st an hur on th lake michig.
oswegatchie ke nor we lak r e onta fort niagara detroit la st ke eri io dutchmans point pointeau fer oswego new york e pennsylvania r it delaware river or y cincinnati nj pittsburgh ma c e r ri po to t louisiana spanish n re w md ve r de virginia 200 miles r o hio r r ive 200 kilometers how did the northwest ordinance of 1787 revise jeffersons earlier plan for territorial government.
wwn64 figure m6 2 how were settlement patterns in the northwest territories different from firstthose proof on the frontier in the south.
31p0 x 25p0 how did the united states treat native american claims to their ancestral lands in the west.
icans to pay their prewar debts to british merchants.
another major irritant in u s british relations was the seizure of loyalist property.
during and after the war americans had confiscated tory homes businesses farms and slaves.
with spain the chief issues were the southern boundary of the united states and the right for americans to send boats or barges down the mississippi river which spain then controlled.
after the seven years war in 1763 spain had acquired the vast louisiana territory which included the valuable port of new orleans the mississippi river and all of the area west to the rocky mountains.
after the revolution spain closed the mississippi river to a merican use 252 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation infuriating settlers in kentucky and tennessee.
spain also regained ownership of florida which then included southern alabama.
thereafter the spanish governor in florida provided firearms to creek indians who resisted american encroachment on their lands in south georgia.
trade and the economy more troublesome than the behavior of the british and the spanish was the fragile state of the american economy.
seven years of warfare had nearly bankrupted the new nation.
the escape of some 60 000 slaves during and after the revolution was a terrible blow to the southern economy.
at the same time many men who had served in the army had never been paid.
civilians who had loaned money supplies crops and livestock to the war effort had also not been repaid.
after the war the british treated the united states as an enemy nation insisting that all americans who had been born in england were still bound by allegiance to king george iii.
british warships began stopping american ships in the atlantic boarding them and kidnapping english born american sailors and impressing them into service in the royal navy.
the british also closed their profitable island colonies in the caribbean to american commerce.
new england shipowners and southern planters were especially hard hit as exports of tobacco rice rum and other commodities remained far below what they had been before the war.
after 1783 merchant ships were allowed to deliver american products to england and return to the united states with english goods.
but u s vessels could not carry british goods anywhere else in the world.
to punish britain for banning u s trade with the british west indies many state governments imposed special taxes called tonnage fees on british vessels arriving in american ports and levied tariffs taxes on british goods brought to the united states.
the british responded by sending their ships to ports in states whose tariff rates were lower.
domestic industry american by charging different tariffs on the craftsmen such as this cabinetmaker same products the states waged comfavored tariffs on foreign goods that mercial war with each other.
the result competed with their own products.
was economic chaos.
by 1787 it was the gathering crisis 253 evident that the national government needed to regulate interstate trade and foreign relations especially in regard to british and spanish control of enormous territories bordering the united states.
scarce money complex financial issues also hampered economic development during the critical period.
there was no stable national currency and the nation had only three banks in philadelphia new york city and boston all created since 1782.
farmers who had profited during the war now found themselves squeezed by lower crop prices and mounting debts and taxes.
the widespread shortage of hard money gold and silver coins which had gone to european merchants to buy imported goods led people to postpone paying their bills.
by 1785 indebted citizens urged states to print new paper currency.
in a drama that would be replayed many times over the next century debtors believed that printing paper money would ease their plight by increasing the money supply inflation.
in 1785 1786 seven states began issuing their own paper money to help indebted farmers and to pay the cash bonuses promised to military veterans.
the gathering crisis the economic difficulties weakening the confederation were compounded by growing fears among wealthy gentlemen leaders natural aristocrats that the democratic energies unleashed by the revolution all men are born equal were undermining the authority of the traditional social and economic elite.
class distinctions were disappearing as many among the working poor and middling classes stopped deferring to their betters the so called better sort of people were appalled at the leveling behavior of the antifederal peasants little folks and demagogues who were challenging their leadership.
a virginia aristocrat grumbled that the spirit of independency that inspired the revolution was being converted into equality after the war.
the political culture was also changing more men could now vote and hold office as property owning qualifications were reduced or eliminated in several states.
the nation said wealthy new yorker john jay was headed toward evils and calamities because the masses were gaining power and often taking the laws into their own hands.
no sooner was the war over than americans with large debts again began to protest taxes.
to begin paying down their war debts most state legislatures 254 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation had sharply increased taxes.
in fact during the 1780s most americans paid three times as much in taxes as they had under british tyranny earlier they had objected to taxation without representation now they objected to taxation with representation.
some patriots lost farms because of their inability to pay the new taxes other debtors were imprisoned.
in new hampshire in what was called the exeter riot hard pressed farmers surrounded the legislative building demanding that the representatives print paper money to ease their plight.
similar appeals occurred in other states.
the economic and political elites were horrified that the new men were endangering the security of property by encouraging the printing of more money.
shayss rebellion fears of a taxpayer revolt from below became all too real in western massachusetts when struggling farmers many of them former soldiers demanded that the state issue more paper money and give them more time to pay the unjust taxes owed on their land.
farmers also resented the new state constitution because it raised the property qualifications for voting and holding elected office thus stripping poorer men of political power.
when the merchant dominated massachusetts legislature refused to provide relief however three rural counties in the western part of the state erupted in a disorganized revolt in 1786.
one rebel farmer plough jogger expressed the fears of many when he charged that the great men are going to get all we have and i think it is time for us to rise and put a stop to it and have no more courts nor sheriffs nor tax collectors nor lawyers armed groups of angry farmers called regulators banded together to force judges and sheriffs to stop seizing the cattle and farms of those who could not pay their taxes.
close down the courts they shouted.
a prominent bostonian reported that massachusetts was in a state of anarchy and confusion bordering on civil war the situation worsened when a shayss rebellion shays and his followers demanded that states ragtag army of unruly farmers led issue paper currency to help ease by t hirty nine year old daniel shays the payment of debts and the right to a war veteran marched on the federal postpone paying taxes until the postwar arsenal at springfield in the winter of agricultural depression lifted.
the state government responded creating the constitution 255 by sending 4 400 militiamen who scattered shayss debtor army with a single cannon blast that left four farmers dead and many wounded.
shays fled to vermont.
several others were arrested and two were hanged.
the rebels nevertheless earned a victory of sorts as the state legislature agreed to eliminate some of the taxes and fees on farmers.
news of shayss rebellion sent shock waves across the nation.
in massachusetts abigail adams the wife of future president john adams dismissed shays and his followers as ignorant restless desperadoes without conscience or principles in virginia george washington was equally concerned.
america he exclaimed needed a government by which our lives liberty and properties will be secured unless an alternative could be found to the weak confederation government anarchy and confusion will inevitably ensue creating the constitution in the wake of shayss rebellion a collective shiver passed through what wealthy new yorker john jay called the better kind of people many among the rich and well born agreed with george washington that the nation was tottering the time had come to empower the national government to bring social order and economic stability.
the crisis is arrived during the 1780s newspapers warned that the nations situation had grown critical and dangerous and that its vices were threatening national ruin the states were behaving like thirteen ungovernable nations pursuing their own trade regulations and foreign policies nine of them claimed to have their own navies.
our present federal government said henry knox a boston bookseller who was a general during the revolutionary war is a name a shadow without power or effect such concerns led political leaders to revise their assessment of the american republic.
we have probably concluded washington in 1786 had too good an opinion of human nature in forming our confederation fellow virginian james madison agreed declaring in 1787 that the crisis is arrived it was time to create a new federal constitution that would repair the vices of the political system and decide forever the fate of republican government new yorker alexander hamilton urged that a national gathering of delegates from each state be given full powers to revise the articles of confederation.
the constitutional convention in 1787 the confederation congress responded to hamilton and others by calling for a special 256 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation federal convention to gather in philadelphias old state house now known as independence hall for the purpose of revising the articles of confederation only rhode island refused to participate.
the delegates began work on may 25 1787 meeting five hours a day six days a week.
after four months of secret deliberations t hirty nine delegates signed the new federal constitution on september 17.
only three delegates refused to sign.
the durability of the constitution reflects the thoughtful men who created it.
the delegates were all white their average age was f orty two with the youngest being t wenty six.
most were members of the political and economic elite.
twenty six were college graduates two were college presidents and thirty four were lawyers.
others were planters merchants bankers and clergymen.
yet the founding fathers were also practical men of experience tested in the fires of the revolutionary war.
t wenty two had fought in the war five of whom were captured and imprisoned by the british.
seven had been state governors and eight had helped write their state constitutions.
most had been members of the continental or confederation congresses and eight had signed the declaration of independence.
nearly all were considered gentlemen and more than half of them owned slaves.
drafting the constitution george washington presides over a session of the constitutional convention in philadelphia.
creating the constitution 257 drafting the constitution the widely respected even r evered george washington served as presiding officer at the federal convention later renamed the constitutional convention.
he participated little in the debates however for fear that people would take his prestigious opinions too seriously.
the governor of pennsylvania eighty one year old benjamin franklin the oldest delegate was in such poor health that he had to be carried to the meetings in a special chair borne aloft by inmates from the philadelphia jail.
like washington franklin said little from the floor but provided a wealth of experience wit and common sense behind the scenes.
most active at the convention was james madison of virginia the ablest political theorist in the group.
a thirty six year old attorney who owned a huge tobacco plantation called montpelier not far from jeffersons monticello madison had arrived in philadelphia with trunks full of books about governments and a head full of ideas about how best to strengthen the loose confederation of independent and sovereign states madison was an unlikely giant at constitution making.
barely five feet tall and weighing only 120 pounds a colleague said he was no bigger than half a piece of soap he was too frail to serve in the revolutionary army and suffered from occasional epileptic seizures.
he speaks low his person body is little and ordinary and he was too timid in his politics remarked crusty fisher ames of massachusetts.
although painfully shy and s oft spoken madison had an agile mind a huge appetite for learning and a lifelong commitment to public service.
he was determined to create a constitution that would ensure the supremacy of national authority the logic of his arguments and his pragmatic willingness to compromise on particular points proved decisive in shaping the new constitution.
every person seems to acknowledge his greatness said a georgia delegate.
most delegates agreed with madison james madison this 1783 miniature that their young republic needed a stron shows madison at t hirty two years old ger national government weaker state just four years before he would assume a major role in drafting the constitution.
legislatures and the power to restrain the 258 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation excessive democratic impulses unleashed by the revolution.
the evils we experience said elbridge gerry of massachusetts flow from the excess of democracy two interrelated assumptions guided the constitutional convention that the national government must have direct authority over the citizenry rather than governing through the state governments and that the national government must derive its legitimacy from the people rather than from the state legislatures.
the insistence on the sovereignty of the people that the voters were the legitimate source of all authority as james wilson of pennsylvania stressed was the most important political innovation since the declaration of independence.
by declaring the constitution to be the voice of the people the founders authorized the federal government to limit the powers of the state governments.
the delegates realized too that an effective national government needed new authority to collect taxes borrow and issue money regulate commerce fund an army and navy and make laws binding upon individual citizens.
this meant that the states must be stripped of the power to print paper money make treaties wage war and levy tariffs on imported goods.
this concept of dividing authority between the national government and the states came to be called federalism.
the virginia and new jersey plans james madison drafted the framework for the initial discussions at the constitutional convention.
his proposals called the virginia plan started with a radical suggestion that the delegates scrap their original instructions to revise the articles of confederation and instead create an entirely new constitution.
the virginia plan called for a national government with a supreme legislative executive and judiciary it proposed a new congress divided into two houses bicameral a lower house of representatives chosen by the voters and an upper house of senators elected by the state legislatures.
the more populous states would have more representatives in congress than the smaller states.
madison also wanted to give congress the power to veto state laws.
the virginia plan sparked furious disagreements.
when asked why the small states were so suspicious of the plan gunning bedford of delaware replied i do not gentlemen trust you on june 15 bedford and other delegates submitted an alternative called the new jersey plan developed by william paterson of new jersey.
it sought to keep the existing equal representation of the states in a unicameral one house national legislature.
it also gave congress the power to collect taxes creating the constitution 259 and regulate commerce and the authority to name a chief executive as well as a supreme court but not the right to veto state laws.
the three branches of government the intense debate over congressional representation was finally resolved in mid july by the so called great compromise which used elements of both plans.
the more populous states won apportionment the allocation of delegates to each state by population in the proposed house of representatives while the delegates who sought to protect state power won equality of state representation in the senate where each state would have two members elected by the legislatures rather than directly by the people.
the legislature the great compromise embedded the innovative concept of separation of powers in the new congress.
it would have two separate houses each intended to counterbalance the other with the house of representatives representing the voters at large and the senate representing the state legislatures.
the lower house the house of representatives was designed to be as george mason said the grand repository of the democratic principle of the government its members would be elected by the voters every two years.
under the articles of confederation none of the members of congress had been chosen by popular vote all of them had been elected by state legislatures.
james madison argued that allowing individual citizens to elect one part of the new legislature was essential to every plan of free government the upper house or senate was intended to be a more elite group its members elected by state legislatures for six year terms.
the senate was intended to be a conservative balancing force.
it could use its power to overrule the house of representatives or the president.
madison explained that the senate would help protect the minority of the opulent against the majority the presidency the constitutional convention struggled mightily over issues related to the executive branch.
some delegates wanted a powerful president who could veto acts of congress.
others felt the opposite that the president should simply execute the laws as passed by congress.
still others like benjamin franklin wanted a plural executive rather than a single man governing the nation.
the eventual decision to have a single chief executive caused many delegates considerable pause according to james madison.
george mason of virginia feared that a single president might start behaving like a king.
260 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation in the end several compromises ensured that the president would be powerful enough to counterbalance the congress.
in some cases the chief executives powers actually exceeded those of the british king.
the new president to be elected for four year terms could veto acts of congress subject to being overridden by a two thirds vote in each house in britain the royal veto over parliamentary legislation had long since been abandoned.
the president was to be the nations chief diplomat and commander in chief of the armed forces and was responsible for implementing the laws made by congress.
yet the powers of the president were also limited in key areas.
the chief executive could neither declare war nor make peace those powers were reserved for congress.
unlike the british monarch moreover the president could be removed from office.
the house of representatives could impeach bring to trial the chief executive and other civil officers on charges of treason bribery or other high crimes and misdemeanors an impeached president could be removed from office if t wo thirds of the senate voted for conviction.
to preserve the separation of the three branches of the new national government the president would be elected not by congress but by a group of highly qualified electors chosen by the people in local elections.
the number of electors for each state would depend upon the combined number of signing the constitution september 17 1787 thomas pritchard rossiters painting shows george washington presiding over what thomas jefferson called an assembly of demi gods in philadelphia.
creating the constitution 261 congressional representatives and u s senators.
this electoral college was a compromise between those wanting the president elected by congress and those preferring a direct vote of qualified citizens.
the judiciary the third proposed branch of government the judiciary sparked little debate.
the constitution called for a supreme national court headed by a chief justice.
the supreme courts role was not to make laws a power reserved to congress or to execute and enforce the laws reserved to the presidency but to interpret the laws and to ensure that every citizen received equal justice under the law.
the u s supreme court was given final authority in interpreting the constitution and in settling constitutional disputes between states.
furthermore article vi of the constitution declared that the federal constitution federal laws and treaties are the supreme law of the land state laws or constitutions to the contrary notwithstanding the limits of the constitution the men who drafted the new constitution claimed to be representing all americans.
to highlight that point the constitution begins with the words we the people of the united states in order to form a more perfect union.
establish this constitution for the united states of america in fact however as senator stephen douglas of illinois noted seventy years later the constitution was made by white men for the benefit of white men and their posterity descendants forever important groups of americans were left out of the constitutions protections.
native americans for example were not considered federal or state citizens unless they paid taxes which very few did.
the constitution declared that native american tribes were not part of the united states but instead were separate nations slavery of all the issues that emerged during the constitutional convention of 1787 none was more explosive than slavery.
when the patriots declared independence in 1776 slavery existed in every state.
by 1787 however massachusetts pennsylvania connecticut and rhode island had abolished the practice.
many of the framers viewed slavery as an embarrassing contradiction to the principles of liberty and equality embodied in the declaration of independence and the new constitution.
a new jersey delegate declared that slavery 262 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation was utterly inconsistent with the principles of christianity and humanity by contrast most delegates from the southern states stoutly defended slavery.
religion and humanity have nothing to do with this slavery question declared john rutledge of south carolina.
interest alone is the governing principle of nations most southern delegates would have walked out had there been an attempt to abolish slavery.
so the framers did not consider ending the cursed system nor did they view the enslaved as human beings whose rights should be protected.
slaves were simply viewed as a form of property with a cash value.
those with qualms about slavery salved their consciences by assuming that the practice would eventually die out naturally.
if the slaves were not to be freed or their rights to be acknowledged however how were they to be counted.
since the size of state delegations in the proposed house of representatives was to be based on population southern delegates argued that slaves should be counted to help determine how many representatives from each state would serve in the new congress.
northerners countered that it made no sense to count slaves for purposes of congressional representation when they were treated as property rather than people.
the delegates finally agreed to a compromise in which t hree fifths of all other persons that is the enslaved would be included in population counts as a basis for apportioning a states congressional representatives.
in a constitution intended to secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity the three fifths clause was a glaring example of compromise being divorced from principle.
the corrupt bargain over slavery would bedevil the nation for the next seventy five years.
by design the original constitution never mentions the word slavery.
instead it speaks of free persons and all other persons and of persons charles calvert and his slave 1761 in military regalia the five year held to service of labor the word old descendant of lord baltimore slavery would not appear in the confounder of maryland towers over his stitution until the thirteenth amendslave who is dressed as a drummer boy.
ment 1865 abolished it.
creating the constitution 263 the three fifths clause gave the southern states disproportionate power in congress by increasing the number of southern votes in the house of representatives.
this in turn increased southern influence in the electoral college since the number of each states electors was to be the total of its senators and representatives.
it was thus no accident that in the nations first sixteen presidential elections between 1788 and 1848 a southern slaveholder would be elected twelve times.
the p ro slavery nature of the constitution prompted the fiery abolitionist william lloyd garrison to declare in the 1830s that the framers of the document had forged a covenant with death and an agreement with hell the absence of women the delegates at the constitutional convention dismissed any discussion of political rights for women.
yet not all women were willing to maintain their traditional subordinate role.
just as the experiences of the revolutionary war led many african americans to seize their freedom some brave women demanded political equality for themselves.
eliza yonge wilkinson born in 1757 to a wealthy plantation family living on an island south of charleston south carolina lost her husband early in the war.
in june 1780 after wilkinson was assaulted and robbed by inhuman british soldiers she became a fiery patriot who hated tyranny in every shape she assured a friend that we may be led but we never will be driven likewise wilkinson expected greater freedom for women after the war.
the men say we have no business with politics she wrote to a friend.
i wont have it thought that because we are the weaker sex as to bodily strength my dear we are capable of nothing more than minding the dairy visiting the poultry house and all such domestic concerns wilkinson demanded more.
they wont even allow us the liberty of thought and that is all i want judith sargent murray a massachusetts essayist playwright and poet argued that the rights and liberties fought for by patriots belonged not just to men but to women too.
in her essay on the equality of the sexes published in 1790 she challenged the prevailing view that men had greater intellectual capacities than women.
she insisted that any differences resulted from prejudice and discrimination that prevented women from having access to formal education and worldly experience.
the arguments for gender equality however fell mostly on deaf ears.
at the constitutional convention in philadelphia there was no formal discussion of womens rights nor does the constitution even include the word women.
writing from paris thomas jefferson expressed the hope that american ladies would be contented to soothe and calm the minds of their husbands returning ruffled from political debate 264 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation immigration although america was a nation of immigrants the constitution said little about immigration and naturalization the process of gaining citizenship and most of what it said was negative.
in article ii section 1 it prohibits any future immigrant from becoming president limiting the office to a born citizen on defining citizenship the constitution gives congress the authority to establish a uniform rule of naturalization but offers no further guidance.
as a result naturalization policy has changed repeatedly over the years in response to fluctuating social attitudes economic needs and political moods.
in 1790 the first congress under the new constitution would pass a naturalization law that allowed free white persons who had been in the united states for as few as two years to be made naturalized citizens.
this meant that persons of african descent were denied citizenship it was left to individual states to determine whether free blacks were citizens.
because indians were not free white persons they were also treated as aliens.
not until 1924 would native americans be granted c itizenship by an act of congress rather than a constitutional amendment.
on september 17 1787 the federal convention reported that it had completed the new constitution.
gentlemen announced benjamin franklin you have a republic if you can keep it the fight for ratification the final draft of the constitution was submitted to thirteen special state conventions for approval ratification on september 28 1787.
over the next ten months people from all walks of life in taverns and coffeehouses on street corners around dinner tables and in the nations n inety two newspapers debated the new constitutions merits.
as alexander hamilton noted the debate would reveal whether the people could establish good government by reflection and choice rather than by accident and force the outcome was by no means certain but hamilton said that during the f our month constitutional convention there has been an astonishing revolution for the better in the minds of the people about the new frame of government.
choosing sides advocates for the constitution assumed the name federalists opponents became anti federalists.
the two sides formed the seeds for americas first two party political system.
in the prolonged debate the federalists led by james madison and alexander hamilton had several advantages.
first they had a concrete proposal the proposed constitution itself their opponents had nothing to offer instead but criticism.
second the federalist leaders were on average ten to twelve the fight for ratification 265 years younger and more energetic than the anti federalists many of them had been members of the constitutional convention and were familiar with the disputed issues in the document.
third the federalists were more unified and better organized.
the anti federalist leaders virginians patrick henry george mason richard henry lee and future president james monroe george clinton of new york samuel adams elbridge gerry and mercy otis warren of massachusetts luther martin and samuel chase of m aryland were a diverse group.
some wanted to reject the constitution and retain the confederation.
others wanted to convene another convention and start over.
still others wanted to revise the proposed constitution.
most anti federalists worried that the new national government would eventually grow corrupt and tyrannical.
mercy otis warren of massachusetts the most prominent woman then writing regular political commentary compared the constitution to shackles on our own necks a philadelphia writer denounced those who drafted the constitution as representing the aristocratic party intent upon creating a monarchical national government.
the anti federalists especially criticized the absence of a bill of rights in the proposed constitution to protect individuals and states from the growing power of the national government.
other than the bill of rights however the anti federalists had no comprehensive alternative to the constitution except the admittedly flawed articles of confederation.
the federalist among the supreme legacies of the long debate over the constitution is what came to be called the federalist papers a collection of eighty five essays published in new york newspapers between 1787 and 1788.
written by james madison alexander hamilton and john jay the essays defended the concept of a strong national government and outlined the major principles and assumptions the federalist papers alexander hamilton james madison and john jay published this series of essays in 1788 defending the concept of stronger central government and urging ratification of the constitution.
266 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation embodied in the constitution.
thomas jefferson called the federalist papers the best commentary on the principles of government which ever was written in the most famous of the federalist essays number 10 madison turned the conventional wisdom about republics on its head.
from ancient times it had been assumed that self governing republics survived only if they were small and homogeneous.
patrick henry in fact argued that a single national government could not reign over so extensive a country as this is without absolute despotism madison however argued that small republics usually fell victim to warring f actions well organized interest groups pursuing their self interest at the expense of the whole.
in the united states he explained the size and diversity of the expanding nation would make it impossible for any single faction to form a dangerous majority that could dominate the federal government or society at large.
the contending factions would in essence cancel each other out.
in addition he argued that it was the responsibility of the congress to regulate these various and interfering interests madison and the other framers created a legal and political system designed to protect minorities from a tyranny of the majority.
given a new federal government in which power was checked and balanced among the three federal branches a large republic could work better than a small one to prevent factional tyranny.
extend the geographic sphere madison wrote and you take in a greater variety of parties and interests you make it less probable that a majority of the whole will have a common motive to invade the rights of other citizens the states decide several of the smaller s tates delaware new jersey and georgia were among the first to ratify the constitution.
massachusetts still sharply divided in the aftermath of shayss rebellion was the first state in which the outcome was close approving the constitution by 187 to 168 on february 6 1788.
on june 21 1788 new hampshire became the ninth state to ratify the constitution thereby reaching the minimum number of states needed for approval.
the constitution however could hardly succeed without the approval of virginia the largest wealthiest and most populous state or new york which had the third highest population and occupied a key position geographically.
both states included strong opposition groups who were eventually won over by the same pledge as had been made in massachusetts the addition of a bill of rights.
upon notification that new hampshire had become the ninth state to ratify the constitution the confederation congress chose new york city as the initial national capital and called for the new national government to assume power in 1789.
the constitution was adopted but the spirited resistance to it the fight for ratification 267 the vote on the constitution 1787 1790 federalist majority anti federalist majority evenly divided maine to mass.
lake michi gan lake huron nh ntario lake o e lak new york e eri ma ct ri pennsylvania nj md de virginia kentucky district tennessee district atlantic ocean north carolina south carolina georgia 200 miles 200 kilometers who were the leading federalists and anti federalists.
why were the anti federalists opposed to the constitution.
wwn64 how did the federalists win the national vote ratifying the constitution.
figure m6 3 frst proof 23p0 x 32p0 268 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation convinced the new congress to propose the first ten constitutional amendments now known as the bill of rights.
after attending a parade celebrating the ratification of the constitution dr benjamin rush a philadelphia physician noted with satisfaction that it is done.
we have become a nation other celebrants shared the hope that the new frame of government would last.
our constitution is in actual operation benjamin franklin wrote to a friend in 1789.
everything appears to promise that it will last but in this world nothing is certain but death and taxes george washington was even more uncertain about the future predicting that the constitution would not last for more than twenty years the constitution has lasted much longer of course and in the process its adaptability has provided a model of resilient republican government.
the constitution was by no means perfect after all it has been amended twenty seven times it was a bundle of messy compromises and concessions that left many issues the most important of which was slavery undecided or ignored.
few of the constitutions supporters liked it in its entirety but most believed that it was the best frame of government obtainable and that it would continue to evolve and improve over time.
the constitution confirmed that the united states would be the first democratic republic in history.
the founders believed that they were creating a unique political system based on a new science of politics combining the best aspects of democracies and republics.
in a democracy the people rule sixth pillar an engraving published in 1788 in the massachusetts centinel after massachusetts became the sixth state to ratify the constitution.
by the end of 1788 five more states would approve and the new constitution would soon go into effect.
the last two states to ratify were north carolina in 1789 and rhode island in 1790.
the federalist era 269 ratification of the constitution order of r atification state date of ratification delaware december 7 1787 pennsylvania december 12 1787 new jersey december 18 1787 georgia january 2 1788 connecticut january 9 1788 massachusetts february 6 1788 maryland april 28 1788 south carolina may 23 1788 new hampshire june 21 1788 virginia june 25 1788 new york july 26 1788 north carolina november 21 1789 rhode island may 29 1790 in a republic the officials elected by the people rule.
at the constitutional convention the delegates combined aspects of both approaches so that they balanced and regulated each other and ensured that personal freedoms and the public welfare were both protected in the process.
the federalist era the constitution was ratified because it promised to create a more powerful national government better capable of managing a rapidly growing republic.
yet it was one thing to ratify a new constitution and quite another to make the new government run smoothly.
with each passing year the united states witnessed growing debate over how to interpret and apply the provisions of the new constitution.
during the 1790s a decade called the age of passion the federal government would confront rebellions states threatening to secede international tensions and foreign wars as well as something left unmentioned in the constitution the formation of fiercely competing political parties federalists and democratic republicans more commonly known as jeffersonian republicans or simply as republicans.
the two political parties came to represent very different visions for america.
the democratic republicans were mostly southerners like virginians thomas jefferson and james madison who wanted the country to remain a 270 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation new beginnings an engraving from the title page of the universal asylum and columbian magazine published in philadelphia in 1790.
america is represented as a woman laying down her shield to engage in education art commerce and agriculture.
rural nation of small farmers dedicated to republican values.
the democratic republicans distrusted the national government defended states rights preferred a strict interpretation of the constitution and placed their trust in the masses.
the will of the majority the natural law of every society jefferson insisted is the only sure guardian of the rights of men the federalists led by alexander hamilton and john adams were clustered in new york and new england and embraced urban culture industrial development and commercial growth.
federalists distrusted the passions of the common people and advocated a strong national government and a flexible interpretation of the constitution.
as hamilton stressed the people are turbulent and changing they seldom judge or determine right the first president on march 4 1789 the new congress convened in new york city.
a few weeks later the presiding officer of the senate certified that george washington with 69 electoral college votes was the nations first president.
john adams of massachusetts with 34 votes the second highest number became vice president at this time no candidates ran specifically for the vice presidency the presidential candidate who came in second regardless of party affiliation became vice president.
the federalist era 271 george washington was a reluctant first president.
he would have preferred to stay at mount vernon his virginia plantation but agreed to serve because he had been summoned by my country some complained that washingtons personality was too cold and aloof.
others thought he was unsophisticated since he had little formal education and had never visited europe.
the acidic john adams groused that washington was too illiterate unlearned and unread to be president.
washington had virtues that adams lacked however.
as a french diplomat observed president washington had the soul look and figure of a hero in action he was a soldier who had married a wealthy young widow and become a prosperous tobacco planter and land speculator.
he brought to the presidency both a detached dignity and a remarkable capacity for leadership that helped keep the young republic from disintegrating.
although capable of angry outbursts washington was honest honorable and remarkably self disciplined he had extraordinary stamina and patience integrity and resolve courage and resilience.
and he exercised sound judgment.
he usually asked people for their views weighed his options and made a decision.
most of all he was fearless.
few doubted that he was the best person to lead the new nation.
in his inaugural address washington appealed for unity pleading with the new congress to abandon local prejudices and party animosities to create the national outlook necessary for the fledgling republic to thrive.
within a few months he would see his hopes dashed.
personal rivalries sectional tensions and political infighting would dominate life in the 1790s.
washingtons cabinet americas first president took charge of a tiny national government that faced massive challenges.
george washington had a larger staff at his mount vernon plantation than he did as president of the united states.
unlike today when the executive branch has hundreds of staff members president washington had two.
and when those two secretaries went on vacation he was forced to write all presidential letters himself.
in addition when the presidents office needed new furniture he paid for it.
during the summer of 1789 congress created executive departments corresponding to those formed under the confederation.
to head the department of state president washington named thomas jefferson recently back from his diplomatic duties in france.
to lead the department of the treasury washington appointed alexander hamilton who was widely read in matters of government finance.
washington selected john jay as the first chief justice of the supreme court.
after serving as president of the continental congress in 1778 1779 jay became the american minister ambassador to spain.
while in europe he helped john adams and benjamin franklin negotiate the treaty of paris 272 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation in 1783.
after the revolution jay served as secretary of foreign affairs.
he joined hamilton and james madison as co author of the federalist papers and became one of the most effective champions of the constitution.
president washington routinely called his chief staff members together to discuss matters of policy.
this was the origin of the presidents cabinet an advisory body for which the constitution made no formal provision.
the office of vice president also took on what would become its typical character.
the vice presidency john adams wrote his wife abigail is the most insignificant office.
contrived the bill of rights to address concerns raised by opponents of the new federal government james madison now a congressman from virginia presented to congress in may 1789 a set of constitutional amendments intended to protect individual rights from excessive government power.
as thomas jefferson explained such a bill of rights is what the people are entitled to against every government on earth general or particular and what no just government should refuse after considerable debate congress approved twelve amendments in september 1789.
by the end of 1791 the necessary three fourths of the states had approved ten of the twelve proposed amendments now known as the bill of rights.
the bill of rights provided safeguards for individual rights of speech assembly and the press the right to own firearms the right to refuse to house soldiers protection against unreasonable searches and seizures the right to refuse to testify against oneself the right to a speedy public trial with an attorney present before an impartial jury and protection against cruel and unusual punishments.
the tenth amendment addressed the widespread demand that powers not delegated to the national government are reserved to the states respectively or to the people the amendments were written in broad language that seemed to exclude no one.
in fact however they technically applied only to p roperty owning white males.
native americans were entirely outside the constitutional system an alien people in their own land.
and like the constitution itself the bill of rights gave no protections to enslaved americans.
instead they were governed by state slave codes they had no access to the legal system they could not go to court make contracts or own property.
similar restrictions applied to women who could not vote in most state and national elections.
equally important the bill of rights had a b uilt in flaw it did not protect citizens from states violating their civil rights.
religious freedom the debates over the constitution and the bill of rights generated a religious revolution as well as a political revolution.
hamiltons vision of a c apitalist america 273 unlike the new england puritans whose colonial governments enforced their particular religious beliefs the christian men who drafted and amended the constitution made no direct mention of god.
they were determined to protect religious life from government interference and coercion.
in contrast to the monarchies of europe the united states would keep the institutions of church and government separate and allow people to choose their own religions freedom of conscience.
to that end the first amendment declared that congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof this statement has since become one of the most important and controversial principles of american government.
the united states was virtually alone among nations in not designating a single established national religion funded by the government.
france spain and italy were officially catholic nations great britain was anglican.
in addition when the bill of rights was ratified all but two s tates new york and v irginia still supported an official religion or maintained a religious requirement for holding political office.
dissenters the members of other churches or nonbelievers were tolerated but were prohibited from voting or holding political office.
the first amendment was intended to create a framework within which people of all religious persuasions could flourish.
it prohibited the federal government from endorsing or supporting any individual denomination or interfering with the religious choices that people make.
as thomas jefferson later explained the first amendment erected a wall of separation between church and state hamiltons vision of a c apitalist america in 1776 the same year that americans were declaring their independence adam smith a scottish philosopher published a revolutionary book titled an inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations.
it provided the first full description of a modern capitalist economy and its social benefits.
like the american revolution the wealth of nations was a declaration of independence from great britains mercantilist system.
under mercantilism national governments had exercised tight controls over economic life.
smith argued that instead of controlling economic activity governments should allow individuals and businesses to compete freely for profits in the marketplace.
doing so would unleash the energies of the capitalist spirit.
alexander hamilton greatly admired the wealth of nations and he eagerly took charge of managing the nations complicated financial affairs.
more than 274 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation any other american he grasped both the complex issues of government finance and envisioned what america would become the worlds most prosperous capitalist nation.
hamilton was a self made and self educated aristocrat.
born out of wedlock in the west indies in 1755 he was deserted by his scottish father and left an orphan at thirteen by the death of his mother.
with the help of friends and relatives he found his way at age fifteen to new jersey in late 1772 before moving a year later to new york city.
there he entered kings college now columbia university.
when the war with britain erupted hamilton joined the continental army as a captain at the ripe age of nineteen.
after he distinguished himself in the battles of trenton and princeton hamilton became one of general washingtons favorite aides.
after the war hamilton established a thriving legal practice in new york city a fellow lawyer said he surpassed all of us in his abilities married into a prominent family and served as a member of the confederation congress.
during the revolutionary war hamilton had witnessed the near fatal weaknesses of the confederation congress.
its lack of authority and money almost lost the war.
now as treasury secretary he believed that the federal government should encourage the hustling bustling creative spirit that distinguished americans from other peoples.
hamilton became the foremost advocate for an energetic government promoting capitalist development.
in contrast to jefferson the southern planter hamilton the urban capitalist believed that the united states was too dependent on agriculture for its economic well being.
he championed trade banking finance investment alexander hamilton the powerful and manufacturing as well as bustling secretary of the treasury from 1789 to commercial cities as the most essential 1795 elements of americas future.
hamiltons vision of a c apitalist america 275 hamiltons economic reforms the united states was born in debt.
to fight the war for independence it had borrowed heavily from the dutch and the french.
now after the war it had to find a way to pay off the debts.
yet there was no national bank no national currency and very few mills and factories.
in essence the american republic was bankrupt.
it fell to alexander hamilton to determine how the debts should be repaid and how the new national government could balance its budget.
governments have four basic ways to pay their bills impose taxes or fees on individuals and businesses levy tariffs taxes on imported goods borrow money by selling interest paying government bonds to investors and last but not least print money.
under hamiltons leadership the united states did all of these things and more.
to raise funds the new congress with hamiltons support enacted tariffs of 5 to 10 percent on the value of a wide variety of imported items.
tariffs were hotly debated for two reasons 1 they were the source of most of the federal governments annual revenue and 2 tariffs also protected american manufacturers by taxing their foreign competitors especially those in britain.
by discriminating against imported goods tariffs enabled american manufacturers to charge higher prices for their products sold in the united states.
this penalized consumers particularly those in the southern states that were most dependent upon imported goods.
in essence tariffs benefited the nations young manufacturing sector most of which was in new england at the expense of the agricultural sector since farm produce was rarely imported.
tariff policy soon became an explosive political issue.
dealing with debts the levying of tariffs marked but one major element in alexander hamiltons ambitious plan to put the new republic on a sound financial footing.
in a series of brilliant reports submitted to congress between january 1790 and december 1791 hamilton outlined his visionary program for the economic development of the united states.
the first of two reports on public credit dealt with how the new federal government should refinance the massive debt that the states and the confederation government had accumulated during the war for independence.
hamilton insisted that the debts be repaid.
after all he explained a capitalist economy depends upon its integrity and reliability debts being paid contracts being enforced and private property being protected.
by selling government bonds to pay the interest due on the huge war related debts hamilton argued the u s government would also give investors 276 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation the monied interest a direct stake in the success of the new national government.
a well managed federal debt he claimed would become a national blessing by giving investors at home and abroad confidence in the national economy and the integrity of the government.
hamilton also insisted that the federal government pay assume the state debts from the revolutionary war because they were in fact a national responsibility all americans had benefited from the war for independence.
the debt of the united states he stressed was the price of liberty sectional differences hamiltons complicated financial proposals created a storm of controversy in part because many people then and since did not understand their complexities.
james madison who had been hamiltons close ally in the fight for the new constitution broke with him over the federal government assuming the states debts.
madison then the most powerful member of the new congress was troubled that northern states owed far more debt than southern states.
four states virginia north carolina georgia and maryland had already paid off most of their war debts.
the other states had not been as conscientious.
madisons opposition to hamiltons debt assumption plan ignited a vigorous debate in congress.
in april 1790 the house of representatives voted down hamiltons assumption plan 32 29.
hamilton did not give up however.
after failing to get a couple of members of congress to switch their votes he then hatched an ingenious scheme.
in june 1790 hamilton invited jefferson and madison to join him for dinner in new york city.
by the end of the evening the three leaders had reached a famous compromise.
first they agreed that the national capital should move from new york city to philadelphia for the next ten years.
then the capital would move to a new city to be built in a federal district on the potomac river between maryland and virginia.
hamilton agreed to find the votes in congress to approve the move in exchange for madison pledging to find the two votes needed to pass the d ebt assumption plan.
the votes in congress went as planned and the federal government moved in late 1790 to philadelphia.
ten years later the nations capital was moved again this time to the new planned city of washington in the federal district of columbia.
more immediately hamiltons debt funding scheme proved a success.
the new bonds issued by the federal government in 1790 were quickly snatched up by eager investors thereby providing money to begin paying off the war debts while covering its operating expenses.
in addition hamilton obtained new loans from european governments.
hamiltons vision of a c apitalist america 277 to raise additional government revenue hamilton convinced congress to create an array of excise taxes taxes on particular products such as carriages sugar and salt.
a 25 percent excise tax on liquor in 1791 would prove to be the most controversial of all but the excise taxes generated m uch needed revenue.
by 1794 the nation had a higher financial credit rating than all the nations of europe.
by making the new nation financially solvent hamilton set in motion the greatest economic success story in world history.
a national bank part of the opposition to hamiltons debt financing scheme grew out of opposition to hamilton himself.
the brash young treasury secretary viewed himself as president washingtons prime minister.
that his department of treasury had forty staff members while thomas jeffersons state department had five employees demonstrated the priority that president washington gave to the nations financial situation.
hamilton was on a mission to develop an urban centered economy anchored in finance and manufacturing.
after securing congressional approval of his d ebt funding scheme he called for a national bank modeled after the powerful bank of england.
such a bank hamilton believed would enable much greater commerce among individuals and provide a safe place for the federal governments cash.
by their nature hamilton explained banks were essential to a new nation that was short on gold and silver.
banks would increase the nations money supply by issuing currency in amounts greater than their actual reserve gold and silver coins and government bonds in their vaults.
by issuing loans and thereby increasing the amount of money circulating through the economy banks served as the engines of prosperity industry is increased commodities are multiplied agriculture and manufactures flourish and herein consist the true wealth and prosperity of a genuine nation hamiltons idea of a powerful national bank generated intense criticism.
once again madison and jefferson led the opposition arguing that since the constitution said nothing about creating a national bank the government could not start one.
jefferson also believed that hamiltons proposed bank would not help most americans.
instead a small inner circle of self serving financiers and investors would over time exercise corrupt control over congress.
hamilton however had the better of the argument in congress.
representatives from the northern states voted 33 1 in favor of the national bank southern congressmen opposed the bank 19 6.
the lopsided vote illustrated the growing political division between the north and south in the young nation.
278 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation the bank of the united states proposed by alexander hamilton the national bank opened in philadelphia in 1791.
before signing the bank bill president washington sought the advice of his cabinet where he found an equal division of opinion.
the result was the first great debate on constitutional interpretation.
were the powers of congress only those explicitly stated in the constitution or were other powers implied.
the argument turned chiefly on article i section 8 which authorized congress to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers such language left lots of room for disagreement about what was necessary and proper and led to a savage confrontation between jefferson and hamilton.
the treasury secretary had come to view jefferson as a man of profound ambition violent passions who was guided by an unsound dangerous agrarian economic philosophy.
secretary of state jefferson who despised banks almost as much as he hated the monarchist hamilton pointed to the tenth amendment of the constitution which reserves to the states and the people powers not explicitly delegated to congress.
jefferson argued that a bank might be a convenient aid to congress in collecting taxes and regulating the currency but it was not necessary as article i section 8 specified.
in a lengthy 16 000 word report to the president hamilton countered that the power to charter corporations was an implied power of any government.
hamiltons vision of a c apitalist america 279 as he pointed out the three banks already in existence had been chartered by states none of whose constitutions specifically mentioned the authority to incorporate banks.
hamilton convinced washington to sign the bank bill.
in doing so the president had in jeffersons words opened up a boundless field of power which in coming years would lead to a further broadening of the presidents implied powers with the approval of the supreme court.
the new bank of the united states b u s.
based in philadelphia had three primary responsibilities 1 to hold the governments funds and pay its bills 2 to provide loans to the federal government and to other banks to promote economic development and 3 to manage the nations money supply by regulating the power of state chartered banks to issue paper currency called banknotes.
could issue national banknotes as needed to address the chronic shortage of gold and silver coins.
by 1800 the b u s.
had branches in four cities and four more were soon to be added.
the american financial system was on the verge of becoming the most effective in the world.
encouraging manufacturing hamiltons bold economic vision for the new republic was not yet complete.
in the last of his celebrated recommendations to congress the report on manufactures distributed in december 1791 he set in place the capstone of his design for a modern capitalist economy the active governmental promotion of new manufacturing and industrial enterprises mills mines and factories.
industrialization hamilton believed would bring diversification to an american economy dominated by agriculture and dangerously dependent on imported british goods improve productivity through greater use of machinery provide work for those not ordinarily employed outside the home such as women and children and encourage immigration of skilled industrial workers from other nations.
to foster industrial development hamilton recommended that the federal government increase tariffs on imports three quarters of which came from britain while providing financial incentives called bounties to key industries making especially needed products such as wool cotton cloth and window glass.
such government support he claimed would enable new industries to compete on equal terms with longstanding european enterprises.
finally hamilton asked congress to fund major transportation improvements including the development of roads canals and harbors for commercial traffic.
few of hamiltons pro industry ideas were enacted because of strong opposition from jefferson madison and other southerners.
they did not believe the federal government should support particular industries.
hamiltons proposals however provided an arsenal of arguments for the advocates 280 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation certificate of the new york mechanick society an illustration of the growing diversification of labor by abraham godwin ca.
of manufacturing and federally funded transportation projects called internal improvements in years to come.
hamiltons visionary achievements the economic impact of hamiltons leadership was monumental.
during the 1790s as the treasury department began to pay off the revolutionary war debts foreign capitalists and banks invested heavily in the booming american economy and european nations as well as china began a growing trade with the united states.
economic growth so elusive in the 1780s blossomed at the end of the century as the number of new businesses soared.
a bostonian reported that the nation had never had a brighter sunshine of prosperity.
our agricultural interest smiles our commerce is blessed our manufactures flourish all was not well however.
by championing the values and institutions of a bustling new capitalist system and the big cities and industries that went along with it hamilton upset many people especially in the agricultural south and along the western frontier.
thomas jefferson and james madison had grown increasingly concerned that hamiltons urban industrial economic program and his political d eal making were threatening american liberties.
hamilton hamiltons vision of a c apitalist america 281 recognized that his successes had led jefferson and madison to form a party hostile to me and one intent on making jefferson the next president.
the political competition between jefferson and hamilton boiled over into a nasty personal feud.
both men were visionaries but their visions of americas future could not have been more different.
hamilton saw britain as the model for the kind of e conomy and society he wanted america to develop jefferson preferred france.
they also had markedly different hopes for the nations economic development.
jefferson told president washington that hamiltons efforts to create a thomas jefferson a 1791 portrait by capitalist economy would undermine charles willson peale.
and demolish the republic and c reate the most corrupt government on earth hamilton he added was really a colossus giant to the a nti republican party in turn hamilton called the agrarian jefferson an intriguing incendiary who had circulated unkind whispers about the treasury secretary in an effort to stab me in the dark he also accused jefferson of being an agrarian romantic who failed to see that manufacturing industry and banking would drive the economic future of the united states.
jeffersons spirited opposition to hamiltons politics and policies fractured washingtons cabinet.
jefferson wrote that he and hamilton daily pitted in the cabinet like two cocks roosters president washington who detested political squabbling begged them to stop smearing each other with wounding suspicions and irritating charges and urged them to rise above their dissensions but it was too late they had become mortal enemies as well as the leaders of the first loosely organized political parties the federalists and the d emocratic republicans.
federalists and democratic republicans the federalists were centered in new york and new england.
generally they feared the excesses of democracy distrusted the common people and wanted a strong central government led by the wisest and best leaders who would be 282 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation c ommitted to economic growth social stability and national defense.
what most worried the federalists as alexander hamilton said was the poison of democracy the people he stressed are turbulent and changing they seldom judge or determine right wisely by contrast the democratic republicans led by thomas jefferson and james madison were most concerned about threats to individual freedoms and states rights posed by a strong national government.
in july 1789 chaotic violence erupted in france when masses of the working poor enraged over soaring prices for bread their primary food and in part inspired by the american revolution revolted against the absolute monarchy of louis xvi sending shock waves throughout europe.
the french revolution captured the imagination of many sympathetic americans especially thomas jefferson and the republicans as royal tyranny was displaced by a democratic republic that gave voting rights to all adult men regardless of how much property they owned.
americans formed democratic republican societies that hosted rallies on behalf of the french revolution and in support of local republican candidates.
during the 1790s james madison assumed leadership of hamiltons republican opponents in congress.
foreign and domestic crises during the fragile infancy of the new nation george washington was the only man able to rise above party differences and hold things together.
in 1792 he was unanimously reelected to a second term.
and he quickly found himself embroiled in the cascading consequences of the french revolution which had started in 1789.
the turmoil in france threatened to draw the united states into a european war.
in 1791 the monarchies of prussia and austria had invaded france to stop the revolutionary movement from infecting their absolutist societies.
the foreign invaders however only inspired the french revolutionaries to greater efforts to use force to spread their ideal of democracy.
by early 1793 the most radical of the french revolutionaries called jacobins had executed the king and queen as well as hundreds of aristocrats and priests.
the jacobins not only promoted democracy religious toleration and human rights but they went well beyond the ideals of the american revolution in supporting social racial and sexual equality.
then on february 1 1793 the french revolutionary government declared war on great britain thus beginning a conflict that would last twenty two years.
as the french republic plunged into warfare the revolution entered its worst phase the s o called reign of terror.
in 1793 1794 t housands of foreign and domestic crises 283 counterrevolutionary political prisoners and priests were executed along with many revolutionary leaders.
barbarism ruled the streets of paris and other major cities.
secretary of state thomas jefferson who loved french culture and democratic ideals wholeheartedly endorsed the revolution as the most sacred cause that ever man engaged in by contrast alexander hamilton and vice president john adams saw the french revolution as vicious and godless.
such conflicting attitudes over events in europe transformed the first decade of american politics into one of the most fractious periods in the nations h istory an age of passion the european war against revolutionary france tested the ability of the united states to remain neutral in world affairs.
both france and britain purchased goods from america and each sought to stop the other from trading with the united states even if it meant attacking u s merchant ships.
federalists and jeffersonian republicans alike agreed that a naval war with either european power would devastate the american economy.
as president washington began his second term in 1793 he faced an awkward decision.
by the 1778 treaty of alliance the united states was a perpetual ally of france.
americans however wanted no part of the european war.
they were determined to maintain their profitable trade with both sides although almost 90 percent of u s imports came from britain.
hamilton and jefferson agreed that entering the european conflict would be foolish.
where they differed was in how best to stay out of the war.
hamilton had a simple answer declare the military alliance formed with the french during the american revolution invalid because it had been made with a monarchy that no longer existed.
jefferson preferred to delay and to use the alliance with france as a bargaining point with the british.
in the end president washington took a wise middle course.
on april 22 1793 he issued a neutrality proclamation that declared the united states friendly and impartial toward the belligerent powers and warned u s citizens that they might be prosecuted for aiding or abetting hostilities or taking part in other un neutral acts.
instead of settling matters in his cabinet however washingtons neutrality proclamation brought to a boil the ugly feud between jefferson and hamilton.
jefferson dashed off an angry letter to james madison urging his friend to take up your pen and cut hamilton to pieces in the newspapers.
citizen gent at the same time that president washington issued the neutrality proclamation he accepted secretary of state jeffersons argument that the united states should officially recognize the new french revolutionary 284 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation government becoming the first nation to do so and welcome its ambassador to the united states the cocky twenty nine year old e dmond charles gent.
early in 1793 citizen gent as he became known landed at charleston south carolina to a heros welcome.
he then openly violated u s neutrality by recruiting four american privateers privately owned warships to capture english and spanish merchant vessels.
after five weeks in south carolina gent sailed to philadelphia where his reckless efforts to draw america into the war on frances side embarrassed his friends in the republican party.
when gent threatened to go around president washington and appeal directly to the american people even thomas jefferson disavowed the french monkey in august 1793 washington at hamiltons urging demanded that the french government replace gent.
the growing excesses of the radicals in france were fast cooling u s support for the revolution.
jefferson however was so disgusted by his feud with alexander hamilton and by washingtons refusal to support the french that he resigned as secretary of state at the end of 1793 and returned to his virginia home eager to be rid of the hated occupation of politics vice president adams greeted jeffersons departure by saying good riddance president washington felt the same way.
he never forgave jefferson and madison for organizing d emocratic republican societies to oppose his federalist policies.
after accepting jeffersons resignation washington never spoke to him again.
jays treaty jays treaty a firestorm of controversy greeted jays treaty in america.
opponents of the treaty rioted and burned jay in effigy.
during 1794 tensions between the united states and great britain threatened to renew warfare between the old enemies.
the treaty of paris 1783 that ended the revolutionary war had left the western and southern boundaries of the united states in dispute.
in addition in late 1793 british warships violated international law by seizing u s merchant ships that carried french goods foreign and domestic crises 285 or were sailing for a french port.
by early 1794 several hundred american ships had been confiscated and their crews were given the terrible choice of joining the british navy a process called impressment or being imprisoned.
at the same time british troops in the ohio valley gave weapons to indians who in turn attacked american settlers.
on april 16 1794 president washington sent chief justice john jay to london to settle the major issues between the two nations.
jay agreed to the british demand that america not sell products to france for the construction of warships.
britain also gained trading advantages with the united states while refusing to stop intercepting american merchant ships and impressing their sailors.
finally jay conceded that the british need not compensate u s citizens for the enslaved african americans who had escaped to the safety of british forces during the revolutionary war.
in return jay won three important promises from the british they would evacuate their six forts in northwest america by 1796 reimburse americans for the seizures of ships and cargo in 1793 1794 and grant u s merchants the right to trade again with the island economies of british west indies.
when the terms of jays treaty were disclosed however many americans especially republicans were outraged.
in massachusetts people shouted damn john jay.
damn everyone who wont damn john jay the ferocious debate over the treaty deepened the division between federalists and republicans.
jefferson dismissed jays treaty as an infamous act intended to undermine the constitution another prominent republican offered this toast to president washington may he be damned if he signs jays treaty the uproar created the most serious crisis of washingtons presidency.
some called for his impeachment.
yet the president while admitting that the proposed agreement was imperfect decided that it was the only way to avoid a war with britain that the united states was bound to lose the u s army then had only 672 men and there was no navy.
in the end with washingtons strong support jays treaty barely won the necessary two thirds majority in the senate.
some 80 percent of the votes for the treaty came from new england or the middle atlantic states 74 percent of those voting against the treaty were southerners most of them jeffersonian republicans.
frontier tensions meanwhile new conflicts erupted in the ohio valley between american settlers and native americans.
in the fall of 1793 revolutionary war hero general mad anthony wayne led a military expedition into the northwest territorys indian country they marched north from cincinnati built fort greenville in western ohio and soon went on the offensive in what became known as the northwest indian war a conflict that 286 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation treaty of greenville 1795 lake michigan e lak fallen timbers e eri er chicago detroit ve r h ri as b a w m e au m er iv pennsylvania e ty lin rea ville t green er fort greenville riv re little at k kanawha river a a r wh na ky ntuc ke riv e g ohio vincennes r virginia i r ve kentucky rland riv mbe er cu north carolina area of map 100 miles 100 kilometers indian cessions why did general anthony wayne build fort greenville.
wwn64 what happened at the battle of fallen timbers.
figure m6 4 what were the terms of the treaty of greenville.
first proof 23p0 x 22p0 arose after the british transferred the ohio country to the united states.
the native americans living in the region insisted that the british had no right to give away their ancestral lands.
as pioneers moved into the northwest territory the various indian nations formed the western confederacy to resist american settlement.
in august 1794 the western confederacy of some 2 000 shawnee ottawa chippewa delaware and potawatomi warriors supported by the british and reinforced by canadian militiamen engaged general waynes troops and indian allies in the battle of fallen timbers along the m ichigan ohio border.
the americans decisively defeated the indians destroyed their crops and villages and built a line of forts in northern ohio and indiana one of which became the city of fort wayne indiana.
the indians finally agreed to the treaty of greenville signed in foreign and domestic crises 287 august 1795 by which the united states bought most of the territory that would form the state of ohio and the cities of detroit and chicago.
the whiskey rebellion soon after the battle of fallen timbers the washington administration displayed another show of strength in the backcountry this time against the so called whiskey rebellion.
alexander hamiltons 1791 federal tax on distilled spirits had ignited resentment and resistance throughout the western frontier.
liquor made from grain or fruit was the rural regions most valuable product it even was used as a form of currency.
when protesters efforts to repeal the tax failed many turned to violence and intimidation.
beginning in september 1791 angry groups of farmers militiamen and laborers attacked federal tax collectors and marshals.
in the summer of 1794 the discontent exploded into open rebellion in western pennsylvania home to a fourth of the nations whiskey stills.
the rebels threatened to assault nearby pittsburgh loot the homes of the rich and set the town ablaze.
after negotiations failed a u s supreme court justice declared on august 4 1794 that western pennsylvania was in a state of rebellion it whiskey rebellion george washington as commander in chief reviews the troops mobilized to quell the whiskey rebellion in pennsylvania in 1794.
288 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation was the first great domestic challenge to the federal government since the constitution was ratified and george washington responded decisively.
at the urging of alexander hamilton washington ordered the whiskey rebels to disperse by september 1 or he would send in the militia.
when the rebels failed to respond some 12 500 militiamen from several states began marching to western pennsylvania to suppress the rebellion.
president washington donned his military uniform and rode on horseback to greet the soldiers.
it was the first and last time that a sitting president would lead troops in the field.
pinckneys treaty 1795 virginia te nn es s iv e ri b e rland r ive ee r north carolina tennessee mi ss iss ip pi r um c r louisiana spanish ver kentucky south carolina t riv r e iver ar 31 31 florida spanish new orleans gulf of mexico area claimed by spain after 1793 line of pinckneys treaty 1795 what were the terms of pinckneys treaty.
why was the treaty popular.
wwn64 figure m6 5 first proof 23p0 x 24p0 charleston savannah fl in a la b am georgia 100 miles 100 kilometers st augustine western settlement 289 the huge army commanded by virginias governor henry lighthorse harry lee quickly panicked the whiskey rebels who vanished into the hills.
two dozen were charged with high treason two were sentenced to hang only to be pardoned by president washington.
the new federal government had made its point and showed its strength.
the show of force led the rebels and their sympathizers to change their tactics.
rather than openly defying federal laws they voted for republicans who won heavily in the next pennsylvania elections.
pinckneys treaty while the turbulent events were unfolding in pennsylvania the spanish began negotiations over control of the mississippi river as well as the disputed northern boundary of their florida colony which they had acquired from the british at the end of the revolutionary war.
u s negotiator thomas pinckney pulled off a diplomatic triumph in 1795 when he convinced the spanish to accept a southern american boundary at the 31st parallel in west florida along the northern coast of the gulf of mexico the current boundary between florida and georgia.
the spanish also agreed to allow americans to ship goods grains and livestock down the mississippi river to spanish controlled new orleans.
senate ratification of pinckneys treaty also called the treaty of san lorenzo came quickly for westerners were eager to transport their crops and livestock to new orleans.
western settlement the treaties signed by john jay and thomas pinckney spurred a new wave of settlers into the western territories.
their lust for land aroused a raging debate in congress over what the federal government should do with the vast areas it had acquired or taken from the british the spanish and from native americans.
land policy federalists and republicans differed sharply on federal land policy.
federalists wanted the government to charge high prices for western lands to keep the east from losing both political influence and a labor force important to the growth of manufactures.
they also preferred that government owned lands be sold in large parcels to speculators rather than in small plots to settlers.
thomas jefferson and james madison were reluctantly prepared to go along with such land policies for the sake of reducing the national debt but jefferson preferred that g overnment owned land be sold to farmers rather than speculators.
290 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation the prevalence of agriculture this american folk painting by edward hicks shows the residence of david twining a pennsylvania farmer as it appeared in 1787.
for the time being however the federalists prevailed.
with the land act of 1796 congress doubled the price of federal land public domain to 2 per acre.
half the townships would be sold in 640 acre sections making the minimum cost 1 280 a price well beyond the means of ordinary settlers.
by 1800 federal land offices had sold fewer than 50 000 acres.
criticism of the land policies led to the land act of 1800 which reduced the minimum parcel to 320 acres and spread payments over four years.
thus with a down payment of 160 one could buy a farm.
the wilderness road the lure of western lands led thousands of settlers to follow pathfinder daniel boone into the territory known as k entucky or kaintuck from the cherokee name k en ta ke great meadow.
in the western settlement 291 late eighteenth century the indian held lands in kentucky were a farmers dream and a hunters paradise.
the vast area boasted fertile soil bluegrass meadows abundant forests and countless buffalo deer and wild turkeys.
born on a small farm in 1734 in central pennsylvania boone was a deadeye marksman by the age of twelve who became an experienced farmer and an accomplished woodsman.
after hearing numerous reports about the fertile lands over the appalachian mountains boone set out in 1769 to find a trail into kentucky.
he discovered what daniel boone escorting settlers was called the warriors path a narrow through the cumberland gap foot trail that buffalo deer and native painting by george caleb bingham.
americans had worn along the steep ridges over the centuries.
in 1773 boone led a group of white settlers into kentucky.
two years later he and thirty woodsmen used axes to widen the 208 mile long warriors path into what became known as the wilderness road a rough passageway that more than 300 000 settlers would use over the next t wenty five years.
at a point where a branch of the wilderness road intersected with the kentucky river near what is now lexington boone built the settlement of boonesborough.
in 1780 kentucky was divided into three counties and integrated into the state of virginia.
in 1792 it became a separate state.
in the process of settling kentucky boone became one of americas first folk heroes a larger than life figure known as the columbus of the woods as he admitted however many heroic actions and chivalrous adventures are related of me which exist only in the regions of fancy.
with me the world has taken great liberties and yet i have been but a common man a steady stream of settlers mostly scots irish migrants from pennsylvania virginia and north carolina poured into kentucky during the last quarter of the eighteenth century.
the pioneers came on foot or horseback often leading a mule or a cow that carried their tools and other possessions.
near a creek or spring they would buy a parcel or stake out a claim and mark its boundaries by chopping notches into witness trees they would then build a l ean to for temporary shelter and clear the land for planting.
the larger t rees those that could not be felled with an a x were girdled a cut would be made around the 292 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation trunk and the tree would be left to die.
because clearing trees often took years a farmer had to hoe and plant a field filled with stumps.
the pioneers grew melons beans turnips and other vegetables but corn was the preferred crop because it kept well and had so many uses.
ears were roasted and eaten on the cob and kernels were ground into meal for making mush hominy grits and hoecakes or johnnycakes dry flour cakes suitable for travelers that were originally called journeycakes.
pigs provided pork and cows supplied milk butter and cheese.
many frontier families also built crude stills to manufacture a potent whiskey they called corn likker.
transfer of power in 1796 president washington decided that two terms in office were enough.
weary of the increasingly bitter criticism directed at him he was eager to retire to his plantation at mount vernon.
he would leave behind a formidable record of achievement the organization of a new national government a prosperous economy the recovery of territory from britain and spain a stable northwestern frontier and the admission of three new states vermont 1791 kentucky 1792 and tennessee 1796.
washingtons farewell on september 17 1796 washington delivered a farewell address in which he criticized the rising spirit of political partisanship and the emergence of political parties.
they endangered the republic he felt because they pursued the narrow interests of minorities rather than the good of the nation.
in foreign relations washington advised the united states should stay away from europes quarrels by avoiding permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world his warning against permanent foreign entanglements would serve as a fundamental principle in u s foreign policy until the early twentieth century.
the election of 1796 with washington out of the race the united states had its first contested election for president.
the federalist caucus a group of leading congressmen chose vice president john adams as their presidential candidate.
thomas pinckney of south carolina fresh from his diplomatic triumph in spain also ran as a federalist presidential candidate.
as expected the republicans chose thomas jefferson.
aaron burr a young new york attorney and senator who was distrusted by many and disliked by most also ran as a republican.
the campaign of 1796 was mean and nasty.
the federalists were attacked for unpopular taxes excessive spending and abuses of power.
republicans called the pudgy john adams his rotundity and labeled him a monarchist the adams administration 293 mount vernon george washington and the marquis de lafayette at mount vernon in 1784.
washington enlarged the estate which overlooks the potomac river to nearly 8 000 acres dividing it among five farms.
because he loved the symbols of power and despised the people adams wanted people to refer to the president as his highness federalists countered that jefferson was a french loving atheist eager for another war with great britain and charged that the philosophical virginian was not decisive enough to be president.
adams won the election with 71 electoral votes but in an odd twist jefferson who received 68 electoral votes became vice president.
the federalists won control of both houses of congress.
the adams administration vain and prickly opinionated and stubborn john adams had long lusted for the presidency but he was a much better political theorist than he was a political leader.
an independent thinker with a proud combative spirit and volcanic temper he fought as often with his fellow federalists especially alexander hamilton as he did with his republican opponents.
benjamin franklin said adams was always an honest man often a wise one but sometimes.
absolutely out of his senses adams had crafted a distinguished career as a massachusetts lawyer and as a leader in the revolutionary movement.
widely recognized as the hardest working member of the continental congress he had also authored the massa 294 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation john adams political philosopher and politician adams was the first president to take up residence in the new white house in the new national capital of washington d c in 1801 chusetts state constitution.
during the revolution adams had served as an exceptional diplomat in france holland and great britain and he had been george washingtons vice president.
in contrast to the tall lanky jefferson the short stocky adams feared democracy and despised equality both of which he believed must be kept within bounds by wise leaders.
he once referred to ordinary americans as making up the common herd of mankind adams also felt that he was never properly appreciated and he may have been right.
yet on the essential issue of his presidency war and peace he kept his head when others about him were losing theirs probably at the cost of his reelection.
the war with france as americas second president john adams inherited a quasi war with france a b y product of the angry french reaction to jays treaty between the united states and great britain.
the navies of both nations were capturing u s ships headed for the others ports.
by the time of adamss inauguration in 1797 the french had plundered some 300 american vessels and broken diplomatic relations with the united states.
adams sought to ease tensions by sending three prominent americans to paris to negotiate a settlement.
when the u s diplomats arrived however they were accosted by three french officials labeled x y and z by adams in his report to congress who announced that negotiations could begin only if the united states paid a bribe of 250 000 and loaned france 12 million.
such bribes were common i n the eighteenth century but the answer from the american side was no no not a sixpence when the so called xyz affair became public american hostility toward france soared.
many republicans with the exception of vice president thomas jefferson joined with federalists in calling for war.
federalists in congress voted to triple the size of the army and construct warships.
president adams asked george washington to put on his military uniform and become commander of the army again.
the adams administration 295 conflict with france a cartoon indicating the anti french sentiment generated by the xyz affair.
the three american negotiators at left reject the paris monsters demand for bribery money before discussions could begin.
he reluctantly agreed on the condition that hamilton be appointed a major general.
by the end of 1798 french and american ships were engaged in an undeclared naval war in the caribbean sea.
the war at home the naval conflict with france sparked an intense debate between federalists eager for a formal declaration of war and republicans sympathetic to france.
amid the superheated emotions vice president jefferson observed that a wall of separation had come to divide the nations political leaders.
he told a french official that president adams was a vain irritable stubborn man.
for his part adams had tried to take the high ground.
soon after his election he had invited jefferson to join him in creating a bipartisan administration.
jefferson refused saying that he would not be a part of the cabinet but instead would only preside over the senate as vice president as the constitution specified.
within a year he and adams were at each others throats.
adams regretted losing jefferson as a friend but felt obliged to look upon him as a man whose mind is warped by prejudice jefferson he claimed had 296 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation become a child and the dupe of the republican faction in congress led by james madison.
jefferson and other republicans were convinced that the real purpose of the french crisis was to provide federalists with an excuse to quiet their american critics.
the alien and sedition acts 1798 seemed to confirm the republicans suspicions.
these partisan acts passed amid a wave of patriotic war fervor gave the president extraordinary powers to violate civil liberties in an effort to stamp out criticism of the administration.
they limited freedom of speech and of the press as well as the liberty of aliens immigrants who had not yet gained citizenship.
adamss support of the alien and sedition acts war measures would prove to be the greatest mistake of his presidency.
timothy pickering his secretary of state claimed that adams agreed to the acts without consulting any member of the government and for a reason truly remarkable because he knew we should all be opposed to the measure three of the four alien and sedition acts reflected hostility to french and irish immigrants many of whom had become militant republicans in america.
the naturalization act lengthened from five to fourteen years the residency requirement for u s citizenship.
the alien act empowered the president to deport dangerous aliens and the alien enemies act authorized the president in wartime to expel or imprison enemy aliens at will.
finally the sedition act outlawed writing publishing or speaking anything of a false scandalous and malicious nature against the government or any of its officers.
of the ten people convicted under the sedition act all were republicans including newspaper editors.
to offset the reign of witches unleashed by the alien and sedition acts jefferson and madison drafted the kentucky and virginia resolutions passed by the legislatures of those two states in late 1798.
the resolutions denounced the alien and sedition acts as alarming infractions of constitutional rights and put forth the shocking idea that state legislatures should nullify reject and ignore acts of congress that violated the constitutional guarantee of free speech.
in attacking the alien and sedition acts jefferson was suggesting something more dangerous disunion.
george washington told patrick henry in virginia that jefferson was threatening to dissolve the union while adams and jefferson were waging their war of words the president was seeking peace with france.
in 1799 he dispatched another team of diplomats to negotiate with a new french government under first consul napolon bonaparte the general on horseback whose army had overthrown the republic.
in a treaty called the convention of 1800 the americans won the best terms they could from the french.
they dropped their demands to the adams administration 297 be repaid for the ships taken by the french and the french agreed to end the military alliance with the united states dating back to the revolutionary war.
the senate quickly ratified the agreement which became effective on december 21 1801 republican victory in 1800 the furor over the alien and sedition acts influenced the pivotal presidential election of 1800.
the federalists nominated adams even though many of them continued to snipe at him and his policies especially his refusal to declare war against france.
alexander hamilton publicly questioned adamss fitness to be president citing his disgusting egotism thomas jefferson and aaron burr the republican candidates once again represented the alliance of the two most powerful states virginia and new york.
the federalists claimed that jeffersons election would bring civil war and anarchy to america.
jeffersons supporters portrayed him as a passionate idealist and optimist who was a friend of farmers and a courageous champion of states rights a limited federal government and personal liberty.
in the important election of 1800 jefferson and burr the two republicans emerged with 73 electoral votes each.
federalist john adams received only 65.
when burr shockingly refused to withdraw his candidacy in favor of jefferson the tie vote in the electoral college sent the election into the house of representatives a constitutional defect corrected in 1804 by the twelfth amendment.
hamilton grudgingly preferred jefferson over burr who would later kill hamilton in a duel.
jefferson hamilton said is by far not so dangerous a man he has pretensions to character as to burr hamilton added there is nothing in his favor the tie vote in the electoral college between thomas jefferson and aaron burr created an explosive political crisis.
federalist fisher ames predicted that burr might impart vigor to the country while jefferson was absurd enough to believe his own nonsense the rumor filled three months between the house vote for president in december 1800 and thomas jeffersons inauguration in march 1801 were so tense that people talked openly of civil war.
the crisis is momentous warned the washington federalist.
there were even wild rumors of plots to assassinate jefferson.
in the end it took t hirty six ballots for the house of representatives to choose jefferson over burr as the new president.
before the federalists turned over power on march 4 1801 president adams and congress passed the judiciary act of 1801.
it was intended to ensure federalist control of the judicial system by creating sixteen federal circuit courts with a new judge for each.
it also reduced the number of supreme 298 chapter 6 strengthening the new nation court justices from six to five in an effort to deprive the next president of appointing a new member.
before he left office adams appointed federalists to all the new positions.
the federalists quipped jefferson had retired into the judiciary as a stronghold they never again would exercise significant political power.
a new era the election of 1800 did not resolve the fundamental political tensions that had emerged between ardent nationalists like adams and hamilton and those like jefferson and madison who clung to ideals of states rights and an agriculture based economy.
in fact the 1800 election further divided the young republic into warring political factions and marked a major turning point in the nations history.
it was the first time that one political party had relinquished presidential power to the opposition party and it was the only election that pitted a sitting president adams against his own vice president jefferson.
jeffersons hard fought victory signaled the emergence of a new more democratic political culture dominated by bitterly divided parties and wider public the election of 1800 nh 6 vt 4 indiana terr.
electoral vote thomas jefferson republican aaron burr republican john adams federalist charles c pinckney federalist ma 16 terr.
nw of ohio r 64 pa va 73 73 ny 12 ky 4 tn 3 ga nc 8 4 sc ri 4 ct 9 nj 7 de 3 md r 5 f 5 one rhode island elector cast one of his ballots for john jay.
tie resolved by house of representatives jefferson elected.
why was the election of 1800 a key event in american history.
what voting patterns emerged in the election of 1800.
wwn64 howfigure did congress m6 6 break the tie between thomas jefferson and aaron burr.
first proof 31p0 x 18p6 the adams administration 299 participation.
before and immediately after independence people took a keen interest in public affairs but socially prominent families the rich the able and the wellborn still dominated political life.
however the raging political battles of the late 1790s culminating in 1800 with jeffersons election established the right of common men to play a more active role in governing the young republic.
with the gradual elimination of the requirement that citizens must own property to vote the electorate expanded enormously in the early nineteenth century.
jefferson called his election the revolution of 1800 for it marked the triumph of the republican party and the slaveholding south at the expense of the new england federalists.
three virginia republican slaveholders jefferson james madison and james m onroe would hold the presidency for the next t wenty four years.
a bitter john adams was so upset by his defeat as well as by the death of his alcoholic son charles that he refused to participate in jeffersons inauguration in the new federal capital in washington d c.
instead unnoticed and unappreciated adams boarded a stagecoach at 4 a m for the 500 mile trip to his home in massachusetts.
he and jefferson would not communicate for the next twelve years.
as adams returned to work on his massachusetts farm with his wife abigail he told his eldest son john quincy who would become the nations sixth president that anyone governing the united states has a hard laborious and unhappy life the victorious jefferson would soon feel the same way.
chapter review summary confederation government despite its many weaknesses the national government created by the articles of confederation managed to construct impor tant alliances during the revolutionary war help win the war of independence and negotiate the treaty of paris 1783.
it created executive departments and established through the northwest ordinance the process by which new western territories would be organized and governments formed before they applied for statehood.
yet the articles of confederation did not allow the national government to raise taxes to fund its debts.
shayss rebellion made many americans fear that such uprisings would eventually destroy the new republic unless the united states formed a stronger national government.
constitutional convention delegates gathered at the convention in philadelphia in 1787 to revise the existing government but almost immediately they decided to scrap the articles of confederation and start over.
an entirely new document emerged which created a system called federalism in which a strong national government with clear separation of powers among executive legislative and judicial branches functioned alongside state governments with clearly designated responsibilities.
arguments about how best to ensure that the rights of individual states were protected and also that the people were represented in the new congress were resolved by establishing a senate with equal representation for each state and a house of representatives the number of whose delegates was determined by population counts.
ratification of the constitution ratification of the constitution was hotly contested.
anti federalists such as virginias patrick henry opposed the new structure of government because the absence of a bill of rights would lead to a loss of individual and states rights.
to sway new york state toward ratification alexander hamilton james madison and john jay wrote the federalist papers.
ratification became possible only when federalists promised to add a bill of rights.
federalists versus republicans alexander hamilton and the federalists wanted to create a diverse economy in which agriculture was balanced by trade finance and manufacturing.
hamilton crafted a federal budget that funded the national debt through tariff and tax revenues and he created a national bank the first bank of the united states.
thomas jefferson and others known as jeffersonian republicans worried that hamiltons plans violated the constitution and made the federal government too powerful.
they envisioned a nation dominated by farmers and planters where the rights of states would be protected against federal power.
trouble abroad during the french revolution george washingtons policy of neutrality violated the terms of the 1778 treaty with france.
at the same time americans sharply criticized jays treaty with the british for giving too much away.
french warships began seizing british and american ships and an undeclared war was under way.
federalists supported washingtons approach while republicans were more supportive of france.
during the presidency of john adams the united states fought an undeclared naval war with the french which led to the controversial alien and sedition acts of 1798.
chronology 1786 1787 1787 1788 articles of confederation take effect treaty of paris ends the war of independence shayss rebellion northwest ordinance the constitutional convention is held in philadelphia the federalist papers are published president george washington is inaugurated bill of rights is ratified bank of the united states is created washington issues a proclamation of neutrality jays treaty is negotiated with england whiskey rebellion in pennsylvania u s army defeats indians in the battle of fallen timbers treaty of greenville pinckneys treaty is negotiated with spain john adams is elected president alien and sedition acts are passed thomas jefferson is elected president key terms federalism p 247 bill of rights 1791 p 272 articles of confederation p 247 bank of the united states b u s.
1791 p 279 northwest ordinance 1787 p 250 shayss rebellion 1786 1787 p 255 separation of powers p 259 anti federalists p 264 the federalist papers p 265 jeffersonian republicans p 269 french revolution p 282 jays treaty 1794 p 285 whiskey rebellion 1794 p 287 alien and sedition acts 1798 p 296 election of 1800 p 297 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
the early republic 1800 1815 we owe allegiance to no crown ca.
1814 the war of 1812 generated a renewed spirit of nationalism inspiring philadelphia s ign painter john archibald woodside to create this patriotic painting.
w hen president thomas jefferson took office in early 1801 the united states and its western territories reached from the atlantic ocean to the mississippi river.
the nation remained primarily rural and agricultural.
nine of ten americans lived or worked on land with most of them growing enough food and raising enough livestock to feed their families but rarely producing enough to sell outside the community much less overseas.
that changed during the nineteenth century.
with each passing year more and more farmers began to produce surplus crops and livestock to sell in regional and world markets.
such commercial agriculture was especially evident in the south where skyrocketing european demand for cotton caused prices to soar.
the growing market economy produced the boom and bust cycles that have always been a regular element of capitalist economies but overall the years from 1790 to 1830 were prosperous with enterprising americans experiencing unprecedented opportunities for land ownership economic gain geographic mobility and political participation.
the desire displayed by americans for profits was according to congressman henry clay a passion as unconquerable as any with which nature has endowed us.
you may attempt to regulate it but you cannot destroy it everywhere in the early republic it seemed people were on the move and on the make leading one newspaper to claim that what made the united states different from other nations was the almost universal ambition to get forward americans excelled at westward expansion economic development rapid population growth and intense political activity.
former president john adams observed that there is no people on earth so ambitious as the people of america.
because the lowest can aspire as freely as the highest focus questions 1.
what were the major domestic political developments that took place during thomas jeffersons administration.
how did foreign events impact the united states during the jefferson and madison administrations.
what were the primary causes of the american decision to declare war on great britain in 1812.
what were the significant outcomes of the war of 1812 on the united states.
148 chapter 4 from colonies to states competing neighbors the french established colonies in north america at the same time as the english.
the bitter rivalry between great britain and france fed frances desire to challenge the english presence in the americas by establishing catholic settlements in the caribbean canada and the region west of the appalachian mountains.
yet the french never invested the people or resources in north america that the english did.
during the 1660s the population of new france was less than that of the tiny english colony of rhode island.
by the m id eighteenth century the residents of new france numbered less than 5 percent of british americans.
new france the actual settlement of new france began in 1605 when soldier explorer samuel de champlain the father of new france founded p ort royal in acadia along the eastern canadian coast.
three years later champlain established quebec to the west along the st lawrence river quebec is an algonquian word meaning where the river narrows.
champlain was the first european to explore and map the great lakes.
champlain in new france samuel de champlain firing at a group of iroquois killing two chieftains 1609.
competing neighbors 149 until his death in 1635 champlain governed new france on behalf of trading companies exploiting the fur trade with the indians.
the trading companies sponsored champlains voyages in hopes of creating a prosperous commercial colony.
in 1627 however the french government ordered that only catholics could live in new france.
this restriction stunted its growth as did the harsh winter climate.
as a consequence the number of french who colonized canada was much smaller than the number of british dutch and spanish colonists in other north american colonies.
champlain knew that the outnumbered french could survive only by befriending the native peoples.
to that end he dispatched young trappers and traders to live with the indigenous peoples learn their languages and customs marry native women and serve as ambassadors of new france.
many of these hardy woodsmen were coureurs des bois runners of the woods who pushed into the forested regions around the great lakes and developed a thriving fur trade.
in 1663 french king louis xiv changed struggling new france into a royal colony led by a governor general who modeled his rule after that of the absolute monarchy.
new france was fully subject to the french king.
the french colonists had no political rights or elected legislature and public meetings could not be held without official permission.
to solidify new france the king dispatched soldiers and settlers during the 1660s including shiploads of young women known as the kings daughters to be wives for the mostly male colonists.
louis xiv also awarded large grants of land called seigneuries to lure aristocratic settlers.
the poorest farmers usually rented land from the seigneur.
yet none of these efforts transformed new france from being essentially a fur trading outpost.
only about 40 000 french immigrants came to the western hemisphere during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries even though the population of france was three times that of spain.
by 1750 when the british colonists in north america numbered about 1 5 million the total french population was 70 000.
from their canadian outposts along the great lakes french explorers in the early 1670s moved southward down the mississippi river to the gulf of mexico.
louis jolliet a fur trader born in quebec teamed with father jacques marquette a jesuit priest fluent in indian languages to explore the wisconsin river south to the mississippi river.
traveling in canoes they paddled south to within 400 miles of the gulf of mexico where they turned back for fear of encountering spanish soldiers.
other french explorers followed.
in 1682 ren robert cavelier sieur de la salle organized an expedition that started in montreal crossed the great lakes and made it all the way down the mississippi river to the gulf 150 chapter 4 from colonies to states the french in north america hudson bay newfoundland james bay n e w montreal france superior green bay e ke la french a c a d i a english port royal boston albany plymouth new york philadelphia r mo i o atlantic ocean jamestown ap missi ppi river ssi ansas rive r pa la french english ch ia n oh louisbourg u n ta no i l li vincennes a i a n st louis kaskaskia io tar rie r cahokia on ins lake michigan n uro is ke la eh so mi s i s l o uuri r a rk l ak wisconsin r fort michilimackinac fox river quebec t connecticu n r dso rive hu er riv l st.
l french english ake cape breton island aw r riv ence er hudson bay company tennessee river spanish english mobile biloxi neworleans gulf of mexico charleston savannah st augustine florida spanish english possessions french possessions spanish possessions disputed territory marquette and jolliets route 1673 la salles route 1682 where were the largest french settlements in north america.
from the spanish and english colonies.
26593 04map 01 describe the french colonization of the louisiana territory.
wwn64 america how were they 10e different first proof 500 miles 500 kilometers competing neighbors 151 of mexico the first european to do so.
la salle who learned seven different indian languages hoped to create a string of fur trading posts along the entire length of the river.
near what is today venice mississippi he buried an engraved plate and erected a cross claiming for france the vast ohio and mississippi valleys all the way to the rocky mountains.
he named the entire region louisiana after king louis xiv.
settlement of the louisiana territory finally began in 1699 when the french established a colony near biloxi mississippi.
the main settlement then moved to mobile bay and in 1710 to the present site of mobile alabama.
for nearly fifty years the driving force in louisiana was j ean baptiste le moyne sieur de bienville.
sometimes called the father of louisiana he served periodically as governor and in 1718 he founded new orleans which shortly thereafter became the capi jesuits in new france founded in 1539 tal of the sprawling louisiana colony the jesuits sought to convert indians to encompassing much of the interior of catholicism in part to make them more reliable trading partners and military the entire north american continent.
new france had one important advantage over its british rival access to the great inland rivers that led to the heartland of the continent and the pelts of fur bearing animals beaver otter and mink.
in the illinois region french settlers began farming the fertile soil while jesuits established missions to convert the indians at places such as terre haute high land in what is now indiana and des moines of the monks in p resent day i owa the name probably shortened from rivire des moines or river of the monks.
the british colonial system the diverse british colonies in north america were quite different from those of new france.
the colonial governments typically were headed by a royal 152 chapter 4 from colonies to states governor or proprietor who could appoint and remove officials command the militia and grant pardons to people convicted of crimes.
the british colonies unlike the spanish french or dutch colonies had elected legislatures the lower houses were chosen by popular vote.
like parliament the assemblies controlled the budget and could pass laws and regulations.
most colonial assemblies exercised influence over the royal governors by paying their salaries.
unlike in new france self government in british america was expected and cherished.
mercantilism the english civil war during the 1640s sharply reduced the flow of money and people to america and created great confusion regarding colonial policies.
it also forced english americans to take sides in the conflict between royalists and puritans.
the 1651 victory of oliver cromwells puritan army over the monarchy had direct effects in the colonies.
as englands new ruler cromwell embraced mercantilism a political and economic policy adopted by most european monarchs during the seventeenth century.
in a mercantile system the government controlled all economic activities in an effort to strengthen national power.
key industries were regulated taxed or subsidized supported by payments from the government.
people with specialized skills or knowledge of new industrial technologies such as textile machinery were not allowed to leave the country.
mercantilism also supported the creation of global empires.
colonies it was assumed enriched the mother country in several ways 1 by providing silver and gold as well as the raw materials furs fish grains timber sugar tobacco indigo tar etc.
needed to supply food build ships and produce goods 2 by creating a captive market of colonial consumers who would be forced to buy goods created in the home country 3 by relieving social tensions and political unrest in the home country because colonies could absorb the growing numbers of poor unemployed and imprisoned and 4 by not producing goods that would compete with those produced in the home country.
navigation acts such mercantilist assumptions prompted oliver cromwell to adopt the first in a series of navigation acts intended to increase control over its colonial economies.
the navigation act of 1651 required that all goods going to and from the colonies be carried only in british owned ships built in britain.
the law was intended to hurt the dutch who had developed a flourishing business shipping goods between america and europe.
dutch shippers charged much less to transport goods than did the english and they actively encouraged smuggling in the american colonies as a means of defying competing neighbors 153 the navigation acts.
by 1652 england and the netherlands were at war the first of three naval conflicts that erupted between 1652 and 1674 involving the two protestant rivals.
after the monarchy was restored to power in 1660 the new royalist parliament passed the navigation act of 1660 which specified that certain colonial products such as tobacco were to be shipped only to england or other colonies.
the navigation act of 1663 called the staples act required that all shipments of goods from europe to america must first stop in britain to be offloaded and taxed before being sent on to the colonies.
by 1700 the english had surpassed the dutch as the worlds leading maritime power and most products sent to and from america via europe and africa were carried in british ships.
what the english government did not predict or fully understand was that the mercantile system would arouse resentment in the colonies.
colonial resentment colonial merchants and shippers loudly complained about the navigation acts but the english government refused to lift its restrictions.
new england which shipped 90 percent of all american exports was particularly hard hit.
in 1678 a defiant massachusetts legislature declared that the navigation acts had no legal standing.
in 1684 boston from the southeast this view of e ighteenth century boston shows the importance of shipping and its regulation in the colonies.
154 chapter 4 from colonies to states king charles ii tried to teach the rebellious colonists a lesson by revoking the royal charter for massachusetts.
the following year king charles ii died and was succeeded by his brother king james ii the first catholic monarch in more than 100 years.
to demonstrate his power over americans the new king reorganized the new england colonies into a single royal supercolony called the dominion of new england.
in 1686 the newly appointed royal governor the authoritarian sir edmund andros arrived in boston to take control of the dominion.
andros stripped new englanders of their civil rights imposed new taxes as well as the anglican religion ignored town governments strictly enforced the navigation acts and punished smugglers who tried to avoid regulation altogether.
the glorious revolution in 1688 the dominion of new england added the former dutch provinces of new york east jersey and west jersey to its control just a few months before the glorious revolution erupted in england in december.
the revolution was called glorious because it took place with little bloodshed.
james ii was forced to flee to france and was replaced by the kings protestant daughter mary and her protestant husband william iii the ruling dutch prince.
william iii and mary ii would rule as constitutional monarchs their powers limited by the parliament.
the new king and queen soon issued a religious toleration act and a bill of rights to ensure that there never again would be an absolute monarchy in england.
in 1689 americans in boston staged their own revolution upon learning of the transfer of power in london.
a group of merchants ministers and militiamen citizen soldiers arrested governor andros and his aides and removed massachusetts bay colony from the new dominion of new england.
within a few weeks the other colonies that had been absorbed into the dominion also restored their independence.
william and mary allowed all the colonies to regain their former status except massachusetts bay and plymouth which after some delay were united under a new charter in 1691 as the royal colony of massachusetts bay.
william and mary however were determined to crack down on american smuggling and rebelliousness.
they appointed new royal governors in massachusetts new york and maryland.
in massachusetts the governor was given authority to veto acts of the colonial assembly and he removed the requirement that only church members could vote in elections.
john locke on revolution the glorious revolution in england had significant long term effects on american history in that the an emerging colonial system 155 removal of king james ii revealed that a hated monarch could be deposed according to constitutional principles.
the long standing geographical designation great britain for the united kingdoms of england scotland and wales would soon be revived as the nations official name.
a powerful justification for revolution appeared in 1690 when the english philosopher john locke published his two treatises on government which had an enormous impact on political thought in the colonies.
locke rejected the divine right of monarchs to govern with absolute power.
he also insisted that people are endowed with natural rights to life liberty and property.
locke noted that it was the need to protect those natural rights that led people to establish governments in the first place.
when rulers failed to protect the property and lives of their subjects locke argued the people had the r ight in extreme cases to overthrow the monarch and change the government.
an emerging colonial system in early 1689 new yorkers sent a message to king william thanking him for delivering england from tyranny popery and slavery many colonists were disappointed however when the king cracked down on american smugglers.
the act to prevent frauds and abuses of 1696 required colonial royal governors to enforce the navigation acts allowed customs officials in america to use writs of assistance general search warrants that did not have to specify the place to be searched and ordered that accused smugglers be tried in royal admiralty courts because juries in colonial courts rarely convicted their peers.
admiralty cases were decided by judges appointed by the royal governors.
soon however british efforts to enforce the navigation acts waned.
king george i r 1714 1727 and george ii r 1727 1760 german princes who were descendants of james i showed much less interest in enforcing colonial trade laws.
robert walpole the l ong serving prime minister 1721 1742 and lord of the treasury decided that the american colonies should be left alone to export needed raw materials timber tobacco rice indigo and to buy various manufactured goods from the mother country.
under walpoles leadership britain followed a policy of a wise and salutary neglect of the navigation acts and gave the colonies greater freedom to pursue their economic interests.
what walpole did not realize was that such salutary neglect would create among many colonists an independent attitude that would eventually blossom into revolution.
156 chapter 4 from colonies to states the habit of self government government within the american colonies evolved without plan during the eighteenth century as the colonial assemblies acquired powers particularly with respect to government appointments that parliament had yet to exercise itself.
the english colonies in america unlike new france and new spain benefited from elected legislative assemblies.
whether called the house of burgesses virginia delegates maryland representatives massachusetts or simply the assembly the lower houses were chosen by popular vote.
only male property owners could vote based upon the notion that only men who held a tangible stake in society could vote responsibly.
because property holding was much more widespread in america than in europe a greater proportion of the men could vote and hold office in the colonies.
members of the colonial assemblies tended to be wealthy prominent figures but there were exceptions.
one unsympathetic colonist observed in 1744 that the new jersey assembly was chiefly composed of mechanicks and ignorant wretches obstinate to the last degree the most profound political trend during the early eighteenth century was the growing power exercised by the colonial assemblies.
like parliament the assemblies controlled the budget through their vote on taxes and expenditures and they held the power to initiate legislation.
most of the colonial assemblies also exerted leverage on the royal governors by controlling their salaries.
throughout the eighteenth century the assemblies expanded their power and influence sometimes in conflict with the governors sometimes in harmony with them.
self government in america became first a habit then a right by the mid eighteenth century the american colonies had become largely s elf governing.
warfare in the colonies the glorious revolution of 1688 transformed relations among the great powers of europe.
protestants william and mary for example were passionate foes of catholic frances louis xiv.
king william organized an alliance of european nations against the french in a transatlantic war known in the american colonies as king williams war 1689 1697.
it was the first of four major wars fought in europe and the colonies over the next s eventy four years.
in each case britain and its european allies fought against catholic france or spain and their allies.
by the end of the eighteenth century the struggle between the british and the french would shift the balance of power in europe.
warfare in the colonies 157 in all four of the wars except the last the seven years war battles in the north american colonies were but a sideshow accompanying massive warfare in europe.
although the wars involved many nations including indians who fought on both sides the conflicts centered on the intense struggle for supremacy between the british and the french a struggle that ended up profoundly shifting the international balance of power among the great powers of europe.
the prolonged warfare during the eighteenth century had a devastating effect on new england especially massachusetts for it was closest to the battlefields of french canada.
the wars also reshaped britains relationship with america.
great britain emerged from the wars in 1763 as the most powerful nation in the world.
thereafter international commerce became increasingly essential to the expanding british empire thus making the american colonies even more strategically significant.
the french and indian war the most important conflict between britain and france in north america was the french and indian war 1754 1763 globally known as the seven years war.
unlike the earlier wars the french and indian war started in america and ended with a decisive victory.
it was sparked by french and british competition for the ancestral indian lands in the vast ohio valley and the stakes were high.
whoever controlled the ohio country would control the entire continent because of the ohio and mississippi rivers.
to defend their interests in the ohio country the french pushed south from canada and built forts in the region.
when virginias british governor learned of the forts he sent an ambitious t wenty two year old militia officer major george washington to warn the french to leave.
washington made his way on foot and by horseback canoe and raft more than 450 miles to fort le boeuf just south of lake erie in northwest pennsylvania in late 1753 only to be rudely rebuffed by the french.
a few months later in the spring of 1754 washington now a lieutenant colonel went back to the ohio country with 150 volunteer soldiers and indian allies.
they planned to build a fort where the allegheny monongahela and ohio rivers converged where the city of pittsburgh later developed.
the so called forks of the ohio was the key strategic gateway to the vast western territory west of the appalachian mountains and both sides were determined to control it.
after two months of difficult travel through densely forested hilly terrain washington learned that french soldiers had beaten him to the site and built fort duquesne in western pennsylvania.
washington decided to camp about 158 chapter 4 from colonies to states forty miles from the fort.
the next day the virginians ambushed a french scouting party killing ten soldiers including the c ommander the first fatalities in what would become the french and indian war.
washington and his troops reinforced by more virginians and british soldiers dispatched from south carolina hastily constructed a tiny circular stockade at great meadows in western pennsylvania.
they called it fort necessity.
washington remarked that the valley provided a charming field for an encounter but there was nothing charming about the battle that erupted when a large french force attacked in a rainstorm on july 3 1754.
after the d ay long lopsided battle of great meadows washington surrendered having seen a third of his 300 men killed or wounded.
the french and their indian allies lost only three men.
the french commander then forced washington to surrender his french prisoners and admit that he had assassi major campaigns of the french and indian war wo lfe c a n a d 1 cape breton island a quebec fort louisbourg ri r ve nova scotia montreal hu r on fort niagara fort ticonderoga t a r i o fort george l ak e on mo ha new york river wk fort le boeuf r iv er fort duquesne sus pennsylvania qu e oh fort necessity md braddock 1755 washington 1754 amherst 1759 nh ma boston ct new york nj de potomac river virginia port royal maine mass.
lake champlain io philadelphia hud s on river albany e ha n na r war ela e r.
ri e e e d lak c ren l connecticut river aw la k e.
st chesapeake bay atlantic providence ocean ri 200 miles 200 kilometers battle site what was the significance of the siege of fort necessity.
whatamerica was the10e albany plan of union.
wwn64 what led to the british victory over france in north america in 1759.
26593 04map 02 first proof warfare in the colonies 159 nated the group of french soldiers at the earlier encounter.
on july 4 1754 washington and the defeated virginians began trudging home.
most of them he noted are almost naked and scarcely a man has either shoes stockings or hat france was now in undisputed control of the ohio country.
washingtons bungled expedition not only had failed to oust the french it had triggered a massive world war.
as a british politician exclaimed the volley fired by a young virginian in the backwoods of america set the world on fire the albany plan british officials worried about war with the french and their indian allies urgently called a meeting of the northern colonies as far south as maryland.
twenty one representatives from seven colonies gathered in albany new york.
it was the first time that a large group of colonial delegates had met to take joint action.
at the urging of pennsylvanias benjamin franklin the albany congress june 19 july 11 1754 approved the albany plan of union.
it called for eleven colonies to band together headed by a president appointed by the king.
each colonial assembly would send two to seven delegates to a grand council the first american political cartoon benjamin franklins plea to the colonies to unite against the french in 1754 would become popular again twenty years later when the colonies faced a different threat.
160 chapter 4 from colonies to states which would have legislative powers.
the union would have jurisdiction over indian affairs.
the albany plan of union was too radical for the time however.
british officials and the colonial legislatures eager to maintain their powers wanted simply a military alliance against indian attacks so they rejected the albany plan.
benjamin franklin later maintained that the plan of union had it been adopted may have postponed or eliminated the eventual need for a f ull scale colonial revolution.
franklins proposal however did have a lasting significance in that it would be the model for the form of governance articles of confederation created by the new american nation in 1777 war in north america with the failure of the albany plan the british government decided to force a showdown with the presumptuous french in north america.
in june 1755 a british fleet captured the french forts protecting acadia a colony of new france along the atlantic coast of canada.
the british then expelled 11 500 acadians the catholic french residents.
hundreds of them eventually found their way to french louisiana where they became known as cajuns the name derived from acadians.
in 1755 the british government sent 1 000 soldiers to dislodge the french from the ohio country.
the arrival of unprecedented numbers of redcoat soldiers on american soil would change the dynamics of british north america.
although the colonists endorsed the use of force against the french they later would oppose the use of british soldiers to enforce colonial regulations.
braddock s defeat the british commander in chief in america general edward braddock was a stubborn overconfident officer who refused to recruit large numbers of indian allies.
braddock viewed indians with open contempt telling those willing to fight with him that he would not reward them with land for doing so no savage should inherit the land his dismissal of the indians and his ignorance of unconventional warfare in american forests would prove fatal.
neither he nor his irish troops had any experience fighting in the wilderness.
with the addition of some american militiamen including george washington as a volunteer officer braddocks force left northern virginia to confront the french hacking a 125 mile long road west through the rugged allegheny mountains toward fort duquesne.
on july 9 1755 as the british neared the fort they were ambushed by french soldiers canadian militiamen and indians.
the british troops dressed in impractical b right red wool uniforms in the summer heat suf warfare in the colonies 161 fered s hocking losses.
braddock was mortally wounded and would die three days later.
washington his coat riddled by four bullets helped lead a hasty retreat.
what came to be called the battle of monongahela was one of the worst british defeats in history.
the french and indians killed 63 of 86 british officers 914 out of 1 373 soldiers and captured the british cannons and supplies.
twelve of the wounded british soldiers left behind on the battlefield were stripped and burned alive by indians.
a devastated washington wrote his brother that the british army had been scandalously beaten by a trifling body of men the vaunted redcoats broke run as sheep pursued by hounds but the virginians he noted behaved like men and died like soldiers a world war while braddocks stunning defeat sent shock waves through the colonies indians allied with the french began attacking from la roques encyclopedie des american farms throughout western voyages an iroquois warrior in an eighteenth century french engraving.
pennsylvania maryland and virginia killing scalping or capturing hundreds of men women and children.
desperate to respond the pennsylvania provincial government offered 130 spanish dollars for each male indian scalp and 50 dollars for female scalps.
indians and colonists killed each other mercilessly throughout 1755 and 1756 during the french and indian war.
it was not until may 1756 however that protestant britain and catholic france formally declared war in europe.
the first truly world war the seven years war in europe and the french and indian war in north america would eventually be fought on four continents and three oceans around the globe.
in the end it would redraw the political map of the world.
162 chapter 4 from colonies to states the onset of war brought into office a new british government with william pitt as prime minister.
his exceptional ability and self assurance matched his towering ego.
i know that i can save england and no one else can he announced.
pitt assembled a huge force of 45 000 british troops and american militiamen and in august 1759 they captured the french forts near the canadian border at ticonderoga crown point and niagara.
the battle of quebec in 1759 the french and indian war reached its climax with a series of british triumphs on land and at sea.
the most decisive victory was at quebec the hilltop fortress city and the capital of french canada.
during the dark of night some 4 500 british troops scaled the cliffs above the st lawrence river and at dawn surprised the unprepared french defenders in a battle that lasted only ten minutes.
the french retreated only to surrender four days later.
the battle of quebec was the turning point in the war.
thereafter the conflict in north america diminished although the fighting dragged on until 1763.
in the south fighting flared up between the carolina settlers and the cherokee nation.
a force of british regulars and colonial militia broke cherokee resistance in 1761 a new british king meanwhile the seven years war played out around the globe.
in europe huge armies ravaged each other.
hundreds of towns and cities were plundered and more than a million people killed.
on october 25 1760 british king george ii arose at 6 a m drank his morning chocolate milk and suddenly died on his toilet as the result of a ruptured artery.
his death shocked the nation and brought an untested new king to the throne.
george iis inexperienced successor was his t wenty two year old grandson george iii who was despised by his grandfather.
although initially shy and insecure the young king the first in his german royal family to be born and raised in england was an unabashed patriot i glory in the name of britain george iii the young king of a he became a strong willed leader who victorious empire.
oversaw the military defeat of france warfare in the colonies 163 and spain in the seven years war.
the treaty of paris which ended the war made great britain the ruler of an enormous world empire.
the american colonists celebrated the great british victories with as much excitement and pride as did londoners.
the treaty of paris 1763 in the treaty of paris signed in february 1763 britain took control of many important french colonies around the world including several incredibly profitable sugar island c olonies in the west indies most of the french colonies in india and all of frances north american possessions east of the mississippi river all of canada and what was then called spanish florida including much of present day alabama and mississippi.
as compensation the treaty gave spain control over the vast louisiana territory including new orleans and all french land west of the mississippi river.
the loss of louisiana left france with no territory on the north american continent.
british americans were delighted with the outcome of the war.
as a new england minister declared great britain had reached the summit of earthly grandeur and glory britains spectacular military success created massive challenges however.
the national debt doubled during the war and the new cost of maintaining the sprawling north american empire including the permanent stationing of british soldiers in the colonies was staggering.
in winning a huge global empire british leaders developed what one historian has called an arrogant triumphalism which led them to t ighten and ultimately l ose their control over the indians and colonists in north america.
managing a new empire no sooner was the treaty of paris signed than king george iii and his cabinet working through parliament began strictly enforcing economic regulations on the american colonies to help reduce the crushing national debt caused by the war.
during and after the war the british government increased taxes in britain to fund the military expenses.
in 1763 the average british citizen paid t wenty six times as much in taxes each year as the average american colonist paid.
with that in mind british leaders thought it only fair that the americans should pay more of the expenses for administering and defending the colonies.
many americans disagreed however arguing that the various navigation acts restricting their economic activity were already a form of tax on them.
the tension between the british need for greater revenue from the colonies and the americans defense of their rights and liberties set in motion a chain of events that would lead to revolution and independence.
it is truly a miserable thing said a connecticut minister in december 1763 that we no sooner leave fighting our neighbors the french but we must fall to quarreling among ourselves 164 chapter 4 from colonies to states unexpl ore d north america 1713 hudson bay h u d s o n s b ay c o m pa n y i s w fr co lo an ni c es ne ia newfoundland nova scotia new england n eng lish u ocean sippi sis r ive m is r lo pa c i f i c e virginia na atlantic carolinas ocean e florida w s england france spain gulf of mexico p cuba a 1000 miles i n hispaniola caribbean sea new granada 1000 kilometers what events led to the first clashes between the french and the british in the late seventeenth century.
10e wwn64 why didamerica new england suffer more than other regions of north america 26593 04map 03 during the wars of the eighteenth century.
first proof what were the long term financial military and political consequences of the wars between france and britain.
pontiacs rebellion after the war colonists began squabbling over indian owned land west of the appalachian mountains that the french had ceded to the british in the treaty of paris.
native american leaders none of whom attended the meetings leading to the treaty were shocked to learn that the french had given their ancestral lands to the british.
ohio indians warfare in the colonies 165 north america 1763 unexplored russians hudson bay h u d s o n s b ay c o m pa n y the th irte q en ue co lo be ni c newfoundland nova scotia es m is r i ia na n e w s 1000 miles 1000 kilometers england spain proclamation line of 1763 india n re ser ve u s new england sippi sis r ive lo oregon p a c i f i c disputed by o c e a n russia and spain west florida gulf of mexico p a st pierre et miquelon france i n virginia carolinas east florida atlantic ocean guadeloupe haiti france france cuba hispaniola martinique france british caribbean sea honduras mosquito coast new granada how did the map of north america change between 1713 and 1763.
how did spain win the louisiana territory.
wwn64 america 10e what were the consequences of the british gaining all the land east of the 26593 04map 04 mississippi first proof river.
complained to british army officers that as soon as you conquered the french you did not care how you treated us one chieftain claimed that the british had treated them like slaves the indians fought back in the spring of 1763 capturing most of the british forts around the great lakes and in the ohio valley.
never was panic more general reported the pennsylvania gazette than that of the back woods inhabitants whose terrors at this time exceed that followed on the defeat of general braddock 166 chapter 4 from colonies to states native americans raided colonial settlements in pennsylvania maryland and virginia destroying farms and killing thousands.
every day for some time past reported a marylander has offered the melancholy scene of poor distressed families.
who have deserted their plantations for fear of falling into the cruel hands of our savage enemies the refugees told of terrible massacres in which settlers were most cruelly butchered the woman was roasted.
and several of the men had awls thrust in their eyes and spears arrows pitchforks etc sticking in their bodies the widespread indian attacks in the spring and summer of 1763 came to be called pontiacs rebellion because of the prominent role played by the inspiring ottawa chieftain who sought to unify several tribes in the effort to stop american expansion.
pontiac told a british official that the french never conquered us neither did they purchase a foot of our country nor have they a right to give it to you in december 1763 a group of frontier ruffians in pennsylvania took the law into their own hands.
outraged at the unwillingness of pacifist quakers in the pennsylvania assembly to protect white settlers on the frontier from marauding indians a group called the paxton boys s cots irish farmers from paxton near harrisburg armed with tomahawks and rifles took revenge by massacring and scalping peaceful conestogas men women and children.
then they threatened to kill the so called moravian indians a group of christian converts living near bethlehem.
when the indians took refuge in philadelphia some 1 500 paxton boys marched on the capital where benjamin franklin helped persuade the ungovernable frontiersmen to return home.
the proclamation line to help keep peace with the indians and to abide by the terms of an earlier agreement with the delawares and shawnees called the treaty of easton 1758 king george iii issued the royal proclamation of 1763 which drew an imaginary line along the crest of the appalachian mountains from canada south to georgia.
white settlers our loving subjects were forbidden to go west of the line in order to ensure that the indians would not be molested or disturbed on their ancestral lands.
for the first time american territorial expansion was to be controlled by royal officials.
in practice the proclamation line ended the activities of speculators buying huge tracts of indian lands but did not keep l and hungry settlers from pushing across the steep appalachian ridges into indian country.
by 1767 an indian chief was complaining that whites were making more encroachments on their country than ever they had before regulating the colonies 167 regulating the colonies as britain tightened its hold over the colonies after 1763 americans reminded parliament that their original charters guaranteed that they should be treated as if they were english citizens with all the rights and liberties protected by the nations constitutional traditions.
such arguments however fell on deaf ears in parliament.
as one member explained the british were determined to make north america pay for its own army grenvilles colonial policy just as the proclamation of 1763 was being drafted a new british government led by george grenville began to grapple with the huge debts the government had accumulated during the war along with the added expenses of maintaining troops in america.
grenville insisted that the americans whom he called the least taxed people in the world must pay for the soldiers defending them.
he also resented the large number of american merchants who engaged in smuggling to avoid paying british taxes on imported goods.
grenville ordered colonial officials to tighten enforcement of the navigation acts and sent warships to capture smugglers who if caught would be tried in new military courts rather than civilian jury trials.
the sugar act grenvilles effort to enforce the various navigation acts posed a serious threat to new englands prosperity.
distilling rum out of molasses a sweet syrup made from sugarcane had become quite profitable especially if the molasses could be smuggled in from caribbean islands still controlled by the french.
to generate more money from the colonies grenville put through the american revenue act of 1764 commonly known as the sugar act which cut the tax on molasses in half.
doing so he believed would reduce the temptation to smuggle french molasses or to bribe royal customs officers.
but the sugar act also added new duties taxes on other goods sugar wines coffee spices imported into america.
the new revenues generated by the sugar act grenville estimated would help pay for the necessary expenses of defending protecting and securing the said colonies with the sugar act parliament for the first time adopted a policy designed to raise revenues from the colonies and not merely to regulate trade with other nations.
colonists claimed that the sugar act taxed them without their consent since they had no elected representatives in parliament.
british officials argued however that parliaments power was absolute and indivisible.
if the americans accepted parliamentary authority in any area they had to accept 168 chapter 4 from colonies to states its authority in every area.
in the end however the controversial new sugar tax did not produce more revenue for great britain the cost of enforcing it was four times greater than the revenue it generated.
the currency act americans equally hated another of grenvilles new regulatory measures the currency act of 1764 which prohibited the colonies from coining or printing money while requiring that all payments for british goods imported into the colonies must be in gold or silver coins or in a commodity like tobacco.
the colonies had long faced a chronic shortage of hard money gold and silver coins called specie which kept flowing overseas to pay debts in england.
to address the lack of specie many colonies issued their own paper money which could not be used in other colonies.
british creditors feared payment in a currency of such fluctuating value.
to alleviate their fears grenville implemented the currency act.
by banning paper money it caused the value of existing paper money to plummet.
as a philadelphia newspaper complained ollar less the times are dreadful dismal doleful dolorous and d the stamp act prime minister grenville excelled at doing the wrong thing repeatedly.
in 1765 for example he persuaded parliament to pass the quartering act which required americans to feed and house british troops.
most americans saw no need for so many british soldiers in colonial cities.
if the british were there to defend against indians why werent they positioned closer to the indians.
some colonists decided that the quartering act was actually an effort to use british soldiers to bully the americans.
william knox a british colonial official admitted as much in 1763 when he said that the main purpose of keeping an army in america was to secure the dependence of the colonies on great britain yet grenville aggravated colonial concerns by pushing through an even more controversial measure.
on february 13 1765 parliament passed the stamp act which required colonists to purchase stamped paper for virtually every possible use newspapers pamphlets bonds leases deeds licenses insurance policies college diplomas even playing cards.
the requirement was to go into effect november 1.
the stamp act was the first effort by parliament to place a tax directly on american goods and services rather than levying an external tax on imports and exports.
not a single colony supported the new measure.
the whig point of view grenvilles colonial policies outraged many americans especially those living in the large port cities bos regulating the colonies 169 ton new york philadelphia and charleston.
unwittingly the prime minister had stirred up a storm of protest and set in motion a violent debate about the proper relationship between great britain and her colonies.
in the late eighteenth century the americans who opposed british policies began to call themselves patriots or whigs a name earlier applied to british critics of royal power.
in turn whigs labeled the king and his corrupt government ministers and parliamentary supporters as tories a term of abuse meaning friends of the king.
in 1764 and 1765 whigs felt that grenville was violating their rights in several ways.
a professional army was usually a weapon used by tyrants and now with the french defeated and canada solidly under british control thousands of british soldiers remained in america.
were the troops there to protect the colonists or to scare them into obedience.
whigs also argued that british citizens had the right to be taxed only by their elected representatives in parliament but americans had no such representatives.
british leaders countered that the colonists enjoyed virtual representation in parliament.
william pitt a staunch supporter of american rights in parliament dismissed grenvilles concept of virtual representation as the most contemptible idea that ever entered into the head of a man many others in both britain and america agreed.
sir francis bernard the royal governor of massachusetts correctly predicted that the new stamp tax would cause a great alarm meet much opposition in the colonies.
protests in the colonies the stamp act aroused fierce resentment and resistance.
a new yorker wrote that this single stroke has lost great britain the affection of all her colonies in a flood of pamphlets speeches resolutions and street protests critics repeated a slogan familiar to americans no taxation without representation in parliament protesters calling themselves sons of liberty emerged in every colony often meeting beneath liberty trees in boston a great elm in charleston south carolina a live oak.
in new york city the sons of liberty erected liberty poles as symbols of their resistance.
in virginia patrick henry convinced the assembly to pass the stamp act resolutions which asserted yet again that the colonists could not be taxed without being first consulted by the british government or represented in parliament by their own elected members.
the nonimportation movement americans opposed to the stamp act knew that the most powerful form of leverage they had against 170 chapter 4 from colonies to states opposition to the stamp act in protest of the stamp act which was to take effect the next day the pennsylvania journal printed a skull and crossbones on its masthead.
the british was economic.
to put pressure on the british government and show that the colonists themselves had not become dependent on britains empire of goods patriots by the thousands between 1767 and 1770 signed what were called nonimportation agreements pledging not to buy or consume any british goods.
the nonimportation movement of the 1760s and 1770s united whigs from different communities and different colonies.
it also enabled women to play a significant role resisting britains colonial policies.
calling themselves daughters of liberty many colonial women stopped buying imported british clothes.
they also quit drinking british tea in order to save this abused country from ruin and slavery using herbs and flowers they made liberty tea instead.
the daughters of liberty also participated in public spinning bees whereby they would gather in the town square to weave and spin yarn and wool into fabric known as homespun in 1769 the boston evening post reported that the industry and frugality of american ladies were enabling the political salvation of a whole continent regulating the colonies 171 patriots saw the effort to boycott british products as a way to restore their own virtue.
a rhode islander declared that a primary cause of americas problems was the luxury and extravagance brought on by their freewheeling purchases of british goods.
the nonimportation movement would help americans restore our frugality industry and simplicity of manners a boston minister claimed that those who could not do without british luxury goods and be satisfied with plainness and simplicity did not deserve to be american citizens.
colonial unity the boycotts worked imports of british goods fell by 40 percent.
at the same time the virginia house of burgesses struck the first official blow against the stamp act with the virginia resolves a series of resolutions inspired by the fiery patrick henry.
virginians henry declared were entitled to all the rights of englishmen and englishmen could be taxed only by their own elected representatives.
because virginians had no elected representatives in parliament they could only be taxed by the virginia the repeal or the funeral procession of miss a meric stamp this 1766 cartoon shows grenville carrying the dead stamp act in its coffin.
in the background trade with america starts up again.
172 chapter 4 from colonies to states legislature.
newspapers spread the virginia resolves throughout the colonies and other colonial assemblies hastened to follow virginias example.
no taxation without representation became the echoing rally cry for american whigs.
in 1765 the massachusetts house of representatives invited the other colonial assemblies to send delegates to new york city to discuss their opposition to the stamp act.
nine responded and from october 7 25 1765 the stamp act congress formulated a declaration of the rights and grievances of the colonies.
the delegates insisted that they would accept no taxes being imposed on them without their own consent given personally or by their representatives grenville responded by denouncing his colonial critics as ungrateful for all of the benefits provided them by the british government.
repeal of the stamp act the storm over the stamp act had scarcely erupted before grenville was out of office.
he had lost the confidence of the king who replaced him with lord rockingham in july 1765.
then in mid august 1765 nearly three months before the stamp act was to take effect a boston mob plundered the homes of the royal lieutenant governor thomas hutchinson and the official in charge of enforcing the stamp tax.
thoroughly shaken the boston stamp agent resigned and other stamp agents throughout the colonies were hounded out of office.
the growing violence in america and the success of the nonimportation movement convinced rockingham that the stamp act was a mistake.
in february 1766 a humiliated parliament repealed it.
to save face parliament passed the declaratory act which asserted its power to govern the colonies in all cases whatsoever the repeal of the stamp act set off excited demonstrations throughout the colonies.
sally franklin wrote to her father benjamin in europe that philadelphias church bells were rung and bonfires were built.
i never heard so much noise in my life she noted.
the townshend acts in july 1766 king george iii replaced lord rockingham with william pitt the former prime minister who had exercised heroic leadership during the seven years war.
for a time the guiding force in the pitt ministry was the witty but reckless charles townshend the treasury chief whose abilities were superior to those of all men said a colleague and his judgment common sense below that of any man in 1767 townshend pushed through parliament his i ll fated plan to generate more colonial revenue.
a few months later he died at age f orty two leaving regulating the colonies 173 behind a bitter legacy the townshend acts.
the revenue act of 1767 which taxed colonial imports of glass lead paint paper and tea was the most hated.
it posed an even more severe threat than grenvilles taxes had for townshend planned to use the new tax revenues to pay the salaries of the royal governors in the colonies.
until that point the colonial assemblies paid the salaries thus giving them some leverage over them.
john adams observed that townshends plan would make the royal governor independent of the people and disrupt that balance of power which is essential to all free governments writing in the boston gazette adams insisted that such an independent ruler is a monster in a free state discontent on the frontier some colonists had little interest in the disputes over british regulatory policy raging along the seaboard.
parts of the backcountry stirred with quarrels that had nothing to do with the stamp and townshend acts.
rival claims to lands east of lake champlain pitted new york against new hampshire.
eventually the residents of the disputed area would form their own state of vermont created in 1777 although not recognized as a member of the union until 1791.
in the south frontiersmen in south carolina issued a rising chorus of complaints about the lack of colonial protection from horse thieves cattle rustlers and indians.
backcountry residents organized societies called regulators to administer vigilante justice in the region and refused to pay taxes until they gained effective government.
in 1769 the assembly finally set up six circuit courts in the region but without responding to the backcountrys demand for representation in the legislative assemblies.
in north carolina the protest was less over the lack of government than over the abuses and extortion by appointees from the eastern part of the colony.
western farmers felt especially oppressed by the governments refusal either to issue paper money or to accept produce in payment of taxes and in 1766 they organized to resist.
efforts of these regulators to stop seizures of property and other court proceedings led to more disorders and the enactment of a bill that made the rioters guilty of treason.
that the regulators tended to be baptists methodists and presbyterians who preached plain living while the coastal elite tended to be anglicans who paraded their wealth injected a religious and social element into the squabbles.
in the spring of 1771 north carolinas royal governor william tryon led 1 200 militiamen into battle against regulators.
there his forces defeated some 174 chapter 4 from colonies to states 2 000 i ll organized regulators in the battle of alamance in which eight were killed on each side.
tryons men then ranged through the backcountry forcing some 6 500 piedmont settlers to sign an oath of allegiance to the king.
these disputes and revolts within the colonies illustrate the diversity of opinion and outlook among americans on the eve of the revolution.
colonists were of many minds about many things including british rule but also differed with one another over how best to protest against particular grievances.
the crisis grows the townshend acts surprised and angered many colonists.
as american rage bubbled over samuel adams of boston one of the most radical rebels decided that a small group of determined whigs could generate a mass movement.
it does not take a majority to prevail adams insisted but rather an irate tireless minority keen on setting brushfires of freedom in the minds of men early in 1768 adams and boston attorney james otis jr convinced the massachusetts assembly to circulate a letter they had written to the other colonies.
it restated the illegality of taxation without representation in parliament and invited the support of other colonies.
british officials ordered the massachusetts assembly to withdraw the letter.
they refused and the king ordered the assembly dissolved.
in response to an appeal by the royal governor of massachusetts 3 000 british troops were sent to boston in october 1768 to maintain order.
loyalists as the americans who supported the king and parliament were often called welcomed the soldiers patriots those rebelling against british authority viewed the british troops as an occupation force.
meanwhile in london the king appointed samuel adams adams was the fiery still another new chief minister fredorganizer of the sons of liberty.
erick lord north in january 1770.
the crisis grows 175 the first bloodshed in 1765 benjamin franklin had predicted that although british soldiers sent to america would not find a rebellion they may indeed make one the growing tensions between rebellious americans and british troops triggered several violent incidents.
the first called the battle at golden hill occurred in new york city where liberty boys kept erecting liberty poles only to see british soldiers knock them down.
the soldiers called lobsterbacks or redcoats because of their bright red uniforms also began posting signs declaring that the sons of liberty were the real enemies of society on january 18 1770 a group of patriots captured two british soldiers.
soon an angry crowd formed around the twenty british soldiers sent to rescue their comrades.
the outnumbered soldiers retreated.
when they reached golden hill more soldiers arrived.
at that point the redcoats turned on the crowd pursuing them.
an officer yelled draw your bayonets and cut your way through them they attacked the crowd and in the confusion several on both sides were seriously hurt.
the next day more brawls erupted.
once the british soldiers left the scene the sons of liberty erected another liberty pole which bore the inscription liberty and property the first blood had been shed in the growing conflict over american liberties and it was soon followed by more violence.
the boston massacre massachusetts had long been the center of resistance to british authority.
in boston the presence of thousands of british soldiers had become a constant source of irritation.
crowds frequently heckled the soldiers many of whom earned the abuse by harassing and intimidating americans.
on the evening of march 5 1770 two dozen boston rowdies teens irishmen blacks and sailors began taunting and throwing icicles at hugh white a british soldier guarding the custom house.
someone rang the town fire bell drawing a larger crowd to the scene as the taunting continued kill him kill him knock him down.
fire damn you fire you dare not fire a squad of soldiers arrived to help white but the surly crowd surrounded them.
when someone knocked a soldier down he arose and fired his musket.
others joined in.
when the smoke cleared five people lay dead or dying and eight more were wounded.
the first one killed or so the story goes was crispus attucks a former slave who worked at the docks.
the so called boston massacre sent shock waves throughout the colonies and all the way to london.
virtually the entire city of boston attended the funerals for the deceased.
only the decision to postpone the trial of the british 176 chapter 4 from colonies to states the bloody massacre paul reveres engraving of the boston massacre 1770.
soldiers for six months allowed the tensions to subside.
at the same time the impact of the colonial boycott of british products persuaded lord north to modify the townshend acts.
late in april 1770 parliament repealed all the townshend duties except for the tea tax which the king wanted to keep as a symbol of parliaments authority.
colonial discontent subsided for two years thereafter.
the redcoats left boston but remained in canada and the british navy still patrolled the new england coast.
the gaspe incident in june 1772 a naval incident further eroded the colonies fragile relationship with the mother country.
near warwick rhode island the hms gaspe a british warship ran aground while chasing suspected american smugglers.
its hungry crew seized local sheep hogs and chickens from local farms.
an enraged crowd some of them dressed the crisis grows 177 as mohawk indians then boarded the gaspe shot the captain removed the crew looted the ship and then burned it.
the gaspe incident symbolized the intensity of anti british feelings among growing numbers of americans.
when the british tried to take the suspects to london for trial patriots organized in protest.
thomas jefferson said that it was the threat of transporting americans for trials in britain that reignited a nti british activities in virginia.
in response to the gaspe incident samuel adams organized the committee of correspondence which issued a statement of american rights and grievances and invited other towns to do the same.
similar committees sprang up across massachusetts and in other colonies forming a unified network of resistance.
the flame is kindled and like lightning it catches from soul to soul reported abigail adams the high spirited wife of future president john adams.
by 1772 thomas hutchinson now the royal governor of massachusetts could tell the colonial assembly that the choice facing americans was stark they must choose between obeying the supreme authority of parliament and total independence the boston tea party the new british prime minister lord north soon provided the spark to transform resentment into rebellion.
in 1773 he tried to bail out the struggling east india company which had in its british warehouses some 17 million pounds of tea that it desperately needed to sell before it rotted.
parliament passed the tea act of 1773 to allow the company to send its tea directly to america without paying any taxes.
british tea merchants could thereby undercut the prices charged by their american competitors most of whom were smugglers who bought tea from the dutch.
at the same time king george iii told lord north to compel obedience in the colonies.
in massachusetts the committees of correspondence backed by boston merchants alerted colonists that the british government was trying to purchase colonial submission with cheap tea.
the reduction in the price of tea was a clever trick to make colonists accept taxation without consent.
in boston furious americans decided that their passion for liberty outweighed their love for tea.
on december 16 1773 scores of patriots disguised as indians boarded three british ships in boston harbor and dumped overboard 342 chests filled with 46 tons of east india company tea.
the boston tea party pushed british officials to the breaking point.
the destruction of so much valuable tea convinced the king and his advisers that a forceful response was required.
the colonists must either submit or triumph george iii wrote to lord north who decided to make an example of boston 178 chapter 4 from colonies to states to the rest of the colonies.
we are now to establish our authority over the colonies north said or give it up entirely the coercive acts in 1774 lord north convinced parliament to punish rebellious boston by enacting a cluster of harsh laws called the coercive acts americans renamed them the intolerable acts.
the boston port act closed the boston harbor until the city paid for the lost tea.
a new quartering act ordered colonists to provide lodging for british soldiers.
the impartial administration of justice act said that any royal official accused of a major crime would be tried back in great britain rather than in the colony.
finally the massachusetts government act gave the royal governor the authority to appoint the colonys legislative council which until then had been elected by the people as well as judges and sheriffs.
it also ordered that no town meeting could be held without the royal governors consent.
in may lieutenant general thomas gage commander in chief of british forces in north america was named governor of massachusetts and assumed command of the british soldiers who had returned to boston.
the intolerable acts shocked colonists.
no one had expected such a severe reaction to the boston tea party.
many towns held meetings in violation of the able doctor or america swallowing the bitter draught this 1774 engraving shows lord north the boston port act in his pocket pouring tea down americas throat and america spitting it back.
the crisis grows 179 the new laws and voters elected their own unauthorized provincial legislative assembly which ordered town governments to quit paying taxes to the royal governor.
by august 1774 patriots across massachusetts had essentially taken control of local governments.
they also began stockpiling weapons and gunpowder in anticipation of an eventual clash with british troops.
elsewhere colonists rallied to help boston raising money sending supplies and boycotting as well as burning or dumping british tea.
in williamsburg when the virginia assembly met in may a member of the committee of correspondence thomas jefferson suggested that june 1 the effective date of the boston port act become an official day of fasting and prayer in virginia.
the royal governor responded by dissolving the assembly whose members then retired to the raleigh tavern where they decided to form a continental congress to represent all the colonies more effectively in the confrontation with britain.
as samuel savage a connecticut colonist wrote may 1774 the conflict had come down to a single question whether we shall or shall not be governed by a british parliament the first continental congress on september 5 1774 the fifty five delegates making up the first continental congress assembled in philadelphia.
it was the first time that all of the colonies had met to coordinate policies.
over seven weeks the congress endorsed the suffolk resolves which urged massachusetts to resist british tyranny with force.
the congress then adopted a declaration of american rights which proclaimed once again the rights of americans as british citizens and denied parliaments authority to regulate internal colonial affairs.
we demand no new rights said the congress.
we ask only for peace liberty and security finally the congress adopted the continental association of 1774 which recommended that every colony organize committees to enforce a new and complete boycott of all imported british goods a dramatic step that would be followed by a refusal to send american goods exports to britain.
if the ideal of republican virtue meant anything it meant the sacrificing of self interest for the public good.
the association was designed to show that americans could deny themselves the baubles of britain in order to demonstrate their commitment to colonial liberties and constitutional rights.
the county and city committees forming the continental association became the organizational network for the resistance movement.
seven thousand men across the colonies served on the local committees and many more women helped put the boycotts into practice.
the committees required 180 chapter 4 from colonies to states colonists to sign an oath refusing to purchase british goods.
in east haddam connecticut a loyalist doctor was tarred feathered and rubbed with pig dung.
such violent incidents led loyalists to claim that it was better to be a slave to the king than to a patriot mob.
thousands of ordinary men and women participated in the boycott of british goods and their sacrifices on behalf of colonial liberties provided the momentum leading to revolution.
it was common people who enforced the boycott volunteered in patriot militia units attended town meetings and ousted royal officials.
as the people of pittsfield massachusetts declared in a petition we have always believed that the people are the fountain of power the growing rebellion against british tyranny now extended well beyond simple grievances over taxation.
patriots decided that there was a conspiracy against their liberties at work in london.
in boston an increasingly nervous general gage requested that more british troops be sent to suppress the growing rebellion.
mercy otis warren wrote that most americans still balked at the idea of drawing the sword against the nation from whence she america derived her origin she feared however that britain was poised to plunge her dagger into the bosom of her affectionate offspring last minute compromise in london king george fumed.
he wrote lord north that blows must decide whether the americans are to be subject to this country or independent in early 1775 parliament declared that massachusetts was officially in rebellion and prohibited the new england colonies from trading with any nation outside the british empire.
on february 27 1775 lord north issued the conciliatory propositions which offered to resolve the festering dispute by eliminating all taxes on any colony that voluntarily paid both its share for military defense and the salaries of the royal governors.
in other words north was asking the colonies to tax themselves.
by the time the conciliatory propositions arrived in america shooting had already started.
bold talk of war while most of the patriots believed that britain would back down patrick henry of virginia dramatically declared that war was unavoidable.
the twenty nine year old henry a farmer and storekeeper turned lawyer claimed that the colonies have done everything that could be done to avert the storm which is now coming on but their efforts had been met only by violence and insult freedom the defiant henry shouted could be bought only with blood.
if forced to choose he supposedly shouted give me liberty then paused dramatically clenched his fist as if it held a dagger and plunged it into his c hest or give me death loyalists shouted treason amid the applause.
the crisis grows 181 as henry predicted events quickly moved toward armed conflict.
by mid 1775 the king and parliament had effectively lost control they could neither persuade nor force the patriots to accept new regulations and revenue measures.
in boston general gage warned that armed conflict would unleash the horrors of civil war but lord sandwich head of the british navy dismissed the rebels as raw undisciplined cowardly men without an army or navy.
major john pitcairn a british army officer agreed writing from boston that one active campaign a smart action and burning two or three of their towns will set everything to rights lexington and concord patrick henry of virginia henry famously declared give me liberty or give me death major pitcairn soon had his chance to quash the rebel resistance.
on april 14 1775 the british army in boston received secret orders to stop the open rebellion in massachusetts.
general gage had decided to arrest rebel leaders such as samuel adams and seize the militias gunpowder stored at concord sixteen miles northwest of boston.
after dark on april 18 some 800 british soldiers secretly boarded boats and crossed the charles river to cambridge then set out westward on foot to lexington a town about eleven miles away.
when patriots got wind of the plan paul revere and william dawes mounted their horses for their famous midnight ride to warn the rebel leaders that the british were coming.
in the gray dawn light of april 19 an advance unit of 238 redcoats found american captain john parker and about seventy minutemen patriot militia who could assemble at a minutes notice lined up on the lexington town square while dozens of villagers watched.
parker and his men intended only a silent protest but major pitcairn rode onto the lexington green swinging his sword and yelling disperse you damned rebels.
you dogs run the outnumbered militiamen were backing away when someone fired.
the british soldiers shot at the minutemen then charged them with bayonets leaving eight dead and ten wounded.
jonathan 182 chapter 4 from colonies to states harrington a militiaman who was shot in the back managed to crawl across the green only to die on his doorstep.
the british officers quickly brought their men under control and led them to concord where they destroyed hidden military supplies.
while marching out of the town they encountered american riflemen at the north bridge.
shots were fired and a dozen or so british soldiers were killed or wounded.
more important the short skirmish and ringing church bells alerted rebel farmers ministers craftsmen and merchants from nearby communities to grab their muskets.
they were as one of them said determined to be free or die by noon the british began a ragged retreat back to lexington.
less than a mile out of concord they suffered the first of many ambushes.
the narrow road turned into a gauntlet of death as rebel marksmen fired on the british troops from behind stone walls trees barns and houses.
it was a day full of horror one of the soldiers recalled.
the patriots seemed maddened during the fighting along the road leading to lexington a british soldier was searching a house for rebel snipers when he ran into t wenty five year old patriot james hayward a school teacher.
the redcoat pointed his musket at the american and said stop youre a dead man hayward raised his weapon rive r lexington and concord april 19 1775 co rd battle site lexington mystic r north bridge concord iver n co sudbury riv er medford british retreat a m menotomy e r i c a n s british advance cambridge charlestown boston c h arle s r i v e r 4 miles 4 kilometers massachusetts bay brookline boston harbor roxbury describe the clash between british soldiers and american militiamen on lexington green.
wwn64 america 10e why did the americans tactics along the road between concord lexington 26593 04map 05 and boston succeed.
first proof why did the british march on concord in the first place.
the spreading conflict 183 the battle of lexington amos doolittles impression of the battle of lexington as shooting begins between the royal marines and the minutemen.
and answered so are you they fired simultaneously.
the british soldier died instantly and hayward succumbed to a head wound eight hours later.
by nightfall the redcoat survivors were safely back in boston having suffered three times as many dead and wounded as the americans.
a british general reported that the colonists had earned his respect whoever looks upon them as an irregular mob will find himself much mistaken until the battles of lexington and concord both sides had mistakenly assumed that the other would back down when confronted with deadly force.
instead the clash of arms turned a resistance movement into a war of rebellion.
masses of ordinary people were determined to fight for their freedoms against a british parliament and king bent on denying them their civil and legal rights.
in virginia thomas jefferson reported that the news from concord and lexington had unleashed a frenzy of revenge against the british among all ranks of people the spreading conflict on june 15 1775 the second continental congress unanimously selected forty three year old george washington to lead a new national army.
his service in the french and indian war had made him one of the few experienced 184 chapter 4 from colonies to states american officers and he was admired for his success as a planter surveyor and land speculator as well as for his service in the virginia legislature and the continental congress.
perhaps more important he looked like a leader.
tall and strong washington was a superb horseman and fearless fighter.
washington humbly accepted the responsibility of leading the american war effort but refused to be paid.
a few weeks later mercy otis warren wrote a friend in london that washington was a man whose military abilities public private virtue place him in the first class of the good the brave the battle of bunker hill on saturday june 17 the very day that george washington was named commander in chief patriot militiamen engaged british forces in their first major clash the battle of bunker hill adjoining breeds hill was the battles actual location.
in an effort to strengthen their control over the area around boston some 2 400 british troops based in the city boarded boats and crossed over the charles river to the charlestown peninsula where they formed lines and advanced up breeds hill in tight formation through waist high grass and across pasture fences as the american defenders watched from behind their earthworks.
view of the attack on bunker hill the battle of bunker hill and the burning of charlestown peninsula.
the spreading conflict 185 the militiamen mostly farmers waited until the redcoats had come within thirty paces then loosed a volley that shattered the front ranks.
the british attacked again but the patriot riflemen forced them to retreat a second time.
during the third british assault the colonists ran out of gunpowder and retreated in panic and confusion.
i jumped over the walls peter brown remembered and ran for about half a mile while musket balls flew like hailstones and cannons roared like thunder the british took the high ground but were too tired to pursue the rebels.
they had suffered 1 054 casualties over twice the american losses.
a dearly bought victory reported british general henry clinton another such would have ruined us there followed a nine month stalemate around boston with each side hoping for a negotiated settlement.
abigail adams reported that the patriots still living in boston where the british army governed by martial law were being treated like abject slaves under the most cruel and despotic of tyrants open and avowed enemies three weeks after the battle of bunker hill in july 1775 the continental congress sent the king the olive branch petition urging him to negotiate with his rebellious colonies.
when the petition reached london however king george refused to look at it.
on august 22 he denounced the americans as open and avowed enemies his arrogant dismissal of the olive branch petition convinced abigail adams that war was now certain the die is cast.
the sword is now our only yet dreadful alternative outright rebellion resistance had grown into outright rebellion but few patriots were ready to call for american independence.
they still considered themselves british subjects.
when the second continental congress convened at philadelphia on may 10 1775 most of the delegates still wanted parliament to restore their rights so that they could resume being loyal british colonists.
meanwhile the british army in boston was under siege by militia units and small groups of musket toting men who had arrived from across new england to join the rebellion.
they were still farmers not trained soldiers and the uprising was not yet an army it lacked an organized command structure and effective support system.
the patriots also lacked training discipline cannons muskets bullets gunpowder and blankets.
what they did have was a growing sense of confidence and resolve.
as a massachusetts patriot said our 186 chapter 4 from colonies to states all is at stake.
death and devastation are the instant consequences of delay.
every moment is infinitely precious with each passing day war fever infected more and more colonists.
oh that i were a soldier john adams wrote home to abigail from philadelphia.
i am reading military books.
everybody must and will and shall be a soldier on the very day that congress met the british fort ticonderoga on lake champlain in upstate new york near the canadian border fell to a patriot force of green mountain boys led by ethan allen of vermont and massachusetts volunteers under benedict arnold.
two days later the patriots captured a smaller british fort at crown point north of ticonderoga.
independence the revolutionary war was well underway in january 1776 when thomas paine a recently arrived t hirty nine year old english emigrant who had found work as a radical journalist in philadelphia provided the patriot cause with a stirring pamphlet titled common sense.
until it appeared colonial grievances had been mainly directed at parliament.
paine however directly attacked the british monarchy by openly appealing to the passions and feelings of mankind the common sense of the matter paine stressed was that king george iii had caused the rebellion and had ordered the savage and cruel denial of american rights.
even brutes do not devour their young he wrote nor savages make war upon their families yet britain the mother of america was doing just that.
americans paine urged should abandon the british monarchy the blood of the slain the weeping voice of nature cries tis time to part it was paine who helped convince americans that independence was not unrealistic it was inevitable.
only by declaring independence he predicted could the colonists gain the crucial support of france and spain the cause of america is in great measure the cause of all mankind the rest of the world would welcome and embrace an independent america it would be the glory of the earth paine concluded that the sun had never shined on a cause of greater worth he insisted that we have it in our power to begin the world over again within three months more than 150 000 copies of paines stirring pamphlet were circulating throughout the colonies and around the world an enormous number for the time.
common sense is working a powerful change in the minds of men george washington reported.
independence 187 breaking the bonds of empire common sense inspired the colonial population from massachusetts to georgia and helped convince british subjects still loyal to the king to embrace the radical notion of independence.
without the pen of paine remembered john adams the sword of washington would have been wielded in vain during the spring and summer of 1776 some ninety local governments towns and colonial legislatures issued declarations of independence from great britain.
momentum for independence was building in the continental congress too but success was by no means assured.
in congress john dickinson of pennsylvania urged delay.
on june 1 he warned that independence was a dangerous step since america had no national government or european allies.
but his was a lone voice of caution.
in june 1776 one by one the colonies authorized their delegates in the continental congress to take the final step.
on june 7 richard henry lee of virginia moved that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states lees resolution passed on july 2 a date that john adams predicted would be the most memorable in the history of america.
the coming revolution the continental congress votes for independence july 2 1776.
188 chapter 4 from colonies to states the more memorable date however became july 4 1776 when the congress formally adopted the declaration of independence.
a few delegates refused to sign the momentous document others said john adams signed with regret.
and with many doubts most however signed wholeheartedly knowing full well that by doing so they were likely to be hanged if captured by british troops.
benjamin franklin acknowledged how high the stakes were well gentlemen he told the congress we must now hang together or we shall most assuredly hang separately the declaration of independence the declaration in its most frequently reproduced form an 1823 engraving by william j.
independence 189 jeffersons declaration in philadelphia in june 1776 t hirty t hree year old thomas jefferson a brilliant virginia attorney and planter serving in the continental congress drafted a statement of independence that john adams and benjamin franklin then edited followed by the members of congress themselves.
the declaration of independence was crucially important not simply because it marked the creation of a new nation but because of the ideals it expressed and the grievances it listed.
it insisted that certain truths were self evident that all men are created equal and independent and have the right to create governments of their own choosing.
governments in thomas jeffersons words derive their just powers from the consent of the people who are entitled to alter or abolish those governments when rulers deny citizens their unalienable rights to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness because king george iii was trying to impose an absolute tyranny over these states the representatives of the united states of america declared the thirteen united colonies to be free and independent states the contradictions of freedom once the continental congress chose independence the members set about revising thomas jeffersons draft declaration before sending it to london.
southern representatives insisted on deleting the slave owning jeffersons section criticizing george iii for perpetuating the african slave trade.
in doing so they revealed the major contradiction at work in the movement for independence the rhetoric of freedom that animated the revolution did not apply to americas original sin the widespread system of slavery that fueled the southern economy.
slavery was the absence of liberty yet few americans confronted the inconsistency of their protests in defense of freedom for whites.
in 1764 a group of slaves in charleston watching a demonstration against british tyranny by white sons of liberty got caught up in the energies of the moment and began chanting freedom freedom freedom but that was not at all what southern planters wanted for african americans.
in 1774 when a group of slaves killed four whites in a desperate attempt to gain their own freedom from tyranny georgia planters responded by capturing the rebels and burning them alive.
the harvard educated lawyer james otis was one of the few whigs who demanded freedom for blacks and women.
in 1764 he had argued in a widely circulated pamphlet that the colonists black and white born here are free british subjects and entitled to all the essential civil rights of such he even went so far as to suggest that slavery itself should be ended since all men.
white or black were by the law of nature freeborn 190 chapter 4 from colonies to states otis also asked are not women born as free as men.
would it not be infamous to assert that the ladies are all slaves by nature his sister mercy otis warren became a tireless advocate of american resistance to british tyranny through her poems pamphlets and plays.
in a letter to a friend she noted that british officials needed to realize that americas daughters are politicians and patriots and will aid the good work of resistance with their female efforts in 1765 john adams had snarled that he and other colonists angered by british actions would not be their slaves actual slaves insisted on independence too.
in 1773 a group of enslaved african americans in boston appealed to the royal governor of massachusetts to free them just as white americans were defending their freedoms against british tyranny.
in many respects the slaves argued they had a more compelling case for liberty we have no property we have no wives.
no children.
no country a few months later a group of four boston slaves addressed a public letter to the town government in which they referred to the hypocrisy of slaveholders who protested against british regulations and taxes.
we expect great things from men who have made such a noble stand against the designs of their fellow men to enslave them they noted.
but freedom in 1776 was a celebration to which slaves were not invited.
in 1775 the prominent south carolinian william henry drayton expressed his horror that impertinent slaves were claiming that the present contest with great britain was for obliging us to give them liberty george washington himself acknowledged the contradictory aspects of the revolutionary movement when he warned that the alternative to declaring independence was to become tame and abject slaves as the blacks we rule over with such arbitrary sway absolute power washphillis wheatley an autographed ington and other slaveholders at the portrait of americas first african head of the revolutionary movement american poet.
such as thomas jefferson were in part independence 191 so resistant to british tyranny because they witnessed every day what actual slavery was like for the blacks under their control.
a morally perplexed jefferson admitted the hypocrisy of slave owning revolutionaries.
southerners he wrote to a french friend are jealous of their own liberties but trampling on those of others such inconsistency was not lost on others.
phillis wheatley the first african american writer to see her poetry published in america highlighted the absurdity of white colonists claiming their freedom while continuing to exercise oppressive power over enslaved africans.
we always had governed ourselves historians still debate the causes of the american revolution.
americans in 1775 1776 were not desperately poor overall they probably enjoyed a higher standard of living than most other societies and lived under the freest institutions in the world.
their diet was better than that of europeans as was their average life span.
in addition the percentage of free property owners in the thirteen american colonies was higher than in britain or europe.
as the wealthy charlestonian charles pinckney remarked a few years later americans by which he meant white americans were more equal in their circumstances than the people of any other country at the same time the new taxes forced on americans after 1763 were not as great as those imposed on the british people.
it is also important to remember that many american colonists perhaps as many as half were indifferent hesitant or actively opposed to rebellion.
so why did the americans revolt at all.
historians have highlighted many factors the clumsy british efforts to tighten their regulation of colonial trade the restrictions on colonists eager to acquire western lands the growing tax burden the mounting debts to british merchants the lack of american representation in parliament and the role of radicals such as samuel adams and patrick henry in stirring up anti british feelings.
yet colonists sought liberty from british tyranny for reasons that were not so selfless or noble.
many of the new englanders and new yorkers most critical of tighter british regulations were smugglers.
boston merchant john hancock for example embraced the patriot cause in part because he was a wealthy smuggler.
paying more british taxes would have cost him a fortune.
likewise south carolinas henry laurens and virginias landon carter both prosperous planters worried that the british might abolish slavery.
overall however what americans most feared and resented were the british efforts to constrict their civil liberties thereby denying their rights as british citizens.
as hugh williamson a pennsylvania physician explained the 192 chapter 4 from colonies to states revolution resulted not from trifling or imaginary injustices but from gross and palpable violations of american rights that had thrown the miserable colonists into the pit of despotism yet how did the american colonies the most diverse society in the world divided by nationality and class develop such a unified resistance.
although most were of english heritage there were many other peoples represented scots irish scots irish welsh germans dutch swedes finns swiss french and jews as well as growing numbers of africans and diminishing numbers of native americans.
in 1774 thomas hutchinson the royal governor of massachusetts assured british officials that a union of the colonies was utterly impracticable because the colonists were greatly divided among themselves in every colony he predicted that rebellious americans would ultimately submit and that they must and moreover would soon hutchinson was wrong of course.
what most a mericans regardless of their backgrounds had come to share by 1775 was a defiant attachment to the civil rights and legal processes guaranteed by the english constitutional tradition.
this new outlook rooted in the defense of sacred constitutional principles made the revolution conceivable armed resistance made it possible and independence ultimately made it achievable.
the outlook of the revolutionaries was founded on the shared political principle that all citizens were equal and independent and that all governmental authority had to be based on the consent of those governed and longstanding constitutional principles.
this republican ideal was the crucial force transforming a prolonged effort to preserve old rights and liberties enjoyed by british citizens into a movement to create an independent nation.
as john adams explained americans by 1776 had lost their affection for england because british officials were conspiring to strip them of their cherished liberties.
with their declaration of independence the r evolutionaries men and women farmers artisans mechanics sailors merchants tavern owners and shopkeepers had at last become determined to develop their own society.
most patriots still spoke the same language and worshipped the same god as the british but they no longer thought the same way.
americans wanted to trade freely with the world and to expand what jefferson called their empire of liberty westward across the appalachian mountains.
perhaps the last word on the complex causes of the revolution should belong to levi preston a minuteman from danvers massachusetts.
asked late in life about the british efforts to impose new taxes and regulations on the colonists preston responded by asking his young interviewer what were they.
oppressions.
i didnt feel them he was then asked what were you independence 193 not oppressed by the stamp act preston replied that he never saw one of those stamps.
i am certain i never paid a penny for one of them what about the tax on tea.
i never drank a drop of the stuff the boys threw it all overboard his interviewer finally asked why he decided to fight for independence.
young man preston explained what we meant in going for those redcoats was this we always had governed ourselves and we always meant to.
they didnt mean we should chapter review summary british and french colonies new france followed the spanish model of absolute power in governing its far flung trading outposts.
on the other hand great britains policy of salutary neglect allowed the colonies a large degree of self government until the british governments decision to rigidly enforce its policy of mercantilism as seen in such measures as the navigation acts became a means to enrich its global empire.
the glorious revolution in great britain inspired new political philosophies that challenged the divine right of kings with the natural rights of free men.
the french and indian war four european wars affected america between 1689 and 1763 as the british and french joined by their allies fought throughout the world.
early in the french and indian war worried colonies created the albany plan of union which formed an early blueprint for an independent american government.
the seven years war known as the french and indian war 1754 1763 in the colonies eventually was won by the british.
in the treaty of paris in 1763 france lost all its north american possessions britain gained canada and florida and spain acquired the vast louisiana territory.
the indians fought to regain control of their ancestral lands in pontiacs rebellion and great britain weary of war negotiated peace in the royal proclamation of 1763.
british colonial policy after the french and indian war the british government was saddled with an enormous debt.
to reduce that burden prime minister george grenville implemented various taxes to compel colonists to pay for their own defense.
colonists resisted claiming that they could not be taxed by parliament because they were not represented in parliament.
british officials countered that the colonists had virtual representation in parliament since each member was supposed to represent his district as well as the empire as a whole.
colonial reaction to the stamp act of 1765 was the first intimation of real trouble for british authorities.
conflicts between whigs and tories intensified when the townshend acts imposed additional taxes.
the sons of liberty and the daughters of liberty mobilized resistance particularly through boycotts of british goods.
road to the american revolution but the crisis worsened.
spontaneous resistance led to the boston massacre organized protesters later staged the boston tea party.
the british response to the events in boston called the coercive acts sparked further violence between patriots and loyalists.
the first continental congress formed committees of correspondence to organize and spread resistance.
thomas paines pamphlet common sense helped kindle revolutionary fervor and plant the seed of independence and the continental congress delivered its declaration of independence.
chronology 1688 1689 1756 1763 first navigation act passed by parliament glorious revolution french and indian war pontiacs rebellion begins treaty of paris ends french and indian war royal proclamation stamp act stamp act congress repeal of the stamp act townshend acts boston massacre tea act boston tea party coercive acts military conflict at lexington and concord thomas paine publishes common sense continental congress declares independence key terms mercantilism p 152 virtual representation p 169 navigation acts p 152 sons of liberty p 169 glorious revolution p 154 daughters of liberty p 170 natural rights p 155 townshend acts p 173 salutary neglect p 155 loyalists p 174 french and indian war seven years war p 157 patriots p 174 albany plan of union p 159 committee of correspondence p 177 treaty of paris 1763 p 163 pontiacs rebellion p 166 royal proclamation of 1763 p 166 stamp act p 168 boston massacre p 175 boston tea party p 177 coercive acts p 178 common sense p 186 declaration of independence p 188 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
pa r t t wo building a nation the signing of the declaration of independence in july 1776 thrilled the rebellious colonists and forced other americans to make a hard choice to remain loyal subjects of king george iii and thus traitors to the new united states of america or to embrace the rebellion and become traitors to great britain.
it was one thing for patriot leaders to declare independence and quite another to win it on the battlefield.
the odds greatly favored the british fewer than half of the colonists were patriots who actively supported the revolution and many others the loyalists fought against it.
the thirteen independent states had new untested governments and general george washington found himself in charge of an inexperienced and poorly equipped army of amateurs facing the worlds greatest military power.
yet the revolutionaries would persevere and prevail.
as a military leader washington proved to be more dogged than brilliant a general famous for his courage and c omposure even in the face of adversity.
he had extensive knowledge of the nations geography and used it to his advantage against the british.
even more important to the revolutionary cause was the decision by the french and later the spanish and dutch to join the war against britain.
the f ranco american military alliance negotiated in 1778 was the decisive turning point in the war.
in 1783 after eight years of sporadic fighting and heavy human and financial losses the british gave up the fight and their american colonies.
while fighting the british the patriots also had to create new governments for themselves.
quite different colonies suddenly became coequal states.
the deeply ingrained resentment of british imperial rule led the americans to give more power to the individual states than to the weak new national government called the confederation.
as thomas jefferson declared virginia is my country such powerful local ties help explain why the articles of confederation the original constitution organizing the thirteen states into a loose confederation provided only minimal national authority when it was finally ratified by the states in 1781.
final power to make and execute laws remained with the states.
after the revolutionary war the flimsy political bonds authorized by the articles of confederation could not meet the needs of the new nation.
this realization led to the calling of the constitutional convention in 1787.
the process of drafting and approving the new constitution generated a heated debate about the respective powers granted to the states and the national government a debate that became the central theme of american political thought.
199 the revolution also helped reshape american society.
what would be the role of women african americans and native americans in the new nation.
how would the different economies of the various regions of the new united states be developed.
who would control access to the vast native american ancestral lands to the west of the original thirteen states.
how would the united states of america relate to the other nations of the world.
these questions gave birth to the first national political parties in the united states.
during the 1790s the federalist party led by george washington john adams and alexander hamilton and the democratic republican party led by thomas jefferson and james madison furiously debated the political and economic future of the new nation.
with jeffersons election as president in 1800 the republicans gained the upper hand in national politics and would remain dominant for the next quarter century.
in the process they presided over a maturing republic that aggressively expanded westward at the expense of the native americans embraced industrial development engaged in a second war with great britain and witnessed growing tensions between north and south over slavery.
the american revolution 1776 1783 the death of general mercer at the battle of princeton ca.
1789 1831 after the american victory at trenton new jersey george washington center on horseback launched a surprise attack on the british at the battle of princeton.
the americans won the battle but one of the casualties was washingtons close friend general hugh mercer bottom whose death created a rallying symbol for the revolution.
f ew europeans thought the upstart american revolutionaries could win a war against the worlds richest and most powerful empire and indeed the americans did lose most of the major battles in the revolutionary war.
but they outlasted the british eventually forcing them to end the war and grant independence to the united states of america.
this stunning result reflected the tenacity of the patriots as well as the difficulties the british faced in fighting a transatlantic war 3 000 miles from home.
it took five to ten weeks for orders from the government in london to reach british commanders in america and often they were out of date by the time they arrived.
the british also had to adjust to the often unorthodox american ways of warfare.
they discovered that patriots were willing to fight at night in the cold in the woods and in the rain and snow.
what began as a war for independence became both a civil war between americans patriots whigs versus loyalists tories joined by their indian allies and a world war involving numerous allied european nations.
the crucial development was the ability of the united states to forge military alliances with france spain and the netherlands all of which were eager to humble great britain and seize its colonies around the world.
those nations provided the revolutionaries with desperately needed money supplies soldiers and warships.
the french and spanish also sent a combined fleet of warships to the english c hannel forcing much of the royal navy to remain at home thus weakening the british effort to blockade american ports.
the war for independence unleashed unexpected social and political changes as it required common people to take a more active role in governments at all focus questions 1.
what challenges faced the british and american military leaders in fighting the revolutionary war.
what were some of the key turning points in the revolutionary war.
how did they change the direction of the war.
in what ways did the american revolution function as a civil war.
how was the revolutionary war an engine for political and social change.
how did the revolutionary war impact african americans women and native americans.
202 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 l evels local state and national.
after all as the declaration of independence asserted governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed the common people readily took advantage of their new opportunities.
in virginia voters in 1776 elected a new state legislature that as an observer noted was composed of men not quite so well dressed nor so politely educated nor so highly born as had been the case in the past.
mobilizing for war the british empire sent some 35 000 soldiers and half of its huge navy across the atlantic to put down the american rebellion.
the british also hired foreign soldiers mercenaries as some 30 000 germans served in the british armies in america.
most were from the german state of hesse cassel thus they became known to americans as hessians.
the british also recruited american loyalists native americans and african americans to fight on their behalf but there were never as many willing to join them as they had hoped.
further the british faced a formidable challenge in supplying their large army and navy in america.
they initially assumed that there would be enough food for their troops and plenty of forage for their horses in america.
as the war ground on however most of the supplies had to come from britain.
the war in america became terribly expensive and eventually demoralizing to the british people as it dragged on year after year costing more and more in lives and money.
the british government under lord north also never had a consistent war strategy.
initially the british focused on blockading new englands seaports to strangle american commerce.
when that failed british military leaders sought to destroy george washingtons continental army in new york.
despite their initial success in driving the americans out of the city the british commanders failed to pursue and eliminate the retreating continental army.
they next tried to drive a wedge between new england and new york splitting the colonies in two.
that too would fail leading to the final british strategy moving their main army into the southern colonies in hopes of rallying loyalists in the region.
the continental army while the patriots had the advantage of fighting on their home ground they also had to create an army and navy from scratch and with little money to do so.
recruiting supplying equipping training and paying soldiers and sailors were monumental challenges.
before the war citizen soldiers militiamen were primarily civilians summoned from their farms and shops to defend their communities.
once the danger passed the militiamen quickly dispersed and returned to their homes mobilizing for war 203 or farms.
many militiamen were unreliable and ungovernable.
they come in you cannot tell how general washington said in exasperation go you cannot tell when and act you cannot tell where consume your provisions exhaust your stores supplies and leave you at last at a critical moment once the war started washington knew that militiamen alone could not win against veteran british and german soldiers.
he needed a professional army with full time soldiers.
while recruiting fighters general washington was pleased to see that the men from different colonies were developing a national or continental viewpoint in which they thought of themselves as fighting for a new nation not just protecting their particular communities like militiamen.
washington thus decided to call it the continental army.
about half of the 200 000 americans who served in the war were in the continental army.
they were mostly young single relatively poor farmers laborers or indentured servants.
what the continental army needed most at the start of the war were capable officers intensive training modern weapons and multiyear enlistment contracts.
the revolutionary soldiers also needed strict discipline for they had no room for error against the british.
as washington began whipping his new army into shape those who violated the rules were jailed flogged or sent packing.
some deserters were hanged.
many patriots who had not fought in the french and indian war found army life unbearable and combat horrifying.
as general nathanael greene a rhode island quaker who abandoned the pacifism of his religion for the war effort and became washingtons ablest commander pointed out few patriots had ever engaged in mortal combat and they were hard pressed to stand the shocking scenes of war to march over dead men to hear without concern the groans of the wounded desertions grew as the war dragged on.
at times washington could put only a few thousand men in the field.
eventually to recruit more soldiers congress was forced to provide more generous enticements such as land grants and cash bonuses in exchange for recruits agreeing to serve in the continental army for the duration of the war.
problems of finance and supply financing the revolution was much harder for the new american nation than it was for great britain.
lacking the power to impose taxes the confederation congress could only ask the states to provide funds for the national government.
yet the states rarely provided their expected share of the wars expenses and the continental congress reluctantly had to allow the patriot armies to take supplies directly from farmers in return for written promises of future payment.
204 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 in a predominantly agricultural society like america turning farmers into soldiers hurt the national economy.
william hooper a north carolinian who signed the declaration of independence grumbled that a soldier made is a farmer lost in april 1776 the continental congress had ended britains trade regulations by opening american ports to the ships of all nations.
soon however british warships set up blockades around americas major coastal cities.
many states found a ready source of revenue in the sale of abandoned loyalist homes farms and plantations.
nevertheless congress and the states still fell short of funding the wars cost and were forced to print more and more paper money which eroded its value.
at the start of the fighting there george washington at princeton commissioned for independence were no uniforms for the soldiers and hall in philadelphia this 1779 painting sailors and weapons were as variby charles willson peale portrays ous as their costumes most weapons washington as the hero of the battle of and ammunition were acquired either princeton.
by capturing british supplies or by importing them from france a government all too glad to help the patriots fight its arch enemy.
native americans and the revolution both the british and americans recruited indians to fight with them but the british were far more successful largely because they had longstanding relationships with chieftains and they promised to protect indian lands.
the peoples making up the iroquois league split their allegiances with most mohawks onondagas cayugas and senecas led by mohawk joseph brant and seneca old smoke joining the british and most oneidas and tuscaroras supporting the patriots.
the cherokees also joined the british in hopes of driving out american settlers who had taken their lands.
most indians in new england tried to remain neutral or sided with the patriots.
the stockbridge indians in massachusetts mostly mahicans formed mobilizing for war 205 a company of minutemen who fought alongside patriot units.
they pledged that wherever your armies go there we will go you shall always find us by your side and if providence calls us to sacrifice our lives in the field of battle we will fall where you fall and lay our bones by yours yet however much the british or americans claimed native americans as allies most indians engaged in the war as a means of protecting themselves and their own interests.
disaster in canada in july 1775 the continental congress authorized an ill planned military expedition in canada against quebec in the vain hope of rallying support among the french canadians.
one patriot detachment under general richard montgomery a former british army officer headed toward quebec by way of lake champlain along the new york canadian border another under general benedict arnold struggled westward toward quebec through the dense maine woods.
the americans arrived outside quebec in september tired exhausted and hungry.
a silent killer then ambushed them smallpox.
as the deadly virus raced through the american camp general montgomery faced a brutal dilemma.
most of his soldiers had signed up for short tours of duty and many were scheduled for discharge at the end of the year.
because of the impending departure of his men montgomery could not afford to wait until spring for the smallpox to subside.
seeing little choice but to fight he ordered an attack on the british forces defending quebec during a blizzard on december 31 1775.
the american assault was a disaster.
montgomery was killed early in the battle and benedict arnold was seriously wounded.
more than 400 americans were taken prisoner.
the rest of the patriot force retreated to its camp outside the walled city and appealed to the continental congress for reinforcements.
smallpox spread throughout the american army and arnold warned george washington in february 1776 that the runaway disease would soon bring the entire ruin of the army the british sensing weakness attacked the american camp and sent the ragtag patriots on a frantic retreat up the st lawrence river to the american held city of montreal and eventually back to new york and new england.
by the summer of 1776 the american revolutionaries had come to realize that their quest for independence would be neither short nor easy for the king and parliament were determined to smash the revolt and restore their empire.
george washington confessed to his brother that his efforts to form an effective american army out of the great mixture of troops were filled with difficulties and distresses most of the new england soldiers farmers sailors fishermen and a few former s laves were he said an exceeding ly 206 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 dirty and nasty people units from pennsylvania washington added did not know more of a rifle than my horse washingtons narrow escape on july 2 1776 the day the continental congress voted for independence a huge army of british redcoats came ashore on undefended staten island across new york citys harbor from manhattan.
by late august two thirds of the entire british army veterans of many campaigns around the world were camped on staten island.
they were the first wave in an effort to end the war quickly with a decisive victory.
for the next several weeks while more ships supplies and troops landed and prepared for action general william howe and his older brother admiral richard howe both of whom sympathized with american grievances but felt strongly that the rebellion must be put down met with patriot leaders in an effort to negotiate a settlement of the revolution.
their orders from london told them to make peace if possible and then wage war if peace was out of the question after the negotiations failed on august 22 1776 a massive british fleet of 427 ships carrying 32 000 troops including 8 000 hired german soldiers began landing on long island near new york city.
it was the largest seaborne military expedition in history to that point.
i could not believe my eyes recalled a pennsylvania militiaman.
i declare that i thought all london was afloat meanwhile george washington after ousting the british from boston had moved his forces to defensive positions around new york city in february 1776.
he still struggled to raise an army powerful enough to match the british.
during the winter and spring he could gather only about 19 000 poorly trained militiamen and recruits.
nor did he have any warships to defend a city surrounded by rivers and bays.
it was too small a force to defend new york from the expected british invasion but the continental congress insisted that the strategic city be defended.
as john adams explained new york was the key to the whole continent although a veteran of frontier fighting washington had never commanded a large force or supervised artillery cannon units.
as he confessed to the continental congress he had no experience to move armies on a large scale and had only limited.
in military matters washington was still learning the art of generalship and the british invasion of new york taught him some costly and painful lessons.
the new american army suffered a humiliating defeat at the battle of long island as the british invaders perfectly executed their assault.
an american mobilizing for war 207 officer noted that the fighting on long island was nothing but fright disgrace and confusion as general washington watched the british advance he sighed good god.
what brave fellows i must this day lose in the face of steadily advancing ranks of british soldiers with bayonet tipped muskets many of the untested american defenders and their officers panicked.
the smoke and chaos of battle disoriented the patriots.
over the next week of intense fighting the confused disorganized undisciplined and indecisive americans steadily gave ground.
only a timely rainstorm and heroic efforts by experienced boatmen enabled the retreating americans to cross the harbor from brooklyn to manhattan during the night of august 29.
had howes british army moved more quickly in pursuing the retreating patriots it could have trapped washingtons entire force and ended the revolution.
but the british rested as the main american army joined by patriot civilians made a miraculous escape from manhattan over the next several weeks.
they crossed the hudson river and retreated with furious urgency into new jersey and then over the delaware river into eastern pennsylvania.
a new jersey resident reported that the retreating americans marched two abreast looked ragged some without a shoe to their feet and most of them wrapped in blankets thousands had been captured during the new york campaign and hundreds more deserted eager to go home ahead of their british pursuers.
general washington was wearied almost to death by one of the greatest chases in military history as the ragged remnants of his army outraced their british pursuers over 170 miles in two months.
in one thing only did the british fail reported an observer they could not run as fast as their foe a british general predicted a quick victory in the war.
the americans he claimed would never again stand before us in the field.
everything seems to be over with them the situation was bleak in the fall of 1776.
new york city became the headquarters of both the royal navy and the british army.
local loyalists tories in new york city and new jersey excitedly welcomed the british occupation.
hundreds in this colony are against us a new york city patriot wrote to john adams.
tories openly express their sentiments in favor of the enemy by december 1776 the american revolution was near collapse.
a british officer reported that many rebels were without shoes or stockings and several were observed to have only linen drawers.
without any proper shirt.
they must suffer extremely in the winter weather.
indeed the continental army was shrinking before washingtons eyes.
he had only 3 000 men left by christmas.
unless a new army could be raised quickly he warned i think the game is pretty near up 208 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 then almost miraculously help emerged from an unexpected source the english born war correspondent thomas paine.
having opened the eventful year of 1776 with his inspiring pamphlet common sense paine now composed the american crisis in which he wrote these stirring lines these are the times that try mens souls the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the service of his country but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.
tyranny like hell is not easily conquered.
yet we have this consolation with us that the harder the conflict the more glorious the triumph.
paines rousing pamphlet boosted patriot morale.
out of the disastrous defeat came major changes in the way the continental congress managed the war.
on december 27 1776 it gave general washington large powers to strengthen the war effort including the ability to offer army recruits cash land clothing and blankets.
in december 1776 general william howe commander in chief of the british forces decided that the war with america was all but won.
he then casually settled down with his flashing blonde loyalist mistress twenty five year old elizabeth loring the wife of a new england tory to wait out the winter in new york city.
eighteenth century armies rarely fought during the thomas paines common sense thomas paines inspiring pamphlet was originally published anonymously because the british viewed it as treasonous.
mobilizing for war 209 winter months.
one american general concluded that howe shut his eyes fought his battles drank his bottle and had his little whore a desperate gamble george washington however was not ready to hibernate for the winter.
the morale of his men and the hopes of the nation he decided required some brilliant stroke of good news after the devastating defeats around new york city.
so the normally cautious washington grew bold out of necessity launching a desperate gamble to achieve a much needed victory before more of his soldiers decided to leave the army and return home.
on christmas night 1776 washington led some 2 400 men packed into forty foot long boats from pennsylvania across the icy delaware into new jersey.
a blizzard of sleet and snow helped cloak their movements on the frigid night.
near dawn at trenton the americans surprised 1 500 sleeping hessians attacking them from three sides.
an american sergeant said his blood chilld to see such horror and distress blood mingling together the dying groans.
the sight was too much to bear the battle of trenton was a total rout from which only 500 hessians escaped.
just two of washingtons men were killed.
the american commander had been in the thick of the battle urging his men forward press on.
press on boys a week later general washington and the americans again crossed the delaware and won another battle in new jersey at princeton before taking shelter at morristown in the hills of northern new jersey.
a british officer muttered that the americans had become a formidable enemy the surprising victories at princeton and trenton saved the cause of independence and shifted the wars momentum as a fresh wave of inspired americans signed up to serve in washingtons army.
a british officer recognized that the victories at trenton and princeton would revive the dropping spirits of the rebels and increase their force the military successes in new jersey also revived patriot confidence in george washingtons leadership.
british war correspondents claimed that he was more talented than any of their own commanders.
yet although the dark days of the autumn of 1776 were over unexpected challenges quickly chilled the patriots excitement.
winter in morristown during the record cold winter in early 1777 george washingtons ragged army again nearly disintegrated as s ix month enlistment contracts expired and deserters fled the hardships caused by the brutal weather inadequate food and widespread disease.
one soldier recalled that we were absolutely literally starved.
i saw several of the men roast their old shoes and eat them 210 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 major campaigns in new york and new jersey 1776 1777 peekskill american forces british forces new york battle site river dson hu 10 miles 10 kilometers white plains howe new jersey hackensack fort lee fort washington harlem heights morristown w as hi ng or nw to n al lis newark new brunswick long island brooklyn c gener al william howe ad newton riv e r re allentown al lo rd howe atlantic ocean aw a pa trenton henry clinton general princeton m ir de l why did general washington lead his army from brooklyn to manhattan and from what is the significance of the battle of trenton.
wwn64 there to new jersey.
figure m5 1 how could the british army commander general william howe have ended the first proof in new york.
31p0xrebellion 40p0 american society at war 211 smallpox and other diseases continued to cause more casualties among the american armies than combat.
by 1777 washington had come to view smallpox with greater dread than the sword of the enemy on any given day a fourth of the american troops were deemed unfit for duty usually because of smallpox.
the threat was so great that in early 1777 washington ordered a mass inoculation which he managed to keep secret from the british.
inoculating an entire army was a risky undertaking in the eighteenth century but it paid off.
the successful inoculation of the american army marks one of washingtons greatest strategic accomplishments of the war.
only about 1 000 patriots stayed with washington through the brutal morristown winter.
with the spring thaw however recruits began arriving to claim the bounty of 20 and 100 acres of land offered by congress to those who would enlist for three years or for the duration of the conflict if less.
having cobbled together some 9 000 regular troops washington began skirmishing with the british forces in northern new jersey.
a strategy of evasion general howe had been making his own plans however and so had other british officers.
howe hoped to maneuver the american army into fighting a single decisive action that the superior british forces would surely win and thereby end the war in one glorious engagement.
george washington however refused to take the bait.
the fighting around new york city had shown him that his outmanned army almost certainly could not defeat the british in a large open battle.
the only way to beat them he decided was to evade the main british army carefully select when and where to attack and in the end wear down the enemy forces and their will to fight on.
washington was willing to concede control of major cities like new york to the british for it was his army not defenseless towns that they have to subdue so the americans in the revolution did not have to win large battles they simply had to avoid losing the war.
britain on the other hand could win only by destroying the american will to resist.
with each passing year it became more difficult and expensive for the british to supply their large army and navy in america.
over time the british government and people would tire of the human and financial toll of conducting a prolonged war across the atlantic.
american society at war the revolution was as much a ruthless civil war among americans including the native american peoples allied with both sides as it was a prolonged struggle against great britain.
the necessity of choosing sides divided families and friends towns and cities.
212 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 benjamin franklins illegitimate son william for example was the royal governor of new jersey.
an ardent loyalist he sided with great britain in the war.
his patriot father later removed him from his will.
similarly eighteen year old bostonian lucy flucker defied her loyalist fathers wishes and married bookseller henry knox in 1774.
knox would become an american general.
lucys estranged family fled with the british army when it left boston in 1776 and she never saw them again.
i have lost my father mother brother and sister entirely lost them she wrote.
the colonists were generally divided into three groups patriots who formed the continental army and fought in state militias loyalists or tories as the patriots mockingly called them and a less committed middle group that sought to remain neutral but were eventually swayed by the better organized and more energetic patriots.
loyalists may have represented 20 percent of the american population but patriots were the largest of the three groups.
some americans like benedict arnold switched sides during the war.
both the patriots and the british once they took control of a city or community would often require the residents to swear an oath of loyalty to their cause.
in pennsylvania patriots tied a rope around the neck of john stevens a loyalist and dragged him behind a canoe in the susquehanna river because he refused to sign a loyalty oath.
where the patriots rejected the monarchy the loyalists whom george washington called abominable pests of society viewed the revolution as an act of treason.
the british empire they felt was much more likely than an independent america to protect them from foreign foes and enable them to prosper.
loyalists were most numerous in the seaport cities especially new york city and philadelphia as well as the carolinas but they came from all walks of life.
governors judges and other royal officials were almost all loyalists most anglican ministers also preferred the mother country as did many anglican worshippers.
in the backcountry of new york and across the carolinas many small farmers who had largely been unaffected by the controversies over british efforts to tighten colonial regulations rallied to the british side.
more new york men joined loyalist regiments than the continental army.
many loyalists calculated that the revolution would fail or feared that it would result in mob rule.
in few places however were there enough loyalists to assume control without the support of british troops.
the loyalists did not want to dissolve the political bands with britain as the declaration of independence demanded.
instead as some 700 of them in new york city said in a petition to british officials they steadily and uniformly opposed this most unnatural unprovoked rebellion jacob bailey american society at war 213 four soldiers ca.
1781 this illustration drawn by a french lieutenant captures the varied uniforms worn by patriot forces in the war left to right a black soldier freed for joining the 1st rhode island regiment a new england militiaman a frontiersman and a french soldier.
of massachusetts dismissed the patriots as a set of surly savage beings who have power in their hands and murder in their hearts in few places however were there enough loyalists to assume control of areas or communities without the presence of british troops.
the british were repeatedly frustrated by both the failure of loyalists to materialize in strength and the collapse of loyalist militia units once british troops departed.
because patriot militias quickly returned whenever the british left an area any loyalists in the region faced a difficult choice either accompany the british and leave behind their property or stay and face the wrath of the patriots.
even more disheartening was what one british officer called the licentiousness of the loyalist troops who committed every species of rapine and plunder and thereby converted potential friends to enemies.
the patriots both moderates and radicals supported the war because they realized that the only way to protect their liberty was to separate themselves from british control.
patriots also wanted to establish an american republic a unique form of government that would convert them from being subjects of a king to being citizens in a republic with the power to elect their own government and pursue their own economic interests.
we have it in our power wrote thomas paine to begin the world over again.
the birthday of a new world is at hand 214 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 setbacks for the british 1777 in 1777 a carefully conceived but poorly executed british plan to defeat the american rebellion involved a three pronged assault on the state of new york.
by gaining control of that important state the british planned to split america in two cutting off new england from the rest of the colonies.
the complicated plan called for a british army based in canada and led by general john burgoyne to advance southward from quebec via lake champlain to the hudson river.
at the same time another british force would move eastward from oswego in western new york.
general william howe meanwhile would lead a third british army up the hudson river from new york city.
all three advancing armies would eventually converge in central new york and wipe out any remaining patriot resistance.
the three british armies however failed in their e xecution and in their communications with one another.
at the last minute howe changed his mind and decided to move his army south from new york city to attack the patriot capital philadelphia.
general washington withdrew most of his men from new jersey to meet the british threat in pennsylvania while other american units banded together in upstate new york to deal with the british threat there.
on september 11 1777 at brandywine creek southwest of philadelphia the british overpowered washingtons army and occupied philadelphia then the largest and wealthiest american city.
the members of the continental congress were forced to flee the city.
battered but still intact washington and his army withdrew to winter quarters twenty miles away at valley forge while howe and his men remained in the relative comfort of philadelphia.
general john burgoyne commander of britains northern forces.
burgoyne and most of his troops surrendered to the americans at saratoga on october 17 1777 the campaign of 1777 meanwhile in northern new york a second british army had stumbled into an american trap.
in june an overconfident general burgoyne nicknamed setbacks for the british 1777 215 general swagger had led his mistress and 7 000 soldiers southward from canada toward new yorks lake champlain.
the american commander in northern new york was general horatio gates.
thirty two years earlier in 1745 he and burgoyne had served as officers in the same british regiment.
now they were commanding opposing armies.
as burgoynes army pushed deeper into new york it became harder to get food and supplies from canada.
short of wagons and carts the advance slowed to a snails pace in the dense forests and swamps thereby allowing the americans to spring a trap.
the outnumbered but more mobile patriots had the benefit of fighting in familiar territory.
they inflicted two serious defeats on the british forces in august 1777.
at oriskany on august 6 patriot militiamen mostly local german american farmers and their indian allies withstood an ambush by loyalists and indians and gained time for patriot reinforcements to arrive at nearby fort stanwix which had been besieged by british soldiers.
when the british demanded the forts surrender general gates rejected the offer with disdain saying that the fort would be defended to the last extremity as the days passed the iroquois deserted the british army leading the british commander to order a withdrawal.
as a result the strategic mohawk valley running across central new york was secured by the patriot forces.
to the east at bennington vermont on august 16 new england militiamen led by colonel john stark decimated a detachment of hessians and loyalists.
stark had pledged that morning well beat them before night or molly stark will be a widow as patriot militiamen converged from across central new york burgoyne pulled his dispirited forces back to the village of saratoga near the hudson river.
in the ensuing t hree week long battles of saratoga gatess army surrounded the british forces cutting off their supply lines.
desperate for food and ammunition the british failed twice to break through the encircling americans.
thus ended all our hopes of victory noted a british officer.
the trapped burgoyne surrendered on october 17 1777 turning over 5 800 troops 7 000 muskets and forty two brass cannons to gates.
in london king george fell into agonies on hearing the account of burgoynes defeat.
william pitt the former british prime minister made a shocking prediction to parliament after the defeat you cannot conquer america alliance with france the surprising american victory at saratoga was a strategic turning point because it convinced the french who had lost four wars to the british in the previous eighty years to sign two crucial treaties that created an american alliance with france.
216 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 under the treaty of amity and commerce france officially recognized the new united states and offered important trading privileges to american ships.
under the treaty of alliance both parties agreed first that if france entered the war both countries would fight until american independence was won second that neither would conclude a truce or peace without the formal consent of the other and third that each would guarantee the others possessions in america from the present time and forever against all other powers france further agreed not to seek canada or other british possessions on the mainland of north america.
in the end the intervention of the french army and navy determined the outcome of the war.
the americans would also form important alliances with the spanish 1779 and the dutch 1781 but neither provided as much support as the french.
after the british defeat at saratoga and the news of the french alliance with the united states parliament tried to end the war by granting all the demands that the americans had made before they declared independence.
but the continental congress would not negotiate until britain officially recognized american independence and withdrew its military forces.
king george refused.
1778 both sides regroup valley forge and stalemate for george washingtons army at valley forge near philadelphia the winter of 1777 1778 was a time of intense suffering and unrelenting cold hunger and disease.
some soldiers lacked shoes and blankets and their makeshift l og and mud huts offered little protection from the chilling winds.
by february 7 000 troops were too ill for duty.
more than 2 500 soldiers died at valley forge another 1 000 deserted.
fifty officers resigned on one december day and several hundred more left before winters end.
desperate for relief washington sent troops across new jersey delaware and the eastern shore of maryland to confiscate horses cattle and hogs in exchange for receipts promising future payment.
by march 1778 the troops at valley forge saw their strength restored.
their improved health enabled washington to begin a rigorous training program.
because few of the american officers had any formal military training their troops lacked leadership discipline and skills.
to remedy this defect washington turned to an energetic prussian soldier of fortune friedrich wilhelm baron von steuben who used an interpreter and frequent profanity to instruct the troops in the fundamentals of close order drill.
1778 both sides regroup 217 valley forge during the harsh winter of 1777 1778 washingtons army battled starvation disease and freezing temperatures.
steuben was one of several foreign volunteers who joined the american army at valley forge.
another was a n ineteen year old red haired french orphan named gilbert du motier marquis de lafayette.
a wealthy idealist excited by the american cause i was crazy with desire to wear a uniform he said lafayette offered to serve in the continental army for no pay in exchange for being named a general.
washington was initially skeptical of the young french aristocrat but lafayette soon became the commander in chief s most trusted aide.
washington noted that lafayette possessed a large share of bravery and military ardor the young french general also proved to be an able diplomat in helping to forge the military alliance with france there are forty cities seven counties and a private college named for lafayette across the united states.
the continental armys morale rose when the continental congress promised extra pay and bonuses after the war and it rose again with the news of the military alliance with france.
in the spring of 1778 british forces withdrew from pennsylvania to new york city with the american army in hot pursuit.
once the british were back in manhattan washingtons army encamped at 218 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 major campaigns in new york and pennsylvania 1777 quebec 100 miles 100 kilometers burgoyne montreal canada s st.
l t l aw eg er n ce re er riv crown point fort ticonderoga st leger arnold oriskany fort stanwix md ho w valley forge winter quarters brandywine creek e ct new york princeton trenton philadelphia wilmington new jersey atlantic ocean de che sap eake bay virginia ri wa shi ive r r ve ri massachusetts ho we a a nn w dela are r susqu eh pennsylvania saratoga bennington ngt on hudson river new york nh connecticut river fort oswego vt gates lake ontario maine mass.
american forces british forces battle site what were the consequences of burgoynes strategy of dividing the colonies by invading upstate new york from canada.
wwn64 how didm5 2 life in the american winter camp at valley forge transform the army.
figure why were the battles of saratoga a turning point in the american revolution.
first proof 23p0 x 34p5 1778 both sides regroup 219 nearby white plains north of the city.
from that time on the combat in the north settled into a long stalemate.
war in the west the revolution had created two wars.
in addition to the main conflict between armies in the east a frontier guerrilla war of terror and vengeance pitted indians and loyalists against isolated patriot settlers along the northern and western frontiers.
in the ohio valley as well as western new york and pennsylvania the british urged frontier loyalists and their indian allies to raid farm settlements and offered to pay bounties for american scalps.
to end the english led attacks joseph brant this 1786 portrait of early in 1778 george rogers clark thayendanegea joseph brant by took 175 patriot frontiersmen on flat gilbert stuart features the mohawk leader who fought against the boats down the ohio river.
on the americans in the revolution.
evening of july 4 the americans captured english controlled kaskaskia in present day illinois.
then without bloodshed clark took cahokia in illinois across the mississippi river from st louis and vincennes in present day indiana.
after the british retook vincennes clark led his men almost half of them french volunteers across icy rivers and flooded prairies sometimes in water neck deep and prepared to attack the british garrison.
clarks rugged frontiersmen called rangers captured five indians carrying american scalps.
clark ordered his men to kill the indians in sight of the fort.
after watching the terrible executions the british surrendered.
while clarks rangers were in the indiana territory a much larger u s military force moved against iroquois strongholds in western new york where loyalists tories and their indian allies had been terrorizing frontier settlements.
these iroquois attacks led by mohawk chief joseph brant had killed hundreds of patriot militiamen.
in response george washington sent 4 000 men under general john sullivan to crush the hostile tribes and the most mischievous of the tories at newton new york on august 29 1779 sullivans soldiers destroyed about 220 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 forty seneca and cayuga villages which broke the power of the iroquois confederacy for all time.
in the kentucky territory the legendary frontiersman daniel boone and his small band of settlers repeatedly clashed with the shawnees and their british and loyalist allies.
in 1778 boone and some thirty men aided by their western campaigns 1776 1779 american forces british forces battle site tory iroquois raids 1778 lake huron ny cherokee settlements lake ontario e lake erie a w a ec s i n 7 79 pa a nj nee md de u n chillicothe ve r m ri virginia atlantic ocean io oh o vincennes n a i cla rk h rive r a c a d c umberl n ve r l cherokee north carolina a iss iss ipp i r iver kaskaskia minisink t shaw te nn es se e ri cahokia 17 ark cl m fort pitt w britis ab h st louis o wyoming valley an 1 e h as 8 u o r i newton d r ve ri q l li v la n su fort detroit r lake michigan se fort niagara fort s i stanwix a p p creek georgia south carolina how did george rogers clark secure cahokia and vincennes.
wwn64 why figure m5 3did the american army destroy iroquois villages in 1779.
first proof were the skirmishes between settlers and indian tribes significant why 31p0 x32p6 the future of the trans appalachian frontier.
200 miles 200 kilometers for 1778 both sides regroup 221 wives and children held off an assault by more than 400 indians at boonesborough.
later boone himself was twice shot and twice captured.
indians killed two of his sons a brother and two brothers in law.
his daughter was captured and another brother was wounded four times.
in early 1776 a delegation of northern i ndians shawnees delawares and mohawks had talked the cherokees into attacking frontier settlements in virginia and the carolinas.
swift retaliation had followed as carolina militiamen led by andrew pickens burned dozens of cherokee villages.
by weakening the major indian tribes along the frontier the american revolution cleared the way for white settlers to seize indian lands after the war.
the war moves south in late 1778 the british launched their southern strategy built on the assumption that large numbers of loyalists in the carolinas virginia and georgia would join the british cause.
once the british gained control of the southern colonies they would have the shrinking united states pinched between canada and a british controlled south.
in december 1778 general sir henry clinton the new commander in chief of british forces in america sent 3 000 redcoats hessians and loyalists to take the port city of savannah on the southeast georgia coast and roll northeast from there.
the plan was to enlist support from local loyalists and the cherokees led by chief dragging canoe who promised to leave the ground dark and bloody british momentum initially clintons southern strategy worked.
within twenty months the british and their allies had defeated three american armies seized the strategic port cities of savannah and charleston south carolina occupied georgia and much of south carolina and killed wounded or captured some 7 000 american soldiers.
the success of the southern campaign led lord george germain the british official in london overseeing the war to predict a speedy and happy termination of the american war germains optimistic prediction however fell victim to three developments first the loyalist strength in the south was weaker than estimated second the british effort to unleash indian attacks convinced many undecided backcountry settlers to join the patriot side and third some british and loyalist soldiers behaved so harshly that they drove loyalists to switch sides.
war in the carolinas the carolina campaign took a major turn when british forces led brilliantly by generals clinton and charles 222 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 ornwallis bottled up an entire american army on the charleston peninsula.
c benjamin lincoln the u s commander begged local planters to arm their slaves and let them join the defense of the city but the slaveholders refused.
prominent south carolina leaders then used their control of local militia units to prevent lincoln and his continental army from escaping the british invasion.
on may 12 1780 general lincoln surrendered charleston and its 5 500 defenders.
it was the single greatest patriot loss of the war.
soon thereafter general cornwallis in charge of the british troops in the south defeated a much larger american force led by general horatio gates at camden south carolina.
cornwallis had georgia and most of south carolina under british control by 1780.
then he made a tactical blunder by sending lieutenants into the carolina countryside to organize loyalist fighters to root out patriots.
in doing so they mercilessly burned homes and hacked to death surrendering rebels.
their behavior alienated many poor rural folk who had been neutral.
francis kinlock a loyalist warned a british official that the lower sort of people who were in many parts.
originally attached to the british government have suffered so severely and been so frequently deceived that great britain now has a hundred enemies where it had one before in mid 1780 small bands of patriots based in the swamps and forests of south carolina launched a successful series of h it and run raids.
led by colorful fighters such as francis marion the swamp fox and thomas sumter the carolina gamecock the patriot guerrillas gradually wore down british confidence and morale.
by august 1780 the british commanders were forced to admit that south carolina was in an absolute state of rebellion against them.
warfare in the carolinas was especially brutal.
patriots fought loyalists who were neighbors of each other.
both sides looted farms and plantations and tortured scalped and executed prisoners.
families were fractured by divided loyalties.
fathers fought sons and brothers killed brothers.
edward lacey a young south carolina patriot who commanded a militia unit had to tie his tory father to a bedstead to prevent him from informing the british of his whereabouts.
chilling violence occurred on both sides.
in virginia the planter charles lynch set up vigilante courts to punish loyalists by lynching them which in this case meant whipping them.
others were tarred and feathered.
in the carolinas and georgia british army commanders encouraged their poorly disciplined loyalist allies to wage a s corched earth war of terror arson and intimidation.
in a civil war the british general charles 1778 both sides regroup 223 ornwallis declared there is no admitting of neutral characteristics he c urged his commanders to use the most vigorous measures to extinguish the rebellion tory militiamen took civilian hostages assaulted women and children burned houses and churches stole property bayoneted wounded patriots and tortured and executed unarmed prisoners.
vengeful patriots responded in kind.
when georgia loyalist thomas burnfoot brown refused to join the revolutionary side a mob of patriots bludgeoned him took his scalp tarred his legs and then held his feet over a fire costing him several toes.
brown thereafter conducted a personal war of vengeance.
after a battle near augusta georgia brown ordered loyalists to hang thirteen patriot prisoners from a staircase banister.
the battle of kings mountain cornwalliss two most c old blooded cavalry officers sir banastre tarleton and major patrick ferguson who were in charge of training loyalist militiamen eventually overreached themselves.
the british officers often let their men burn patriot farms liberate slaves and destroy livestock.
major ferguson sealed his doom when he threatened to march over the blue ridge mountains hang the mostly s cots irish presbyterian patriot leaders backwater barbarians and destroy their frontier farms.
instead the feisty overmountain men from southwestern virginia and western north and south carolina including tennesseans all of them experienced hunters and riflemen who had often fought cherokees went hunting for ferguson and his army of carolina loyalists in late september 1780.
on october 7 the two sides clashed near kings mountain a heavily wooded ridge along the border between north carolina and south carolina.
in a ferocious h our long battle patriot sharpshooters told by an officer to shout like hell and fight like devils devastated the loyalist troops.
major ferguson had boasted beforehand that all the rebels in hell could not push him off kings mountain.
by the end of the battle his lifeless body was riddled with seven bullet holes.
seven hundred loyalists were captured twenty five of whom were later hanged.
the division among the people is much greater than i imagined an american officer wrote to one of general washingtons aides.
the patriots and loyalists he said persecute each other with.
savage fury as with so many confrontations during the war in the south the battle of kings mountain resembled an extended family feud.
seventy four sets of brothers fought on opposite sides and twenty nine sets of fathers and sons.
224 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 after the battle patriot captain james withrow refused to help his loyalist brother in law who had been badly wounded and left him to die on the battlefield.
when withrows wife learned how her husband had treated her brother she asked for a separation.
five brothers in the goforth family from rutherford county north carolina fought at kings mountain three were loyalists two were patriots.
only one of them survived.
two of the brothers preston and john preston fighting on opposite sides recognized each other during the battle took deadly aim as if in a duel and fired simultaneously killing each other.
the american victory in the battle of kings mountain was crucial because it undermined the british strategy in the south.
thomas jefferson later said that the battle was the turn of the tide of success after kings mountain the british forces under cornwallis were forced to retreat to south carolina and found it virtually impossible to recruit more loyalists.
southern retreat in late 1780 the continental congress chose a new commander for the american army in the south general nathanael greene the fighting quaker of rhode island.
a former blacksmith blessed with unflagging persistence he was bold and daring and well suited to a d rawn out war.
greene arrived in charlotte north carolina to find himself in charge of a shadow army the 2 200 troops lacked everything necessary either for the comfort or convenience of soldiers greene wrote general washington that the situation was dismal and truly distressing yet he also knew that if he could not create a victorious army the whole south would be re annexed to britain.
like washington greene adopted a h it and run strategy.
from charlotte he moved his army eastward while sending general daniel morgan one of the heroes of the battles of saratoga a h eavy drinking fist fighting wagonmaster with about 700 riflemen on a sweep to the west of cornwalliss headquarters at winnsboro south carolina.
on january 17 1781 morgans force took up positions near cowpens an area of cattle pastures in northern south carolina about t wenty five miles from kings mountain.
there he lured sir banastre tarletons army into an elaborate trap.
tarleton known for his bravery but hated for his brutality rushed his men forward running at us as if they intended to eat us up only to be ambushed by morgans cavalry.
tarleton escaped but 110 british soldiers were killed and more than 700 were taken prisoner.
cowpens was the most complete victory for the american side in the revolution and was one of the few times that patriots won a battle in which a war of endurance 225 the two sides were evenly matched.
when general cornwallis learned of the american victory he was so furiously disappointed that he snapped his ceremonial sword in two saying that the news broke my heart after the victory at cowpens morgans army moved into north carolina and linked up with greenes troops.
greene lured cornwalliss starving british army north then attacked the redcoats at guilford courthouse near what became greensboro north carolina on march 15 1781.
the americans lost the battle of guilford courthouse but inflicted such heavy losses that cornwallis left behind his wounded and marched his weary men toward wilmington on the north carolina coast to lick their wounds and take on supplies from british ships.
the british commander reported that the americans had fought like demons greene then resolved to go back into south carolina hoping to lure cornwallis after him or force the british to give up the state.
greene connected with local guerrilla bands led by francis marion andrew pickens and thomas sumter.
by targeting outlying british units and picking them off one by one the guerrillas eventually forced the british back into charleston and savannah.
george washington praised greene for having done great things with little means a war of endurance during 1780 the revolutionary war became a contest of endurance and the americans held the advantage in time men and supplies.
they knew they could outlast the british as long as they avoided a catastrophic defeat.
we fight get beat rise and fight again general greene said.
the virginia campaign by september 1781 the americans had narrowed british control in the south to charleston and savannah although local patriots and loyalists would continue to battle each other for more than a year in the backcountry where there was nothing but murder and devastation in every quarter greene said.
meanwhile cornwallis had pushed his army northward from wilmington.
before the carolinas could be subdued he had decided that virginia must be eliminated as a source of american reinforcements and supplies.
in may 1781 the british marched into virginia.
there benedict arnold the former american general whom the british had bribed to switch sides in the war was eager to strike at the americans.
arnold had earlier plotted to sell out his former american command of west point a critically important 226 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 major campaigns in the south 1778 1781 american forces petersburg british forces battle site n 100 kilometers so hillsborough 100 miles guilford courthouse er gu f ga n g north carolina ne ree r mo charlotte sav an c na h ri ve r south carolina or nw lincoln georgia is camden a ll i wilmington s n winnsboro l al e ta r l to 1 s te ga kings mountain w rn co cowpens cornwallis 1781 virginia s c li n ton d an li al nw r co charleston savannah r ve altama ha ri atlantic ocean east florida british why did the british suddenly shift their military campaign to the south in 1778.
why were the battles at savannah and charleston major victories for the wwn64 british.
figure m5 4 first proof how did general nathanael greene undermine british control of the lower 25p0south.
x 30p0 fortress on the hudson river north of new york city.
only the lucky capture of a british spy major john andr had exposed arnolds plot.
warned that his plan had been discovered arnold joined the british while the americans hanged andr as a spy.
a war of endurance 227 cornwallis jam er gr a ves rocham and bea u on washingt y ke bay sapea che wayne la fa ye to yorktown when cornwallis yorktown 1781 and his army joined arnolds at pennsylvania petersburg virginia their combined nj po forces totaled 7 200 men.
as the e md m tt ac ri americans approached cornwallis ve r picked yorktown a small tobacco de virginia port between the york and james rivers on the chesapeake bay as his base of operations.
he was not woror k ri ried about an american attack since i v r v e r es general washingtons main force richmond ra s seemed preoccupied hundreds of miles petersburg yorktown b ar away with the british occupation of de g rass e new york city and the british navy 50 miles still controlled american waters.
north carolina 0 50 kilometers in july 1780 the french had finally managed to land 6 000 solwwn64 diers at newport rhode island but they figure had been bottled up there for a year m5 4 a first proof blockaded by the british fleet.
as long as the british navy maintained suprem15p5 x15p5 acy along the coast the americans could not hope to win the war.
in may 1781 however the elements for a combined f rench american action suddenly fell into place.
as cornwalliss army moved into virginia washington persuaded the commander of the french army in rhode island to join in an attack on the british in new york city.
before they could strike however word came from the caribbean that admiral f ranois joseph paul de grasse was headed for the chesapeake bay with his large fleet of french warships and some 3 000 soldiers.
the u nexpected news led general washington to change his strategy.
he immediately began moving his army briskly south toward yorktown.
at the same time french ships slipped out of the british blockade at newport and also headed south.
somehow in an age when communications were difficult the french and americans coordinated a complex plan to join naval and army forces and destroy the main british army.
success depended on the french fleet getting to the chesapeake bay off the coast of virginia before the british navy did.
on august 30 admiral de grasses t wenty four warships won the race to yorktown and french troops landed to join the americans.
on september 6 the day after a british fleet appeared de grasse attacked and forced the british navy to abandon cornwalliss surrounded army leaving him with no way to get fresh food and supplies.
de grasse then sent ships up the chesapeake to ferry down the soldiers who were marching south from new york 228 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 surrender of lord cornwallis the artist john trumball completed his painting of the pivotal british surrender at yorktown in 1781.
ringing the combined american and french armies to 19 000 men more b than double the size of cornwalliss army.
the battle of yorktown began on september 28.
the american and french troops soon closed off cornwalliss last escape route and began bombarding the british with cannons.
they held out for three grim weeks before running out of food and suffering from widespread disease.
on october 17 1781 a glum cornwallis surrendered.
two days later the british forces marched out and laid down their weapons.
cornwallis himself claimed to be too ill to participate.
his report to the british commander in chief in new york was painfully brief i have the mortification to inform your excellency that i have been forced to surrender the troops under my command among cornwalliss surrendered army were five of thomas jeffersons former slaves and two owned by george washington.
the treaty of paris 1783 the war was not yet over.
the british still controlled new york city charleston and savannah and british ships still blockaded other american ports but any lingering british hopes of a military victory vanished at yorktown.
in a war of endurance 229 london lord north reacted to the news as if he had taken a ball bullet in the breast the shaken prime minister exclaimed oh god it is all over in december 1781 king george decided against sending more troops to america.
on february 27 1782 parliament voted to begin negotiations to end the war and on march 20 lord north resigned.
in part the british leaders chose peace in america so that they could concentrate on their continuing global war with france and spain.
north america 1783 russians unexplored hudson bay lake of the woods claimed by spain russia and england u pi sip sis er iv mis r lo pacific ocean claimed by england and u s st.
claimed by england and u s lawr enc newfoundland is ia e er riv nova scotia boston new york united states na atlantic ocean charleston savannah claimed by u s and spain florida m e gulf of mexico x hispaniola i c cuba o great britain british honduras united states spain cen disputed territory 1 000 miles 1 000 kilometers tr al russia st pierre et miquelon france magdalen islands haiti france caribbean sea am rica e south america what were the terms of the treaty of paris.
wwn64 figure m5 5 why might the ambiguities in the treatys language have led to conflicts among the firstamericans proof the spanish and the british.
31p0 x 31p0 230 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 a negotiated peace upon learning of the british decision to negotiate the continental congress named a group of prominent americans to go to paris to discuss terms with the british.
they included john adams who was then representing the united states in the netherlands john jay minister ambassador to spain and benjamin franklin already in france.
the cranky john adams was an odd choice since as thomas jefferson said he hates benjamin franklin he hates john jay he hates the french he american commissioners of the preliminary hates the english in the end franklin peace negotiations with great britain an and jay did most of the work leading to unfinished painting from 1782 by benjamin west.
from left john jay john adams benjamin the peace treaty.
franklin henry laurens and franklins the negotiations dragged on for grandson william temple franklin.
months until on september 3 1783 the treaty of paris was finally signed.
its provisions were surprisingly favorable to the united states.
great britain recognized the independence of the thirteen former colonies a nd surprisingly agreed that the mississippi river was americas western boundary thereby more than doubling the territory of the new nation.
the boundaries of the united states created by the treaty covered some 900 000 square miles most of which were west of the proclamation line of 1763 a vast region long inhabited by indians and often referred to as trans appalachia.
native americans were given no role in the negotiations and they were by far the biggest losers in the final treaty.
the treatys unclear references to americas northern and southern borders would be a source of dispute for years.
florida as it turned out passed back to spain from britain.
as for the prewar debts owed by americans to british merchants the u s negotiators promised that british merchants should meet with no legal impediment in seeking to collect money owed them.
war as an engine of change like all major wars the american war for independence had unexpected effects on political economic and social life.
the long war upset traditional social relationships and affected the lives of people who had long been dis war as an engine of change 231 criminated a gainst african americans women and indians.
in important ways then the revolution was an engine for political experimentation and social change.
it ignited a prolonged debate about what new forms of government would best serve the new american republic.
republican ideology american revolutionaries embraced a republican ideology instead of the aristocratic or monarchical outlook that had long dominated europe.
the new american republic was not a democracy in the purest sense of the word.
in ancient greece the athenians had practiced direct democracy which meant that citizens voted on all major decisions affecting them.
the new united states however was technically roperty holding white men governed a representative democracy in which p themselves through the concept of republicanism whereby they elected representatives or legislators to make key decisions on their behalf.
as thomas paine observed representative democracy had many advantages over monarchies one of which was greater transparency whatever are its excellencies and defects they are visible to all to preserve the delicate balance between liberty and power in the new republic revolutionary leaders believed that they must protect the rights of individuals and states from being violated by the national government.
the war for independence thus sparked a wave of new state constitutions that remains unique in history.
not only was a new nation coming into being as a result of the revolutionary war but new s tate level governments were also being created all of which were designed to reflect the principles of the republican ideology limiting the powers of government so as to protect the rights of the people.
state governments most of the political experimentation between 1776 and 1787 occurred at the state level in the form of written constitutions in which the people granted limited authority to their governments.
the first state constitutions created state governments during the war of independence much like the colonial governments but with elected governors and senates instead of royally appointed governors and councils.
most of the constitutions also included a bill of rights that protected freedom of speech trial by jury freedom from self incrimination and the like.
most also limited the powers of governors and strengthened the powers of the legislatures.
the articles of confederation once the colonies had declared their independence in 1776 the patriots needed to form a national government as well.
before march 1781 the continental congress had exercised emergency powers without any legal or official authority.
232 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 plans for a permanent form of government emerged quickly.
as early as july 1776 a committee appointed by the continental congress had produced a draft constitution called the articles of confederation and perpetual union.
when the articles of confederation finally were ratified in march 1781 they essentially legalized the way things had been operating since independence had been declared.
the confederation government reflected the long standing fears of monarchy by not allowing for a president or chief executive.
in the confederation government congress was given full power over foreign affairs and disputes between the states.
but it had no national courts and no power to enforce its resolutions and ordinances.
it could not levy taxes and its budgetary needs depended on requisitions from the states which state legislatures often ignored.
the states were in no mood to create a strong central government.
the confederation congress in fact had less power than the colonists had once accepted in the british parliament because it could not regulate interstate and foreign commerce.
for certain important acts moreover a special majority in the confederation congress was required.
nine states had to approve measures dealing with war treaties coinage finances and the army and navy.
unanimous approval from the states was needed both to impose tariffs often called duties or taxes on imports and to amend the articles.
for all its weaknesses however the confederation government represented the most practical structure for the new nation.
after all the revolution on the battlefields had yet to be won and an america besieged by british armies and warships could not risk divisive debates over the distribution of power.
the new state governments were not willing in 1776 to create a strong national government that might threaten their liberties.
expansion of political participation the new political opportunities afforded by the creation of state governments led more ordinary citizens to participate than ever before.
property qualifications for voting which already allowed an overwhelming majority of white men to vote were lowered after 1776 as a result of the revolutionary fervor.
as a group of farmers explained no man can be free and independent unless he possesses a voice.
in the most important officers in the legislature in pennsylvania delaware north carolina and georgia any male taxpayer could vote regardless of how much if any property they owned.
farmers tradesmen and shopkeepers were soon elected to state legislatures.
in general a higher percentage of american males could vote in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century than could their counterparts in great britain.
the social revolution 233 the social revolution what did the revolution mean to those workers servants farmers and freed slaves who participated.
many hoped that the revolution would remove not reinforce the elites traditional political and social advantages.
wealthy patriots on the other hand would have been content to replace royal officials with the rich the wellborn and the able and let it go at that.
in the end the new republics social fabric and political culture were visibly different after the war.
the energy created by the concepts of liberty equality and democracy changed the dynamics of american social and political life in ways that people could not have imagined in 1776 the exodus of loyalists the loyalists were hurt the most by the brutal civil war embedded within the revolutionary war.
they suffered greatly for their stubborn loyalty to king george iii and for their refusal to pledge allegiance to the new united states.
during and after the revolution their property was confiscated and many loyalists were assaulted brutalized and executed by patriots and vice versa.
after the american victory at yorktown tens of thousands of panicked loyalists made their way to seaports to board british ships and flee the united states.
thousands of african americans mostly runaway slaves also flocked to new york city charleston and savannah with many of their angry owners in hot pursuit.
boston king a runaway said he saw white slave owners grabbing their escaped slaves in the streets of new york or even dragging them out of their beds general guy carleton the commander in chief of british forces in north america organized the mass evacuation after the war.
he intentionally violated the provisions of the treaty of paris by refusing to return slaves to their owners defiantly telling a furious george washington that his slaves from mount vernon had already escaped and boarded british ships bound for canada.
some 80 000 desperate refugees white loyalists free blacks freed slaves and native americans who had allied with the b ritish dispersed throughout the british empire changing it in the process.
among the refugees who resettled in canada were 3 500 former slaves who had been given their freedom in exchange for joining the british army.
some 2 000 freed blacks opted to go to sierra leone where british abolitionists helped them create an experimental colony called freetown.
about 12 000 georgia and south carolina loyalists including thousands of their slaves the british granted freedom only to the slaves of patriots 234 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 the fate of the loyalists 1783 after the revolution many loyalists fled to british colonies in the caribbean and canada.
this british cartoon shows patriots depicted as savages let ting loose mercilessly hanging and scalping loyalists.
went to british controlled east florida only to see their new home handed over to spain in 1783.
spanish authorities gave them a hard choice swear allegiance to the spanish king and convert to catholicism or leave.
most of them left.
some of the doubly displaced loyalists sneaked back into the united states but most went to british islands in the caribbean.
we are all cast off complained one embittered loyalist.
i shall ever tho remember with satisfaction that it was not i deserted my king george iii but my king that deserted me the largest number of loyalist exiles landed in canada where royal officials wanted them to displace the earlier french presence.
the departure of so many loyalists from america was one of the most important social consequences of the revolution.
their confiscated homes lands and vacated jobs created new social economic and political opportunities for patriots.
in paris however the americans negotiating the peace treaty agreed that the continental congress would earnestly recommend to the states that the confiscated property be restored although it rarely was.
freedom of religion the revolution also tested traditional religious loyalties and set in motion important changes in the relationship the social revolution 235 religious development the congregational church developed a national presence in the early nineteenth century.
lemuel haynes depicted here was its first african american minister.
between church and government.
before the revolution americans tolerated religious dissent after the revolution americans insisted on complete freedom of r eligion as embodied in the principle of separation of church and state.
the anglican church established as the official religion in five colonies and parts of two others was especially vulnerable to changes prompted by the war.
anglicans tended to be pro british and non anglicans notably baptists and methodists outnumbered anglicans in all states except virginia.
all but virginia eliminated tax support for the church before the fighting was over and virginia did so soon afterward.
although anglicanism survived in the form of the new episcopal church it never regained its p re revolutionary stature.
in 1776 the virginia declaration of rights guaranteed the free exercise of religion and in 1786 the virginia statute of religious freedom written by thomas jefferson declared that no man shall be compelled to frequent 236 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 or support any religious worship place or ministry whatsoever and that all men shall be free to profess and by argument to maintain their opinions in matters of religion these statutes and the revolutionary ideology that justified them helped shape the course that religious life would take in the new united states diverse and voluntary rather than monolithic and enforced by the government.
slaves and the revolution the sharpest irony of the american revolution is that great britain offered enslaved blacks more opportunities for freedom than did the united states.
in november 1775 the british royal governor of virginia john murray lord dunmore himself a slave owner announced that all slaves and indentured servants would gain their freedom if they joined the loyalist cause.
within a month the british had attracted more than 300 former servants and slaves to what came to be called the ethiopian regiment the number soon grew to almost 1 000 males and twice as many women and children.
one former slave renamed himself british freedom another runaway who joined the a ll black ethiopian regiment was harry washington one of george washingtons slaves.
in his new role as soldier he wore a uniform embroidered with the motto liberty to slaves washingtons farm manager wrote the general that all his slaves would leave us if they believed they could make their escape for liberty is sweet the british recruitment of slaves outraged george washington thomas jefferson and other white plantation owners in virginia where 40 percent of the population was black.
washington predicted that if dunmores efforts were not crushed soon the number of slaves joining the british army would increase as a snow ball by rolling jefferson expressed the same concerns after t wenty three slaves escaped from his plantation outside charlottesville.
jefferson eventually reclaimed six of them only to sell them for their disloyalty another virginia planter captured a fifteen year old girl who tried to join the british army lashed her eighty times with his whip and then poured hot coals on her wounds.
southern backlash in the end the british policy of recruiting slaves backfired.
the terrifying prospect of british troops arming slaves persuaded many f ence straddling southerners to join the patriot cause.
edward rutledge of south carolina said that the british decision to arm slaves and the revolution 237 slaves did more to create an eternal separation between great britain and the colonies than any other expedient for rutledge and many other southern whites the revolution became primarily a war to defend slavery.
in 1775 thomas jeremiah a free black was convicted and executed in charleston south carolina for telling slaves that british troops were coming to help the poor negroes in response to the british recruitment of enslaved african americans at the end of 1775 a desperate general washington authorized the enlistment of free blacks but not slaves into the american army.
in february 1776 however southern representatives convinced the continental congress to instruct general washington to enlist no more african americans free or enslaved.
two states south carolina and georgia refused to allow any blacks to serve in the patriot forces.
as the american war effort struggled however some states ignored southern wishes.
massachusetts organized two all black army units and rhode island organized one which also included native americans.
about 5 000 african americans fought on the patriot side and most of them were free blacks from northern states.
the white belknap family of framingham massachusetts freed their african american slave peter salem so that he might enlist in the massachusetts militia.
salem was with the minutemen at concord in 1775 and also fought alongside other blacks at the battles of bunker hill and saratoga.
another former slave who fought at bunker hill salem poor was commended after the battle for being a brave gallant soldier who behaved like an experienced officer as well as an excellent soldier overall the british army which liberated 20 000 enslaved blacks during the war was a far greater instrument of emancipation than the american forces.
most of the newly freed blacks found their way to canada or to british colonies on caribbean islands.
while thousands of free blacks and runaway slaves fought in the war the vast majority of african americans did not choose sides so much as they chose freedom.
several hundred thousand enslaved blacks mostly in the southern states took advantage of the disruptions caused by the war to seize their freedom.
in the north which had far fewer slaves than the south the ideals of liberty and freedom led most states to end slavery either during the war or shortly afterward.
but those same ideals had little to no impact in the southern states.
these contrasting attitudes toward slavery would continue to shape the political disputes of the young nation.
238 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 the status of women the ideal of liberty spawned by the revolution applied to the status of women as much as to that of african americans.
the legal status of women was governed by british common law which essentially treated them like children limiting their roles to child rearing and maintaining the household.
women could not vote or hold office.
few had access to formal education.
boys were taught to read and write girls were taught to read and sew.
most new england women in the eighteenth century could not write their own names.
until married women were subject to the dictates of their fathers.
once a woman married she essentially became the property of her husband and her property became his.
a married woman had no right to buy sell or manage property.
technically any wages a wife earned belonged to the husband.
women could not sign contracts file lawsuits or testify in court.
a husband could beat and even rape his wife without fearing legal action.
divorces were extremely difficult to obtain.
yet the revolution offered women new opportunities for independence and public service.
women in many communities made clothing for soldiers and organized fund raising efforts.
others became camp followers traveling and camping with the soldiers often with their children in tow.
the women in the army camps cooked meals washed clothes nursed wounds and on occasion took part in battle.
in 1777 some 400 armed women mobilized to defend pittsfield vermont.
the men of the town had gone off to fight when a band of loyalists and indians approached the village.
in a day long battle the women held off the attackers until help arrived.
a few women disguised their gender and fought as ordinary soldiers.
an exceptional case was deborah sampson who joined a massachusetts regiment as robert shurtleff and served from 1781 to 1783 by the artful concealment of her gender.
she was wounded twice leading congress to declare after the war that she was the highest example of female heroism fidelity and courage perhaps the feistiest of the fighting women was georgian nancy hart a tall red haired cousin of american general daniel morgan and a skilled hunter local native americans called her war woman.
when a group of loyalists accused her of helping a patriot escape she didnt deny the charge.
instead she shot two of them then held the others at gunpoint until her husband arrived.
her husband so the story goes wanted to shoot the remaining tories but she insisted on hanging them instead.
women and liberty americas war against great britain led some women to demand their own independence.
early in the revolution slaves and the revolution 239 ary struggle abigail adams one of the most learned spirited and independent women of the time wrote to her husband john in the new code of laws which i suppose it will be necessary for you to make i desire you would remember the ladies.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands since men were naturally tyrannical she wrote why then not put it out of the power of the vicious and the lawless to use us with cruelty and indignity with impunity otherwise if particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have abigail adams abigail adams wife of no voice or representation john adams in a 1766 portrait.
though john adams could not help but an ardent patriot adams and other laugh at his wifes radical proposals women like her saw disappointingly few for female equality.
while surprised changes in womens rights emerging in the new united states.
that women might be dissatisfied he insisted on retaining the traditional privileges enjoyed by males depend upon it we know better than to repeal our masculine systems if women were to be granted equality he warned then children and apprentices and indians and negroes would also demand equal rights and freedoms.
thomas jefferson shared adamss stance.
in his view there was no place in the new american republic for female political participation.
women should not wrinkle their foreheads with politics but instead soothe and calm the minds of their husbands improvements in the status of women would have to wait.
new yorker margaret livingston admitted as much in 1776 when she wrote that our sex are doomed to be obedient to men at every stage of life so that we shant be great gainers by this contest the revolutionary war native americans and the revolution most native americans sought to remain neutral in the war but both british and american agents urged the chiefs to fight on their side.
the result was chaos.
indians on both sides attacked villages burned crops and killed civilians.
213003 05 197 243 r3 th indd 239 24 10 15 1 06 pm 240 chapter 5 the american revolution 1776 1783 during and after the war the new american government assured its indian allies that it would respect their lands and their rights.
but many white americans used the disruptions of war to destroy and displace native americans.
once the war ended and independence was secured there was no peace for the indians.
by the end of the eighteenth century land hungry americans were again pushing into indian territories on the western frontier.
the emergence of an american culture on july 2 1776 when the second continental congress had resolved that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states john adams had written abigail that future generations would remember that date as their day of deliverance people he predicted would celebrate the occasion with pomp and parade with shows games sports guns bells bonfires and illuminations fireworks from one end of this continent to the other from this time forward forever more adams got everything right but the date.
as luck would have it july 4 the date the declaration of independence was approved became independence day rather than july 2 when independence was formally declared.
the celebration of independence day quickly became the most important public ritual in the united states.
people from all walks of life suspended their normal routine in order to devote a day to parades patriotic speeches and fireworks displays.
in the process the infant republic began to create its own myth of national identity.
what a day exclaimed the editor of the southern patriot in 1815.
what happiness what emotion what virtuous triumph must fill the bosoms of americans american nationalism embodied a stirring idea.
this new nation was not rooted in antiquity.
its people except for the native americans had not inhabited it over many centuries nor was there any notion of a common ethnic descent.
the american national consciousness one observer wrote is not a voice crying out of the depth of the dark past but is proudly a product of the enlightened present setting its face resolutely toward the future many people at least since the time of the pilgrims had thought of the new world as singled out for a special identity a special mission assigned by god.
john adams proclaimed the opening of america a grand scheme and design in providence for the illumination and the emancipation of the slavish part of mankind all over the earth this sense of providential mission provided much of the energy for americas development as a new national republic.
from the democratic rhetoric of the emergence of an american culture 241 thomas jefferson to the pragmatism of george washington to heady toasts bellowed in south carolina taverns patriots everywhere claimed a special role for american leadership in history.
the first mission was to gain independence.
now people believed god was guiding the united states to lead the world toward greater liberty and equality.
benjamin rush a philadelphia doctor and scientist issued a prophetic statement in 1787 the american war is over but this is far from being the case with the american revolution.
on the contrary but the first act of the great drama is closed chapter review summary military challenges in 1776 the british had the mightiest army and navy in the world and they supplemented their military might by hiring professional german soldiers called hessians to help put down the american revolution.
the americans had to create an army the continental a rmy from scratch.
george washington realized that the americans had to turn unreliable citizen soldiers into a disciplined fighting force and try to wage a long costly war staking that the british army was fighting thousands of miles from its home base and would eventually cut its losses and give up.
turning points after forcing the british to evacuate boston the american army suffered a string of defeats before george washington surprised the hessians at the battle of trenton at the end of 1776.
the victory bolstered american morale and prompted more enlistments in the continental army.
the french were likely allies for the colonies from the beginning of the conflict because they resented their losses to britain in the seven years war.
after the british defeat at the battles of saratoga the colonies brokered an alliance with france.
washingtons ability to hold his ragged forces together despite daily desertions and two especially difficult winters in morristown and valley forge was another major turning point.
the british lost support on the frontier and in the southern colonies when terrorist tactics backfired.
the battle of kings mountain drove the british into retreat and french supplies and the french fleet helped tip the balance and ensure the american victory at the battle of yorktown.
civil war the american revolution was also a civil war dividing families and communities.
there were at least 100 000 loyalists in the colonies.
they included royal officials anglican ministers wealthy southern planters and the elite in large seaport cities they also included many humble people especially recent immigrants.
after the hostilities ended many loyalists including slaves who had fled plantations to support the british cause left for canada the west indies or england.
a political and social revolution the american revolution disrupted and transformed traditional class and social relationships.
american revolutionaries embraced a republican ideology and more white men gained the right to vote as property requirements were removed.
but fears of a monarchy being reestablished led colonists to vest power in the states rather than in a national government under the articles of confederation.
new state constitutions instituted more elected positions and most included bills of rights that protected individual liberties.
the virginia statute of religious freedom led the way in guaranteeing the separation of church and state and religious toleration was transformed into religious freedom.
african americans women and native americans northern states began to free slaves but southern states were reluctant.
although many women had undertaken nontraditional roles during the war afterward they remained largely confined to the domestic sphere with no changes to their legal or political status.
the revolution had catastrophic effects on native americans regardless of which side they had allied with during the war.
american settlers seized native american land often in violation of existing treaties.
chronology british forces seize new york city general washingtons troops defeat british forces at the battle of trenton states begin writing new constitutions american forces defeat british in a series of battles at saratoga americans and french form a military alliance george rogers clarks militia defeats british troops in mississippi valley american forces defeat the iroquois confederacy at newtown new york patriots defeat loyalists at the battle of kings mountain british invasion of southern colonies turned back at the battles of cowpens and guilford courthouse american and french forces defeat british at yorktown virginia articles of confederation are ratified continental congress becomes confederation congress treaty of paris is signed formally ending revolutionary war virginia adopts the statute of religious freedom key terms hessians p 202 battle of yorktown 1781 p 228 citizen soldiers p 202 republican ideology p 231 battle of trenton 1776 p 209 state constitutions p 231 battles of saratoga 1777 p 215 articles of confederation p 232 alliance with france p 215 virginia statute of religious freedom 1786 p 235 valley forge 1777 1778 p 216 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
strengthening the new nation washington as a statesman at the constitutional convention 1856 this painting by junius brutus stearns is one of the earliest depictions of the drafting of the constitution capturing the moment after the convention members including george washington right completed the final draft.
d uring the 1780s the united states of america was rapidly emerging from its colonial past as the lone large republic in an unstable world dominated by monarchies.
it was distinctive in that it was born out of a conflict over ideas principles and ideals rather than from centuries old shared racial or ancestral bonds as in europe and elsewhere.
america was a democratic republic brought forth by certain self evident political i deals that people should govern themselves that people should have an equal opportunity to prosper and that governments exist to protect liberty and promote the public good.
those ideals were captured in lasting phrases all men are created equal.
liberty and justice for all.
e pluribus unum out of many one the phrase on the official seal of the united states.
how americans understood applied and violated these ideals shaped the new nations development after 1783.
power to the people the american revolution created not only an independent new republic but also a different conception of politics than prevailed in europe.
what americans most feared in the late eighteenth century was the governmental abuse of power.
memories of the tyranny of king george iii his prime ministers and royal colonial governors were still raw and frightful.
freedom from such focus questions 1.
what are the strengths and weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
how did they contribute to the creation of a new u s constitution in 1787.
what political innovations did the 1787 constitutional convention develop for the new nation.
what were the debates surrounding the ratification of the constitution.
how were they resolved.
in what ways did the federalists vision for the united states differ from that of their republican opponents during the 1790s.
how did the attitudes toward great britain and france shape american politics in the late eighteenth century.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 western lands america under the confederation 1782 1802 r lake michigan vermont 1791 new ceded by virginia 1784 o new york hampshire i r a t on lake massachusetts ceded by ceded by massachusetts 1785 massachusetts and virginia 1784 rie rhode island ceded by ee k a connecticut ceded by connecticut 1786 l connecticut and virginia 1784 new pennsylvania ceded by jersey connecticut 1800 maryland delaware ceded by virginia 1784 ohio r l hudson r u ro n r maine part of massachusetts eh pi.
ak i m ss i ssi p rio r ce en st l a lak e supe wr british canada virginia spanish louisiana ceded by virginia 1792 ceded by south carolina north carolina ceded by north carolina south carolina ceded by georgia 1802 atl anti c o cean georgia ceded by spain 1795 ceded by georgia 1802 spanish florida gulf of mexico states after land cessions ceded territory territory ceded by new york 1782 200 miles 100 200 kilometers the creation of a nationally controlled public domain from western land ceded by the states was one of the main achievements of the federal government under the articles of confederation.
what were the achievements and problems of the confederation government.
the articles made energetic national government impossible.
but congress in the 1780s did not lack for accomplishments.
the most important was establishing national control over land to the west of the thirteen states and devising rules for its settlement.
disputes over access to western land almost prevented ratification of the articles in the first place.
citing their original royal charters which granted territory running all the way to the south sea the pacific ocean states like virginia the carolinas and connecticut claimed immense tracts of western land.
land speculators politicians and prospective settlers from states with clearly defined boundaries insisted that such land must belong to the nation at large.
only after the land rich states in the interest of national unity ceded their western claims to the central government did the articles win ratification.
congress and the west establishing rules for the settlement of this national domain the area controlled by the federal government stretching from the western boundaries of existing states to the mississippi river was by no means easy.
although some americans spoke of it as if it were empty some 100 000 indians in fact inhabited the region.
in the immediate aftermath of independence congress took the position that by aiding the british indians had forfeited the right to their lands.
little distinction was made among tribes that had sided with the enemy those that had aided the patriots and those in the interior that had played no part in the war at all.
at peace conferences at fort stanwix new york in 1784 and fort mcintosh near pittsburgh the following year american representatives demanded and received large surrenders of indian land north of the ohio river.
similar treaties soon followed with the cherokee choctaw and chickasaw tribes in the south although here congress guaranteed the permanency of the indians remaining much reduced holdings.
the treaties secured national control of a large part of the countrys western territory.
when it came to disposing of western land and regulating its settlement the confederation government faced conflicting pressures.
many leaders believed that the economic health of the new republic required that farmers have access to land in the west.
but they also saw land sales as a potential source of revenue and worried that unregulated settlement would produce endless conflicts with the indians.
land companies which lobbied congress vigorously hoped to profit by purchasing real estate and reselling it to settlers.
the government they insisted should step aside and allow private groups to take control of the wests economic development.
settlers and the west the arrival of peace meanwhile triggered a large population movement from settled parts of the original states into frontier areas like upstate new york and across the appalachian mountains into kentucky and tennessee.
to settlers the right to take possession of western lands and use them as they saw fit was an essential element of american freedom.
when a group of ohioans petitioned congress in 1785 assailing landlords and speculators c h.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 america under the confederation an engraving from the farmers and mechanics almanac shows farm families moving west along a primitive road.
who monopolized available acreage and asking that preference in land ownership be given to actual settlements their motto was grant us liberty indeed settlers paid no heed to indian land titles and urged the government to set a low price on public land or give it away.
they frequently occupied land to which they had no legal title.
by the 1790s kentucky courts were filled with lawsuits over land claims and many settlers lost land they thought they owned.
eventually disputes over land forced many early settlers including the parents of abraham lincoln to leave kentucky for opportunities in other states.
at the same time however like british colonial officials before them many leaders of the new nation feared that an unregulated flow of population across the appalachian mountains would provoke constant warfare with indians.
moreover they viewed frontier settlers as disorderly and lacking in proper respect for authority our debtors loose english people our german servants and slaves benjamin franklin had once called them.
establishing law and order in the west and strict rules for the occupation of land there seemed essential to attracting a better class of settlers to the west and avoiding discord between the settled and frontier parts of the new nation.
the land ordinances a series of measures approved by congress during the 1780s defined the terms by which western land would be marketed and settled.
drafted by thomas jefferson the ordinance of 1784 established stages of self government for the west.
the region would be divided into districts initially governed by congress and eventually admitted to the union as member states.
by a single vote congress rejected a clause that would have prohibited slavery what were the achievements and problems of the confederation government.
western ordinances 1785 1787 british north america canada r maine part of massachusetts st la wr en ce lake superior fort michilimackinac dutchman s point ak i r la fort niagara michigan 1837 fort detroit spanish louisiana io ke ontar la ke er new hampshire oswego new york ie hudson r lake mich p sip u ro n igan eh wisconsin 1848 mi s si s pointau fer l massachusetts rhode island connecticut pennsylvania illinois 1818 ohio 1803 indiana 1816 new jersey maryland delaware.
virginia oh i or forts disputed boundaries northwest territory kentucky 1792 200 miles the seven ranges first area survey detail of township 36 square miles 6 miles virginia pennsylvania 7th range 6th range 5th range 4th range 3rd range 2nd range 1st range 6 miles north carolina tennessee 1796 200 kilometers 1 mile a series of ordinances in the 1780s provided for both the surveying and sale of lands in the public domain north of the ohio river and the eventual admission of states carved from the area as equal members of the union.
income from section 16 reserved for school support detail of section 1 square mile 640 acres half section 320 acres 1 mile atl antic o cean half quarter section 80 acres quarter quarter section 40 acres each quarter section 160 acres c h.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 america under the confederation throughout the west.
a second ordinance in 1785 regulated land sales in the region north of the ohio river which came to be known as the old northwest.
land would be surveyed by the government and then sold in sections of a square mile 640 acres at 1 per acre.
in each township one section would be set aside to provide funds for public education.
the system promised to control and concentrate settlement and raise money for congress.
but settlers violated the rules by pressing westward before the surveys had been completed.
like the british before them american officials found it difficult to regulate the thirst for new land.
the minimum purchase price of 640 however put public land out of the financial reach of most settlers.
they generally ended up buying smaller parcels from speculators and land companies.
in 1787 congress decided to sell off large tracts to private groups including 1 5 million acres to the ohio company organized by new england land speculators and army officers.
this was a different organization from the ohio company of the 1750s mentioned in chapter 4.
for many years national land policy benefited private land companies and large buyers more than individual settlers.
and for many decades actual and prospective settlers pressed for a reduction in the price of government owned land a movement that did not end until the homestead act of 1862 offered free land on the public domain.
a final measure the northwest ordinance of 1787 called for the eventual establishment of from three to five states north of the ohio river and east of the mississippi.
thus was enacted the basic principle of what jefferson called the empire of liberty rather than ruling over the west as a colonial power the united states would admit the areas population as equal members of the political system.
territorial expansion and selfgovernment would grow together.
the northwest ordinance pledged that the utmost good faith would be observed toward local indians and that their land would not be taken without consent.
this was the first official recognition that indians continued to own their land.
congress realized that allowing settlers and state government simply to seize indian lands would produce endless expensive military conflicts on the frontier.
it will cost much less one congressman noted to conciliate the good opinion of the indians than to pay men for destroying them but national land policy assumed that whether through purchase treaties or voluntary removal the indian presence would soon disappear.
the ordinance also prohibited slavery in the old northwest a provision that would have far reaching consequences when the sectional conflict between north and south developed.
but for years owners brought slaves into the area claiming that they had voluntarily signed long term labor contracts.
the confederations weaknesses whatever the achievements of the confederation government in the eyes of many influential americans they were outweighed by its failings.
both the national government and the country at large faced worsening economic problems.
to finance the war of independence congress had borrowed large sums of money by selling interest bearing bonds and paying soldiers and suppliers in notes to be redeemed in the what were the achievements and problems of the confederation government.
lacking a secure source of revenue it found itself unable to pay either interest or the debts themselves.
with the united states now outside the british empire american ships were barred from trading with the west indies.
imported goods however flooded the market undercutting the business of many craftsmen driving down wages and draining money out of the country.
with congress unable to act the states adopted their own economic policies.
several imposed tariff duties on goods imported from abroad.
indebted farmers threatened with the loss of land because of failure to meet tax or mortgage payments pressed state governments for relief as did urban craftsmen who owed money to local merchants.
in order to increase the amount of currency in circulation and make it easier for individuals to pay their debts several states printed large sums of paper money.
others enacted laws postponing debt collection.
creditors considered such measures attacks on their property rights.
in a number of states legislative elections produced boisterous campaigns in which candidates for office denounced creditors for oppressing the poor and importers of luxury goods for undermining republican virtue.
shayss rebellion in late 1786 and early 1787 crowds of debt ridden farmers closed the courts in western massachusetts to prevent the seizure of their land for failure to pay taxes.
they called themselves regulators a term already used by protesters in the carolina backcountry in the 1760s.
the uprising came to be known as shayss rebellion a name affixed to it by its opponents after daniel shays one of the leaders and a veteran of the war for independence.
massachusetts had firmly resisted pressure to issue paper money or in other ways assist needy debtors.
the participants in shayss rebellion believed they were acting in the spirit of the revolution.
they modeled their tactics on the crowd activities of the 1760s and 1770s and employed liberty trees and liberty poles as symbols of their cause.
they received no sympathy from governor james bowdoin who dispatched an army headed by former revolutionary war general benjamin lincoln.
the rebels were dispersed in january 1787 and more than 1 000 were arrested.
without adherence to the rule of law bowdoin declared americans would descend into a state of anarchy confusion and slavery observing shayss rebellion from paris where he was serving as ambassador thomas jefferson refused to be alarmed.
a little rebellion now and then is a good thing he wrote to a friend.
the tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants but the uprising was the culmination of a series of events in the 1780s that persuaded an influential group of americans that the national government must be strengthened so that it could develop uniform economic policies and protect property owners from infringements on their rights by local majorities.
the actions of state legislatures most of them elected annually by an expanded voting population followed by shayss rebellion produced fears that the revolutions democratic impulse had gotten out of hand.
our government samuel adams wrote in 1785 at present has liberty for its object but among proponents of stronger national authority liberty had lost some of its luster.
the danger to individual rights they came to a bankruptcy scene.
creditors repossess the belongings of a family unable to pay its debts while a woman weeps in the background.
popular fears of bankruptcy led several states during the 1780s to pass laws postponing the collection of debts.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 america under the confederation believe now arose not from a tyrannical central government but from the people themselves.
liberty declared james madison may be endangered by the abuses of liberty as well as the abuses of power to put it another way private liberty especially the secure enjoyment of property rights could be endangered by public liberty unchecked power in the hands of the people.
nationalists james madison father of the constitution in a miniature portrait painted by charles willson peale in 1783.
madison was only thirty six years old when the constitutional convention met.
alexander hamilton another youthful leader of the nationalists of the 1780s was born in the west indies in 1755.
this portrait was painted by charles willson peale in the early 1790s.
of the 1780s madison a diminutive colorless virginian and the lifelong disciple and ally of thomas jefferson thought deeply and creatively about the nature of political freedom.
he was among the group of talented and well organized men who spearheaded the movement for a stronger national government.
another was alexander hamilton who had come to north america as a youth from the west indies served at the precocious age of twenty as an army officer during the war of independence and married into a prominent new york family.
hamilton was perhaps the most vigorous proponent of an energetic government that would enable the new nation to become a powerful commercial and diplomatic presence in world affairs.
genuine liberty he insisted required a proper degree of authority to make and exercise the laws men like madison and hamilton were nation builders.
they came to believe during the 1780s that americans were squandering the fruits of independence and that the countrys future greatness depended on enhancing national authority.
the concerns voiced by critics of the articles found a sympathetic hearing among men who had developed a national consciousness during the revolution.
nationalists included army officers members of congress accustomed to working with individuals from different states and diplomats who represented the country abroad.
in the army john marshall later a chief justice of the supreme court developed the habit of considering america as my country and congress as my government influential economic interests also desired a stronger national government.
among these were bondholders who despaired of being paid so long as congress lacked a source of revenue urban artisans seeking tariff protection from foreign imports merchants desiring access to british markets and all those who feared that the states were seriously interfering with property rights.
while these groups did not agree on many issues they all believed in the need for a stronger national government.
in september 1786 delegates from six states met at annapolis maryland to consider ways for better regulating interstate and international commerce.
the delegates proposed another gathering in philadelphia to amend the articles of confederation.
shayss rebellion greatly strengthened the nationalists cause.
the late turbulent scenes in massachusetts wrote madison underscored the need for a new constitution.
no respect he complained is paid to the federal authority without a change in the structure of government either anarchy or monarchy was the likely outcome bringing to an end the experiment in republican government.
every state except rhode island which had gone the farthest in developing its own debtor relief and trade policies decided to send delegates to the philadelphia convention.
when they assembled in what were the achievements and problems of the confederation government.
may 1787 they decided to scrap the articles of confederation entirely and draft a new constitution for the united states.
a new constitution the fifty five men who gathered for the constitutional convention included some of the most prominent americans.
thomas jefferson and john adams serving as diplomats in europe did not take part.
but among the delegates were george washington whose willingness to lend his prestige to the gathering and to serve as presiding officer was an enormous asset george mason author of virginias declaration of rights of 1776 and benjamin franklin who had returned to philadelphia after helping to negotiate the treaty of paris of 1783 and was now eighty one years old.
john adams described the convention as a gathering of men of ability weight and experience he might have added and wealth few men of ordinary means attended.
although a few like alexander hamilton had risen from humble origins most had been born into propertied families.
they earned their livings as lawyers merchants planters and large farmers.
nearly all were quite prosperous by the standards of the day.
at a time when fewer than one tenth of 1 percent of americans attended college more than half the delegates had college educations.
a majority had participated in interstate meetings of the 1760s and 1770s and twentytwo had served in the army during the revolution.
their shared social status and political experiences bolstered their common belief in the need to strengthen national authority and curb what one called the excesses of democracy to ensure free and candid debate the deliberations took place in private.
madison who believed the outcome would have great consequences for the cause of liberty throughout the world took careful notes.
they were not published however until 1840 four years after he became the last delegate to pass away.
the structure of government it quickly became apparent that the delegates agreed on many points.
the new constitution would create a legislature an executive and a national judiciary.
congress would have the power to raise money without relying on the states.
states would be prohibited from infringing on the rights of property.
and the government would represent the people.
hamiltons proposal for a president and senate serving life terms like the king and house of lords of england received virtually no support.
the rich and well born hamilton told the convention must rule for the masses seldom judge or determine right most delegates however hoped to find a middle ground between the despotism of monarchy and aristocracy and what they considered the excesses of popular self government.
we had been a fifty dollar note issued by the continental congress during the war of independence.
congresss inability to raise funds to repay such paper money in gold or silver was a major reason why nationalists desired a stronger federal government.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 the philadelphia state house now called independence hall where the declaration of independence was signed in 1776 and the constitutional convention took place in 1787.
a new constitution too democratic observed george mason but he warned against the danger of going to the opposite extreme the key to stable effective republican government was finding a way to balance the competing claims of liberty and power.
differences quickly emerged over the proper balance between the federal and state governments and between the interests of large and small states.
early in the proceedings madison presented what came to be called the virginia plan.
it proposed the creation of a two house legislature with a states population determining its representation in each.
smaller states fearing that populous virginia massachusetts and pennsylvania would dominate the new government rallied behind the new jersey plan.
this called for a single house congress in which each state cast one vote as under the articles of confederation.
in the end a compromise was reached a two house congress consisting of a senate in which each state had two members and a house of representatives apportioned according to population.
senators would be chosen by state legislatures for six year terms.
they were thus insulated from sudden shifts in public opinion.
representatives were to be elected every two years directly by the people.
the limits of democracy under the articles of confederation no national official had been chosen by popular vote.
thus the mode of choosing the house of representatives represented an expansion of democracy.
popular election of at least one part of the political regime madison declared was essential to every plan of free government the constitution moreover imposed neither property nor religious qualifications for voting leaving it to the states to set voting rules.
what major disagreements and compromises molded the final content of the constitution.
overall however the new structure of government was less than democratic.
the delegates sought to shield the national government from the popular enthusiasms that had alarmed them during the 1780s and to ensure that the right kind of men held office.
the people would remain sovereign but they would choose among the elite to staff the new government.
the delegates assumed that the senate would be composed of each states most distinguished citizens.
they made the house of representatives quite small initially 65 members at a time when the massachusetts assembly had 200 on the assumption that only prominent individuals could win election in large districts.
nor did the delegates provide for direct election of either federal judges or the president.
members of the supreme court would be appointed by the president for life terms.
the president would be chosen either by members of an electoral college or by the house of representatives.
the number of electors for each state was determined by adding together its allocation of senators and representatives.
a states electors would be chosen either by its legislature or by popular vote.
in either case the delegates assumed electors would be prominent well educated individuals better qualified than ordinary voters to choose the head of state.
the actual system of election seemed a recipe for confusion.
each elector was to cast votes for two candidates for president with the second place finisher becoming vice president.
if no candidate received a majority of the electoral ballots as the delegates seem to have assumed would normally be the case the president would be chosen from among the top three finishers by the house of representatives with each state casting one vote.
the senate would then elect the vice president.
the delegates devised this extremely cumbersome system of indirect election because they did not trust ordinary voters to choose the president and vice president directly.
the division and separation of powers hammered out in four months of discussion and compromise the constitution is a spare document of only 4 000 words that provides only the briefest outline of the new structure of government.
see the appendix for the full text.
it embodies two basic political principles federalism sometimes called the division of powers and the system of checks and balances between the different branches of the national government also known as the separation of powers federalism refers to the relationship between the national government and the states.
compared to the articles of confederation the constitution significantly strengthened national authority.
it charged the president with enforcing the law and commanding the military.
it empowered congress to levy taxes borrow money regulate commerce declare war deal with foreign nations and indians and promote the general welfare madison proposed to allow congress to veto state laws but this proved too far reaching for most delegates.
the constitution did however declare national legislation the supreme law of the land and it included strong provisions to prevent the states from infringing on property rights.
they were barred from issuing paper money impairing contracts interfering with interstate commerce and levying their own import or export duties.
on the other hand most day to day affairs of government from education c h.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 a new constitution to law enforcement remained in the hands of the states.
this principle of divided sovereignty was a recipe for debate which continues to this day over the balance of power between the national government and the states.
the separation of powers or the system of checks and balances refers to the way the constitution seeks to prevent any branch of the national government from dominating the other two.
to prevent an accumulation of power dangerous to liberty authority within the government is diffused and balanced against itself.
congress enacts laws but the president can veto them and a two thirds majority is required to pass legislation over his objection.
federal judges are nominated by the president and approved by congress but to ensure their independence the judges then serve for life.
the president can be impeached by the house and removed from office by the senate for high crimes and misdemeanors the this advertisement for the sale of 100 slaves from virginia to states farther south appeared in a richmond newspaper only a few months after the signing of the constitution.
slavery was a major subject of debate at the constitutional convention.
debate over slavery the structure of government was not the only source of debate at the constitutional convention.
as madison recorded the institution of slavery and its implications divided the delegates at many sessions.
those who gathered in philadelphia included numerous slaveholders as well as some dedicated advocates of abolition.
madison like jefferson a virginia slaveholder who detested slavery told the convention that the distinction of color had become the basis for the most oppressive dominion ever exercised by man over man yet he later assured the virginia ratifying convention that the constitution offered slavery better security than any that now exists the words slave and slavery did not appear in the constitution a concession to the sensibilities of delegates who feared they would contaminate the glorious fabric of american liberty as luther martin of maryland wrote his fellow delegates anxiously sought to avoid the admission of expressions which might be odious to the ears of americans but he continued they were willing to admit into their system those things which the expressions signified the document prohibited congress from abolishing the african slave trade for twenty years.
it required states to return to their owners fugitives from bondage.
and it provided that threefifths of the slave population would be counted in determining each states representation in the house of representatives and its electoral votes for president.
south carolinas delegates had come to philadelphia determined to defend slavery and they had a powerful impact on the final document.
they originated the fugitive slave clause the three fifths clause and the electoral college.
they insisted on strict limits on the power of congress to levy taxes within the states fearing future efforts to raise revenue by taxing slave property.
they threatened disunion if the atlantic slave trade were prohibited immediately as the new england states and virginia with its abundance of native born slaves demanded.
their threats swayed many delegates.
gouverneur morris one of pennsylvanias delegates declared that he was being forced to decide between offending the southern states or doing injustice to human nature for the sake of national unity he said he would choose the latter.
what major disagreements and compromises molded the final content of the constitution.
slavery in the constitution the constitutions slavery clauses were compromises efforts to find a middle ground between the institutions critics and defenders.
taken together however they embedded slavery more deeply than ever in american life and politics.
the slave trade clause allowed a commerce condemned by civilized society one that had been suspended during the war of independence to continue until 1808.
on january 1 1808 the first day that congress was allowed under the constitution it prohibited the further importation of slaves.
but in the interim partly to replace slaves who had escaped to the british and partly to provide labor for the expansion of slavery to fertile land away from the coast some 170 000 africans were brought to the new nation as slaves.
south carolina and georgia imported 100 000.
this number represented more than one quarter of all the slaves brought to mainland north america after 1700.
the fugitive slave clause accorded slave laws extraterritoriality that is the condition of bondage remained attached to a person even if he or she escaped to a state where slavery had been abolished.
john jay while serving in spain on a diplomatic mission once wrote of how he missed the free air of america.
jay was probably unaware of the phrases full implications.
in the famous somerset case of 1772 the lawyer for a west indian slave brought to britain had obtained his clients freedom by invoking the memorable words the air of england is too pure for a slave to breathe that is the moment any person sets foot on british soil he or she becomes free.
yet the new federal constitution required all the states north and south to recognize and help police the institution of slavery.
for slaves there was no free air in america.
the constitution gave the national government no power to interfere with slavery in the states.
and the three fifths clause allowed the white south to exercise far greater power in national affairs than the size of its the signing of the constitution by mid nineteenth century american artist thomas pritchard rossiter depicts the conclusion of the constitutional convention of 1787.
among the founding fathers depicted are james wilson signing the document at the table in the center and george washington presiding from the dais with an image of the sun behind him.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 the preamble to the constitution as printed in a pennsylvania newspaper two days after the constitutional convention adjourned.
a new constitution free population warranted.
the clause greatly enhanced the number of southern votes in the house of representatives and therefore in the electoral college where as noted above the number of electors for each state was determined by adding together its number of senators and representatives.
of the first sixteen presidential elections between 1788 and 1848 all but four placed a southern slaveholder in the white house.
even the initial failure to include a bill of rights resulted in part from the presence of slavery.
as south carolina delegate charles c pinckney explained such bills generally begin with declaring that all men are by nature born free a declaration that would come with a very bad grace when a large part of our property consists in men who are actually born slaves but some slaveholders detected a potential threat buried in the constitution.
patrick henry who condemned slavery but feared abolition warned that in time of war the new government might take steps to arm and liberate the slaves.
may congress not say he asked that every black man must fight.
did we not see a little of this in the last war what henry could not anticipate was that the war that eventually destroyed slavery would be launched by the south itself to protect the institution.
the final document gouverneur morris put the finishing touches on the final draft of the new constitution trying to make it he explained as clear as our language would permit for the original preamble which began we the people of the states of new hampshire massachusetts etc he substituted the far more powerful we the people of the united states he added a statement of the constitutions purposes including to establish justice promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty things the articles of confederation in the eyes of most of the delegates had failed to accomplish.
the last session of the constitutional convention took place on september 17 1787.
benjamin franklin urged the delegates to put aside individual objections and approve the document whatever its imperfections.
the older i grow he remarked the more apt i am to.
pay more respect to the judgment of others of the forty five delegates who remained in philadelphia thirty nine signed the constitution.
it was then sent to the states for ratification.
the constitution created a new framework for american development.
by assigning to congress power over tariffs interstate commerce the coining of money patents rules for bankruptcy and weights and measures and by prohibiting states from interfering with property rights it made possible a national economic market.
it created national political institutions reduced the powers of the states and sought to place limits on popular what major disagreements and compromises molded the final content of the constitution.
this satirical engraving by amos doolittle who created the image of the battle of concord in chapter 5 depicts some of the issues in the debate over the ratification of the constitution.
the wagon in the center is carrying connecticut and sinking into the mud under the weight of debts and paper money as federals and antifederals try to pull it out.
federals call for the state to comply with congress that is to pay money requisitioned by the national government the antifederals reply tax luxury and success to shays a reference to shayss rebellion.
the connecticut shoreline and the buildings of manhattan are on the right.
underneath the three merchant ships is a phrase criticizing the tariffs that states were imposing on imports from one another which the constitution prohibited.
at the bottom is the biblical motto a house divided against itself cannot stand later made famous by abraham lincoln.
the same enthusiasm now pervades all classes in favor of government observed benjamin rush that actuated us in favor of liberty in the years 1774 and 1775 whether all classes truly agreed may be doubted for the ratification process unleashed a nationwide debate over the best means of preserving american freedom.
t h e r at i f i c at i o n d e b at e a n d the origin of the bill of rights the federalist even though the constitution provided that it would go into effect when nine states not all thirteen as required by the articles of confederation had given their approval ratification was by no means certain.
each state c h.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 the ratification debate and the origin of the bill of rights held an election for delegates to a special ratifying convention.
a fierce public battle ensued producing hundreds of pamphlets and newspaper articles and spirited campaigns to elect delegates.
to generate support hamilton madison and jay composed a series of eighty five essays that appeared in newspapers under the pen name publius and were gathered as a book the federalist in 1788.
hamilton wrote fifty madison thirty and jay the remainder.
today the essays are regarded as among the most important american contributions to political thought.
at the time however they represented only one part of a much larger national debate over ratification reflected in innumerable pamphlets newspaper articles and public meetings.
again and again hamilton and madison repeated that rather than posing a danger to americans liberties the constitution in fact protected them.
hamiltons essays sought to disabuse americans of their fear of political power.
government he insisted was an expression of freedom not its enemy.
any government could become oppressive but with its checks and balances and division of power the constitution made political tyranny almost impossible.
hamilton insisted that he was as zealous an advocate for liberty as any man whatever but want of power had been the fatal flaw of the articles.
at the new york ratifying convention hamilton assured the delegates that the constitution had created the perfect balance between liberty and power extend the sphere madison too emphasized how the constitution was structured to prevent abuses of authority.
but in several essays especially federalist nos.
10 and 51 he moved beyond such assurances to develop a strikingly new vision of the relationship between government and society in the united states.
madison identified the essential dilemma as he saw it of the new republic government must be based on the will of the people yet the people had shown themselves susceptible to dangerous enthusiasms.
most worrisome they had threatened property rights whose protection was the first object of government the problem of balancing democracy and respect for property would only grow in the years ahead because he warned economic development would inevitably increase the numbers of poor.
what was to prevent them from using their political power to secure a more equal distribution of wealth.
the answer madison explained lay not simply in the way power balanced power in the structure of government but in the nations size and diversity.
previous republics had existed only in small territories the dutch republic or italian city states of the renaissance.
but argued madison the very size of the united states was a source of stability not as many feared weakness.
extend the sphere he wrote.
the multiplicity of religious denominations he argued offered the best security for religious liberty.
likewise in a nation as large as the united states so many distinct interests economic regional and political would arise that no single one would ever be able to take over the government and oppress the rest.
every majority would be a coalition of minorities and thus the rights of individuals would be secure.
madisons writings did much to shape the early nations understanding h o w d i d a n t i fe d e r a l i s t c o n c e r n s r a i s e d d u r i n g t h e r a t i f i c a t i o n p r o c e s s l e a d t o t h e c r e a t i o n o f t h e b i l l o f ri g h t s.
of its new political institutions.
in arguing that the size of the republic helped to secure americans rights they reinforced the tradition that saw continuous westward expansion as essential to freedom.
and in basing the preservation of freedom on the structure of government and size of the republic not the character of the people his essays represented a major shift away from the republican emphasis on a virtuous citizenry devoted to the common good as the foundation of proper government.
madison helped to popularize the liberal idea that men are generally motivated by self interest and that the good of society arises from the clash of these private interests.
the anti federalists opponents of ratification called anti federalists insisted that the constitution shifted the balance between liberty and power too far in the direction of the latter.
anti federalists lacked the coherent leadership of the constitutions defenders.
they included state politicians fearful of seeing their influence diminish among them such revolutionary heroes as samuel adams john hancock and patrick henry.
small farmers many of whom supported the state debtor relief measures of the 1780s that the constitutions supporters deplored also saw no need for a stronger central government.
some opponents of the constitution denounced the documents protections for slavery others warned that the powers of congress were so broad that it might enact a law for abolition.
anti federalists repeatedly predicted that the new government would fall under the sway of merchants creditors and others hostile to the interests of ordinary americans.
repudiating madisons arguments in federalist nos.
10 and 51 anti federalists insisted that a very extensive territory cannot be governed on the principles of freedom popular self government they claimed flourished best in small communities where rulers and ruled interacted daily.
only men of wealth ignorant of the sentiments of the middling and lower class of citizens would have the resources to win election to a national government.
the result of the constitution warned melancton smith of new york a member of congress under the articles of confederation would be domination of the common people by the wellborn this smith predicted will be a government of oppression liberty was the anti federalists watchword.
americas happiness they insisted arises from the freedom of our institutions and the limited nature of our government both threatened by the new constitution.
maryland anti federalists had caps manufactured bearing the word liberty to wear to the polls when members of the states ratification convention were elected.
to the vision of the united states as an energetic great power antifederalists counterposed a way of life grounded in local democratic institutions.
what is liberty asked james lincoln of south carolina.
the power of governing yourselves.
if you adopt this constitution have you this power.
no anti federalists also pointed to the constitutions lack of a bill of rights which left unprotected rights such as trial by jury and freedom of speech and the press.
the absence of a bill of rights declared patrick henry was the most absurd thing to mankind that ever the world saw state constitutions had bills of rights yet the states henry claimed were now being in new york citys grand federal procession of 1788 celebrating the ratification of the constitution members of each trade and occupation marched together.
this document illustrates the variety of crafts in the pre industrial city.
voices of freedom f r o m dav i d r a m s ay the history of the american re v o l u t i o n 1 7 8 9 a member of the continental congress from south carolina david ramsay published his history of the revolution the year after the constitution was ratified.
in this excerpt of legislature are miniature pictures of the community and from their mode of election are government and the right of future amendment likely to be influenced by the same interests and feelings with the people whom they represent.
in no age before and in no other country did man embodied in the state constitutions and adopted ever possess an election of the kind of government he lauds the principles of representative in the national one as unique american political principles and the best ways of securing liberty.
the world has not hitherto exhibited so fair an opportunity for promoting social happiness.
it is hoped for the honor of human nature that the result will prove the fallacy of those theories that mankind are incapable of self government.
the ancients not knowing the doctrine of representation were apt in their public meetings to run into confusion but in america this mode of taking the sense of the people is so well understood and so completely reduced to system that its most populous states are often peaceably convened in an assembly of deputies not too large for orderly deliberation and yet representing the whole in equal proportion.
these popular branches under which he would choose to live.
the constituent parts of the ancient free governments were thrown together by accident.
the freedom of modern european governments was for the most part obtained by concessions or liberality of monarchs or military leaders.
in america alone reason and liberty concurred in the formation of constitutions.
in one thing they were all perfect.
they left the people in the power of altering and amending them whenever they pleased.
in this happy peculiarity they placed the science of politics on a footing with the other sciences by opening it to improvements from experience and the discoveries of future ages.
by means of this power of amending american constitutions the friends of mankind have fondly hoped that oppression will one day be no more.
from james winthrop a n t i fe d e r a l i s t e s s a y s i g n e d a g r i p p a 1 7 8 7 a local official in middlesex massachusetts james winthrop published sixteen public letters between november 1787 and february 1788 opposing ratification of the constitution.
it is the opinion of the ablest writers on the subject that no extensive empire can be governed upon republican principles and that such a government will degenerate into a despotism unless it be made up of a confederacy of smaller states each having the full powers of internal regulation.
this is precisely the principle which has hitherto preserved our freedom.
no instance can be found of any free government of considerable extent which has been supported upon any other plan.
large and consolidated empires may indeed dazzle the eyes of a distant spectator with their splendor but if examined more nearly are always found to be full of misery.
it is under such tyranny that the spanish provinces languish and such would be our misfortune and degradation if we should submit to have the concerns of the whole empire managed by one empire.
to promote the happiness of the people it is necessary that there should be local laws and it is necessary that those laws should be made by the representatives of those who are immediately subject to them.
it is impossible for one code of laws to suit georgia and massachusetts.
they must therefore legislate for themselves.
yet there is i believe not one point of legislation that is not surrendered in the proposed plan.
questions of every kind respecting property are determinable in a continental court and so are all kinds of criminal causes.
the continental legislature has therefore a right to make rules in all cases.
no rights are reserved to the citizens.
this new system is therefore a consolidation of all the states into one large mass however diverse the parts may be of which it is composed.
a bill of rights.
serves to secure the minority against the usurpation and tyranny of the majority.
the experience of all mankind has proved the prevalence of a disposition to use power wantonly.
it is therefore as necessary to defend an individual against the majority in a republic as against the king in a monarchy.
questions 1.
why does ramsay feel that the power to amend the constitution is so important a political innovation.
why does winthrop believe that a bill of rights is essential in the constitution.
how do ramsay and winthrop differ concerning how the principle of representation operates in the united states.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 the ratification debate and the origin of the bill of rights asked to surrender most of their powers to the federal government with no requirement that it respect americans basic liberties.
in general pro constitution sentiment flourished in the nations cities and in rural areas closely tied to the commercial marketplace.
the constitutions most energetic supporters were men of substantial property.
but what george bryan of pennsylvania a supporter of ratification called the golden phantom of prosperity also swung urban artisans laborers and sailors behind the movement for a government that would use its energy and power to revive the depressed economy.
anti federalism drew its support from small farmers in more isolated rural areas such as the hudson valley of new york western massachusetts and the southern backcountry.
in the end the supporters energy and organization coupled with their domination of the colonial press carried the day.
ninety two newspapers and magazines existed in the united states in 1787.
of these only twelve published a significant number of anti federalist pieces.
madison also won support for the new constitution by promising that the first congress would enact a bill of rights.
by mid 1788 the required nine states had ratified.
although there was strong dissent in massachusetts new york and virginia only rhode island and north carolina voted against ratification and they subsequently had little choice but to join the new government.
anti federalism died.
but as with other movements in american history that did not immediately achieve their goals for example the populists of the late nineteenth century some of the anti federalists ideas eventually entered the political mainstream.
to this day their belief that a too powerful central government is a threat to liberty continues to influence american political culture.
the bill of rights ironically the parts of the constitution americans most value today the freedoms of speech the press and religion protection against unjust criminal procedures equality before the law were not in the original document.
all of these but the last which was enshrined in the fourteenth amendment after the civil war were contained in the first ten amendments known as the bill of rights.
madison was so convinced that the balances of the constitution would protect liberty that he believed a bill of rights redundant or pointless amendments restraining federal power he believed would have no effect on the danger to liberty posed by unchecked majorities in the states and no list of rights could ever anticipate the numerous ways that congress might operate in the future.
parchment barriers to the abuse of authority he observed would prove least effective when most needed.
madisons prediction would be amply borne out at future times of popular hysteria such as during the red scare following world war i and the mccarthy era of the 1950s when all branches of government joined in trampling on freedom of expression and during world war ii when hatred of a foreign enemy led to the internment of more than 100 000 japanese americans most of them citizens of the united states.
nevertheless every new state constitution contained some kind of declaration of citizens rights and large numbers of americans federalist visions of freedom banner of the society of pewterers.
a banner carried by one of the many artisan groups that took part in new york citys grand federal procession of 1788 celebrating the ratification of the constitution.
the banner depicts artisans at work in their shop and some of their products.
the words solid and pure and the inscription at the upper right link the quality of their pewter to their opinion of the new frame of government and hopes for the future.
the inscription reads questions 1.
why do you think the pewterers believed that the new constitution would promote americans freedom and prosperity as stated in the inscription.
how does the banner reflect the pewterers pride in their craft.
the federal plan most solid and secure americans their freedom will endure all arts shall flourish in columbias land and all her sons join as one social band c h.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 an engraving and poem published in 1788 in an american newspaper after new york became the eleventh state to ratify the new constitution.
north carolina would ratify in 1789 and rhode island in 1790.
the ratification debate and the origin of the bill of rights and anti federalist alike believed the new national constitution should also have one.
in order to conciliate the minds of the people as madison put it he presented to congress a series of amendments that became the basis of the bill of rights which was ratified by the states in 1791.
the first amendment prohibited congress from legislating with regard to religion or infringing on freedom of speech freedom of the press or the right of assembly.
the second upheld the peoples right to keep and bear arms in conjunction with a well regulated militia others prohibited abuses such as arrests without warrants and forcing a person accused of a crime to testify against himself and reaffirmed the right to trial by jury.
in a sense the bill of rights offered a definition of the unalienable rights jefferson had mentioned in the declaration of independence rights inherent in the human condition.
not having been granted by government in the first place they could not be rescinded by government.
in case any had been accidentally omitted the ninth amendment declared that rights not specifically mentioned in the constitution were retained by the people its suggestion that the constitution was not meant to be complete opened the door to future legal recognition of rights not grounded in the actual text such as the right to privacy.
the tenth amendment meant to answer fears that the federal government would ride roughshod over the states affirmed that powers not delegated to the national government or prohibited to the states continued to reside with the states.
the roots and even the specific language of some parts of the bill of rights lay far back in english history.
the eighth amendment prohibiting excessive bail and cruel and unusual punishments incorporates language that originated in a declaration by the house of lords in 1316 and was repeated centuries later in the english bill of rights and the constitutions of a number of american states.
other provisions reflected the changes in american life brought about by the revolution.
the most remarkable of these was constitutional recognition of religious freedom.
unlike the declaration of independence which invokes the blessing of divine providence the constitution is a purely secular document that contains no reference to god and bars religious tests for federal officeholders.
the first amendment prohibits the federal government from legislating on the subject of religion a complete departure from british and colonial precedent.
under the constitution it was and remains possible as one critic complained for a papist a mohomatan a deist yea an atheist to become president of the united states.
madison was so adamant about separating church and state that he even opposed the appointment of chaplains to serve congress and the military.
today when americans are asked to define freedom they instinctively h o w d i d a n t i fe d e r a l i s t c o n c e r n s r a i s e d d u r i n g t h e r a t i f i c a t i o n p r o c e s s l e a d t o t h e c r e a t i o n o f t h e b i l l o f ri g h t s.
british canada w n re maine part of massachusetts l an lake michig u ro n iss ipp ir eh is s ak m erio constitution a lake sup the st l ratification.
lake er e lak ontario new york new hampshire massachusetts ie rhode island pennsylvania new jersey connecticut maryland souri.
delaware r hi or mis virginia o mi ssis sip p i r north carolina south carolina georgia spanish florida 200 miles gulf of mexico 200 kilometers federalists those who supported the new constitution tended to be concentrated in cities and nearby rural areas while backcountry farmers were more likely to oppose the new frame of government.
atl anti c o cean federalist majority for ratification anti federalist majority against ratification evenly divided politically unorganized c h.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 the people turn to the bill of rights and especially the first amendment with its guarantees of freedom of speech the press and religion.
yet the bill of rights aroused little enthusiasm on ratification and for decades was all but ignored.
not until the twentieth century would it come to be revered as an indispensable expression of american freedom.
nonetheless the bill of rights subtly affected the language of liberty.
applying only to the federal government not the states it reinforced the idea that concentrated national power posed the greatest threat to freedom.
and it contributed to the long process whereby freedom came to be discussed in the vocabulary of rights.
among the most important rights were freedom of speech and the press vital building blocks of a democratic public sphere.
once an entitlement of members of parliament and colonial assemblies free speech came to be seen as a basic right of citizenship.
although the legal implementation remained to be worked out and serious infringements would occur at many points in american history the bill of rights did much to establish freedom of expression as a cornerstone of the popular understanding of american freedom.
the people national a medal issued to red jacket a seneca chief during his visit to philadelphia then the national capital in 1792.
it depicts george washington offering an indian a peace pipe.
the agricultural scene in the background was intended to suggest that indians should take up farming.
identity the colonial population had been divided by ethnicity religion class and status and united largely by virtue of their allegiance to britain.
the revolution created not only a new nation but also a new collective body the american people whose members were to enjoy freedom as citizens in a new political community.
since government in the united states rested on the will of the people it was all the more important to identify who the people were.
the constitution opens with the words we the people describing those who among other things are to possess the blessings of liberty as a birthright and pass them on to posterity abraham lincoln would later cite these words to argue that since the nation had been created by the people not the states the states could not dissolve it.
although one might assume that the people of the united states included all those living within the nations borders the text made clear that this was not the case.
the constitution identifies three populations inhabiting the united states indians treated as members of independent tribes and not part of the american body politic other persons that is slaves and the people only the third were entitled to american freedom.
every nation confronts the task of defining its identity.
historians have traditionally distinguished between civic nationalism which envisions the nation as a community open to all those devoted to its political institutions and social values and ethnic nationalism which defines the nation as a community of descent based on a shared ethnic heritage language and culture.
at first glance the united states appears to conform to the civic model.
it lacked a clear ethnic identity or long established national boundaries the political principles of the revolution held americans together.
to be an american all one had to do was commit oneself to an ideology of liberty equality and democracy.
from the outset however how did the definition of citizenship in the new republic exclude na t i v e a m e r i c a n s a n d a f r i c a n a m e r i c a n s.
american nationality combined both civic and ethnic definitions.
for most of our history american citizenship has been defined by blood as well as by political allegiance.
indians in the new nation the early republics policies toward indians and african americans illustrate the conflicting principles that shaped american nationality.
american leaders agreed that the west should not be left in indian hands but they disagreed about the indians ultimate fate.
the government hoped to encourage the westward expansion of white settlement which implied one of three things the removal of the indian population to lands even farther west their total disappearance or their incorporation into white civilization with the expectation that they might one day become part of american society.
many white americans probably most deemed indians savages unfit for citizenship.
indian tribes had no representation in the new government and the constitution excluded indians not taxed from being counted in determining each states number of congressmen.
the treaty system gave them a unique status within the american political system.
but despite this recognition of their sovereignty treaties were essentially ways of transferring land from indians to the federal government or the states.
often a the signing of the treaty of greenville of 1795 painted by an unknown member of general anthony waynes staff.
in the treaty a group of tribes ceded most of the area of the current state of ohio along with the site that became the city of chicago to the united states.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 indian tribes erio q ama pass lake sup the people r uod chippewa dy penobs cot la an chig lake mi ebago l wy an potawatomi aw ish en ma sca ut nk pia ria ia peokask kia s ka aho c pian kish ke eri aw e seneca do t delaware mohican kaskaskia kickapoo la oneida tuscarora a onondag cayuga mohawk munsee delaware sopoonee troy e marshpepo nd herring sett agan narr n ingto ston on grot an eg moh ottawa rio ake onta seneca winn on in hur s sac iscon w fox ke menominees montauk i miaema w iver e ne eel r awingo h s m atl anti c o cean ch e ch k ro ca ta wb ick a asa w nottaway pamunkey mattaponies ee upper creeks lower creeks choctaw seminole gulf of mexico 200 miles 200 kilometers by 1790 the indian population had declined significantly from the early colonial era but the area west of the appalachian mountains was still known as indian country how did the definition of citizenship in the new republic exclude na t i v e a m e r i c a n s a n d a f r i c a n a m e r i c a n s.
treaty was agreed to by only a small portion of a tribe but the whole tribe was then forced to accept its legitimacy.
during washingtons administration secretary of war henry knox hoped to deal with indians with a minimum of warfare and without undermining the new nations honor.
he recognized he said in 1794 that american treatment of the continents native inhabitants had been even more destructive to the indian than spains conduct in mexico and peru.
his conciliatory policy had mixed results.
congress forbade the transfer of indian land without federal approval.
but several states ignored this directive and continued to negotiate their own agreements.
open warfare continued in the ohio valley.
in 1791 little turtle leader of the miami confederacy inflicted a humiliating defeat on american forces led by arthur st clair the american governor of the northwest territory.
with 630 dead this was the costliest loss ever suffered by the united states army at the hands of indians.
in 1794 3 000 american troops under anthony wayne defeated little turtles forces at the battle of fallen timbers.
this led directly to the treaty of greenville of 1795 in which twelve indian tribes ceded most of ohio and indiana to the federal government.
the treaty also established the annuity system yearly grants of federal money to indian tribes that institutionalized continuing government influence in tribal affairs and gave outsiders considerable control over indian life.
many prominent figures however rejected the idea that indians were innately inferior to white americans.
thomas jefferson believed that indians merely lived at a less advanced stage of civilization.
indians could become full fledged members of the republic by abandoning communal landholding and hunting in favor of small scale farming.
once they possessed property jefferson told one indian group they could join us in our government and indeed mix your blood with ours to pursue the goal of assimilation congress in the 1790s authorized president washington to distribute agricultural tools and livestock to indian men and spinning wheels and looms to indian women.
to whites the adoption of american gender norms with men working the land and women tending to their homes would be a crucial sign that the indians were becoming civilized but the american notion of civilization required so great a transformation of indian life that most tribes rejected it.
one missionary was told if we want to work we know how to do it according to our own way and as it pleases us to indians freedom meant retaining tribal autonomy and identity including the ability to travel widely in search of game.
since our acquaintance with our brother white people declared a mohawk speaker at a 1796 treaty council that which we call freedom and liberty becomes an entire stranger to us there was no room for indians who desired to retain their traditional way of life in the american empire of liberty.
blacks and the republic by 1790 the number of african americans far exceeded the indian population within the united states.
the status of free blacks was somewhat indeterminate.
nowhere does the original constitution define who in fact are c h.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 table 7 1 total population and black population of the united states 1790 state total free population slaves blacks new england new hampshire 141 899 vermont 85 341 massachusetts 378 556 5 369 connecticut 237 655 2 764 2 771 rhode island 69 112 3 484 maine 96 643 new york 340 241 21 324 4 682 new jersey 184 139 11 423 2 762 pennsylvania 433 611 3 737 6 531 delaware 59 096 8 887 3 899 maryland 319 728 103 036 8 043 virginia 747 610 292 627 12 866 north carolina 395 005 100 572 5 041 south carolina 249 073 107 094 1 801 georgia 82 548 29 264 kentucky 73 677 12 430 tennessee 35 691 3 417 3 929 625 697 624 59 557 middle states south total vermont kentucky and tennessee were territories that had not yet been admitted as states.
maine was part of massachusetts in 1790.
the people citizens of the united states.
the individual states were left free to determine the boundaries of liberty.
the norths gradual emancipation acts assumed that former slaves would remain in the country not be colonized abroad.
northern statesmen like hamilton jay and franklin worked for abolition and some helped to establish schools for black children.
during the era of the revolution free blacks enjoyed at least some of the legal rights accorded to whites including in most states the right to vote.
some cast ballots in the election of delegates to conventions that ratified the constitution.
the large majority of blacks of course were slaves and slavery rendered them all but invisible to those imagining the american community.
slaves as edmund randolph the nations first attorney general put it were not.
constituent members of our society and the language of liberty did not apply to them.
one of the eras most widely read books letters from an american farmer published in france in 1782 by hector st john de crvecoeur strikingly illustrated this process of exclusion.
born in france crvecoeur had taken part in the unsuccessful defense of quebec during the seven years war.
instead of returning home he came to new york city in 1759.
as a trader and explorer he visited most of the british mainland colonies as well as the ohio and mississippi valleys.
crvecoeur eventually married the daughter of a prominent new york landowner and lived with his own family on a farm in orange county.
seeking to remain neutral during the war of independence he suffered persecution by both patriots and the british and eventually returned to france.
in letters from an american farmer crvecoeur popularized the idea which would become so common in the twentieth century of the united states as a melting pot.
here he wrote individuals of all nations are melted into a new one the american left behind all his ancient prejudices and manners and received new ones from the new mode of life he has embraced crvecoeur was well aware of what he called the horrors of slavery but when he posed the famous question what then is the american this new man he answered a mixture of english scotch irish french dutch germans and swedes.
he is either a european or the descendant of a european this at a time when fully one fifth of the population the highest proportion in u s history consisted of africans and their descendants.
like crvecoeur many white americans excluded blacks from their conception of the american people.
the constitution empowered congress to create a uniform system by which immigrants became citizens and the naturalization act of 1790 offered the first legislative definition of american nationality.
with no debate congress restricted the process of becoming a citizen from abroad to free white persons the law initiated a policy that some historians with only partial accuracy call open immigration for europeans the process was indeed open.
only in the last quarter of the nineteenth century were groups of whites beginning with prostitutes convicted felons lunatics and persons likely to become a public charge barred from entering the country.
for the first century of the republic virtually the only white persons in the entire world ineligible to claim american citizenship were those unwilling to renounce hereditary titles of nobility as required in an act of how did the definition of citizenship in the new republic exclude na t i v e a m e r i c a n s a n d a f r i c a n a m e r i c a n s.
and yet the word white in the naturalization act excluded a large majority of the worlds population from emigrating to the asylum for mankind and partaking in the blessings of american freedom.
for eighty years no non white immigrant could become a naturalized citizen.
africans were allowed to do so in 1870 but not until the 1940s did persons of asian origin become eligible.
native americans were granted american citizenship in 1924.
jefferson s l a v e r y and race mans liberty john locke had written flowed from his having reason to deny liberty to those who were not considered rational beings did not seem to be a contradiction.
white americans increasingly viewed blacks as permanently deficient in the qualities that made freedom possible the capacity for self control reason and devotion to the larger community.
these were the characteristics that jefferson in a famous comparison of the races in his book notes on the state of virginia published in 1785 claimed blacks lacked partly due to natural incapacity and partly because the bitter experience of slavery had quite understandably he felt rendered them disloyal to the nation.
jefferson was reluctant to degrade a whole race of men from the rank in the scale of beings which their creator may perhaps have given them he therefore voiced the idea as a suspicion only that blacks are inferior to the whites in the endowments both of body and mind yet this unfortunate circumstance he went on is a powerful obstacle to the emancipation of these people jefferson was obsessed with the connection between heredity and environment race and intelligence.
his belief that individuals abilities and achievements are shaped by social conditions inclined him to hope that no group was fixed permanently in a status of inferiority.
he applied this principle as has been noted to indians whom he believed naturally the equal of whites in intelligence.
in the case of blacks however he could not avoid the suspicion that nature had permanently deprived them of the qualities that made republican citizenship possible.
benjamin banneker a free african american from maryland who had taught himself the principles of mathematics sent jefferson a copy of an astronomical almanac he had published along with a plea for the abolition of slavery.
jefferson replied nobody wishes more than i do to see such proofs as you exhibit that nature has given to our black brethren talents equal to the other colors of men to his friend joel barlow however jefferson suggested that a white person must have helped banneker with his calculations.
nothing is more certainly written in the book of fate wrote jefferson than that these people are to be free yet he felt that america should have a homogeneous citizenry with common experiences values and inborn abilities.
americans essential sameness would underpin the ideal of equal rights for all making it possible to realize the idea of the public good.
black americans jefferson affirmed should eventually enjoy the natural rights enumerated in the declaration of independence but in africa or the caribbean not in the united states.
he foresaw indians merging with whites into a single people but he was horrified by the idea of miscegenation between blacks and whites.
unlike indians blacks he believed were unfit the artist john singleton copley best known for his portraits of prominent americans and britons painted this young african american in the late 1770s.
the subject probably worked on a new england fishing boat.
this is one of the eras very few portraits of a black person.
7 founding a nation 1783 1789 the people for economic independence and political self government.
freeing the slaves without removing them from the country would endanger the nations freedom.
in his will tadeusz kosciuszko a polish aristocrat who fought for american independence left funds for jefferson to purchase and free slaves giving them liberty in my name but when his friend died in 1817 jefferson transferred the money to an official of the american colonization society an organization dedicated to sending freed slaves to africa.
eventually the funds were divided among kosciuszkos heirs in europe.
jefferson reflected the divided mind of his generation.
some prominent virginians assumed that blacks could become part of the american nation.
edward coles an early governor of illinois brought his slaves from virginia freed them and settled them on farms.
washington who died in 1799 provided in his will that his 277 slaves would become free after the death of his wife martha.
feeling uncomfortable living among men and women who looked forward to her death she emancipated them the following year.
jefferson thought of himself as a humane owner.
the slave cabins at his estate monticello one visitor wrote are all much better than i have seen on any other plantation although he could not help adding that their cabins form a most unpleasant contrast with the palace that rises so near them believing the slave trade immoral jefferson tried to avoid selling slaves to pay off his mounting debts.
but his will provided for the freedom of only five all relatives of his slave sally hemings with whom he appears to have had fathered one or more children.
when he died in 1826 jefferson owed so much money that his property including the majority of his more than 200 slaves was sold at auction thus destroying the slave community he had tried to keep intact.
principles of freedom even as the decline of apprenticeship and indentured servitude narrowed the gradations of freedom among the white population the revolution widened the divide between free americans and those who remained in slavery.
race one among many kinds of legal and social inequality in colonial america now emerged as a convenient justification for the existence of slavery in a land that claimed to be committed to freedom.
blacks natural faculties alexander hamilton noted in 1779 were probably as good as ours but the existence of slavery he added makes us fancy many things that are founded neither in reason or experience we the people increasingly meant only white americans.
principles of freedom which embrace only half mankind are only half systems declared the anonymous author of a fourth of july speech in hartford connecticut in 1800.
declaration of independence he wondered where art thou now the answer came from a richmond newspaper tell us not of principles.
those principles have been annihilated by the existence of slavery among us suggested reading suggested reading books amar akhil reed.
bill of rights creation and reconstruction 1998.
presents the history of the bill of rights from its ratification through the reconstruction era.
berkin carol.
a brilliant solution inventing the american constitution 2002.
a lively account of the proceedings of the constitutional convention.
cornell saul.
the other founders anti federalism and the dissenting tradition in america 1788 1828 1999.
a careful examination of the ideas of those who opposed ratification of the constitution.
dowd gregory e a spirited resistance the north american indian struggle for unity 1745 1815 1992.
contains an important discussion of the place of indians in the new american nation.
holton woody.
unruly americans and the origins of the constitution 2007.
argues that the political activities of ordinary americans helped to shape the constitution.
kettner james t the development of american citizenship 1608 1870 1978.
traces the development of the definition of american citizenship from early colonization to the aftermath of the civil war.
levy leonard.
the establishment clause religion and the first amendment 1994.
a historical account of one of the key components of the bill of rights.
macleod duncan j slavery race and the american revolution 1974.
a british scholars interpretation of the role of race and slavery in the revolutionary era.
mcmillin james a.
the final victims foreign slave trade to north america 1783 1810 2004.
a study of the last phase of the american slave trade as made possible by the new constitution.
morris richard b.
the forging of the union 1781 1789 1987.
a comprehensive account of the nations history under the articles of confederation.
the forgotten fifth african americans in the age of revolution 2006.
a comprehensive survey of the revolutions impact on blacks slave and free.
nedelsky jennifer.
private property and the limits of american constitutionalism 1990.
analyzes how the protection of private property shaped the writing of the constitution.
rakove jack.
original meanings politics and ideas in the making of the constitution 1996.
an influential interpretation of the ideas that went into the drafting of the constitution.
richards leonard l shayss rebellion the american revolutions final battle 2002.
the most recent study of the uprising that helped to produce the constitution.
wood gordon s the creation of the american republic 1776 1789 1969.
presents the evolution of american political ideas and institutions from the declaration of independence to the ratification of the constitution.
websites creating the united states default aspx explore the constitution c hapter r eview review questions 1.
how did the limited central government created by the articles of confederation reflect the issues behind the revolution and fears for individual liberties.
explain the importance of the land ordinances of 1784 and 1785 as well as the northwest ordinance of 1787 both for the early republic and future generations.
3 who were the nationalists of the late 1780s and why did they believe a new national constitution was necessary.
the constitution has been described as a bundle of compromises which compromises were the most significant in shaping the direction of the new nation and why.
what were the major arguments against the constitution put forth by the anti federalists.
how accurate was hector st john de crvecoeurs description of america as a melting pot.
freedom questions 1.
why did settlers believe that the right to take possession of western lands and use them as they saw fit was an essential part of american freedom.
why did this same freedom not apply to the native americans already on the land.
james madison argued that liberty may be endangered by the abuses of liberty as well as the abuse of power explain what madison meant and how this statement affected the ideas of freedom for the participants at the constitutional convention.
why and how did the framers of the constitution design a government that protected slavery and its advocates.
how important was the bill of rights at the time it was enacted and how important is it now.
why does the constitution never use the word slavery.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e land ordinances of 1784 and 1785 pp.
262 263 debates surrounding the constitutional convention shayss rebellion p 265 interests at stake northwest ordinance of 1787 p 266 issue resolution big v small states representation in congress virginia plan new jersey plan proportional representation in house equal representation in senate slave v non slave states size of population in determining proportional representation when to stop the slave trade three fifths clause twenty years after ratification congress could ban the slave trade advocates of strong v weak central government preventing one branch of the government from dominating the others preventing the federal government from dominating state governments separation of powers division of powers common people v wealthy elite the role of citizens in the new government voters excluded from direct election of senate and president international commerce p 266 checks and balances p 269 separation of powers p 269 high crimes and misdemeanors p 270 three fifths clause p 270 the federalist p 273 anti federalists p 275 bill of rights p 275 civic nationalism p 282 ethnic nationalism p 282 miami confederacy p 285 battle of fallen timbers p 285 treaty of greenville p 285 annuity system p 285 gradual emancipation p 286 letters from an american farmer p 286 open immigration p 286 notes on the state of virginia p 287 c hapter 8 inauguration of george washington french revolution begins bank of the united states report on manufactures 1791 haitian revolution sarah mortons the african chief mary wollstonecrafts a vindication of the rights of woman thomas paines rights of man washingtons neutrality proclamation first federal fugitive slave law jays treaty whiskey rebellion inauguration of john adams xyz affair alien and sedition acts john friess rebellion gabriels rebellion inauguration of thomas jefferson louisiana purchase marbury v madison 1804 lewis and clark expedition embargo act inauguration of james madison battle of tippecanoe 1812 war of 1812 hartford convention treaty of ghent battle of new orleans securing the republic 1790 1815 politics in an age of passion hamiltons program the emergence of opposition the jefferson hamilton bargain the impact of the french revolution political parties the whiskey rebellion the republican party an expanding public sphere the democratic republican societies the rights of women women and the republic the adams presidency the election of 1796 the reign of witches the virginia and kentucky resolutions the revolution of 1800 slavery and politics the haitian revolution gabriels rebellion jefferson in power judicial review the louisiana purchase lewis and clark incorporating louisiana the barbary wars the embargo madison and pressure for war the second war of independence the indian response tecumsehs vision the war of 1812 the wars aftermath the end of the federalist party this colorful image from around the time of the war of 1812 contains numerous symbols of freedom among them the goddess of liberty with her liberty cap a broken chain at the sailors feet the fallen crown under his left foot a broken royal scepter and the sailor himself since english interference with american shipping was one of the wars causes.
f ocus q uestions what issues made the politics of the 1790s so divisive.
how did competing views of freedom and global events promote the political divisions of the 1790s.
what were the achievements and failures of jeffersons presidency.
what were the causes and significant results of the war of 1812.
an early american coin bearing an image of liberty and the word itself as directed by congress in a 1792 law.
l o n april 30 1789 in new york city the nations temporary capital george washington became the first president under the new constitution.
all sixty nine electors had awarded him their votes.
dressed in a plain suit of superfine american broad cloth rather than european finery washington took the oath of office on the balcony of federal hall before a large crowd that reacted with loud and repeated shouts of approval.
he then retreated inside to deliver his inaugural address before members of congress and other dignitaries.
washingtons speech expressed the revolutionary generations conviction that it had embarked on an experiment of enormous historical importance whose outcome was by no means certain.
the preservation of the sacred fire of liberty and the destiny of the republican model of government washington proclaimed depended on the success of the american experiment in self government.
most americans seemed to agree that freedom was the special genius of american institutions.
in a resolution congratulating washington on his inauguration the house of representatives observed that he had been chosen by the freest people on the face of the earth when the time came to issue the nations first coins congress directed that they bear the image not of the head of state as would be the case in a monarchy but an impression emblematic of liberty with the word itself prominently displayed.
american leaders believed that the success of the new government depended above all on maintaining political harmony.
they were especially anxious to avoid the emergence of organized political parties which had already appeared in several states.
parties were considered divisive and disloyal.
they serve to organize faction washington would later declare and to substitute the aims of a small but artful minority for the will of the nation the constitution makes no mention of political parties and the original method of electing the president assumes that candidates will run as individuals not on a party ticket otherwise the second place finisher would not have become vice president.
nonetheless national political parties quickly arose.
originating in congress they soon spread to the general populace.
instead of harmony the 1790s became in the words of one historian an age of passion with each party questioning the loyalty of the other and lambasting its opponent in the most extreme terms.
political rhetoric became inflamed because the stakes seemed so high nothing less than the legacy of the revolution the new nations future and the survival of american freedom.
what issues made the politics of the 1790s so divisive.
p o l i t i c s i n a n a g e o f pa s s i o n president washington provided a much needed symbol of national unity.
having retired to private life after the war of independence despite some army officers suggestion that he set himself up as a dictator he was a model of self sacrificing republican virtue.
his vice president john adams was widely respected as one of the main leaders in the drive for independence.
washington brought into his cabinet some of the new nations most prominent political leaders including thomas jefferson as secretary of state and alexander hamilton to head the treasury department.
he also appointed a supreme court of six members headed by john jay of new york.
but harmonious government proved short lived.
h a m i lt o n s program political divisions first surfaced over the financial plan developed by secretary of the treasury hamilton in 1790 and 1791.
hamiltons immediate aims were to establish the nations financial stability bring to the governments support the countrys most powerful financial interests and encourage economic development.
his long term goal was to make the united states a major commercial and military power.
hamiltons model was great britain.
the goal of national greatness he believed could never be realized if the government suffered from the same weaknesses as under the articles of confederation.
hamiltons program had five parts.
the first step was to establish the new nations credit worthiness that is to create conditions under which persons would loan money to the government by purchasing its bonds confident that they would be repaid.
hamilton proposed that the federal government assume responsibility for paying off at its full face value the national debt inherited from the war of independence as well as outstanding debts of the states.
second he called for the creation of a new national debt.
the old debts would be replaced by new interest bearing bonds issued to the governments creditors.
this would give men of economic substance a stake in promoting the new nations stability since the stronger and more economically secure the federal government the more likely it would be to pay its debts.
the third part of hamiltons program called for the creation of a bank of the united states modeled on the bank of england to serve as the nations main financial agent.
a private corporation rather than a branch of the government it would hold public funds issue bank notes that would serve as currency and make loans to the government when necessary all the while returning a tidy profit to its stockholders.
fourth to raise revenue hamilton proposed a tax on producers of whiskey.
finally in a report on manufactures delivered to congress in december 1791 hamilton called for the imposition of a tariff a tax on imported foreign goods and government subsidies to encourage the development of factories that could manufacture products currently purchased from abroad.
privately hamilton promoted an unsuccessful effort to build an industrial city at present day paterson new jersey.
he also proposed the creation of a national army to deal with uprisings like shayss rebellion.
liberty and washington painted by an unknown artist around 1800 depicts a female figure of liberty placing a wreath on a bust of the first president.
she carries an american flag and stands on a royal crown which has been thrown to the ground.
in the background is a liberty cap.
washington had died in 1799 and was now immortalized as a symbol of freedom independence and national pride.
6 the revolution within americans have frequently defined the idea of freedom in relation to its opposite which in the eighteenth century meant the highly unequal societies of the old world.
this engraving the coronation of louis xvi of france reveals the splendor of the royal court but also illustrates the world of fixed unequal classes and social privilege repudiated by american revolutionaries.
democratizing freedom expanding the political nation with liberty and equality as their rallying cries previously marginalized groups advanced their demands.
long accepted relations of dependency and restrictions on freedom suddenly appeared illegitimate a process not intended by most of the leading patriots.
in political social and religious life americans challenged the previous domination by a privileged few.
in the end the revolution did not undo the obedience to which male heads of household were entitled from their wives and children and at least in the southern states their slaves.
for free men however the democratization of freedom was dramatic.
nowhere was this more evident than in challenges to the traditional limitation of political participation to those who owned property.
in the political thought of the eighteenth century democracy had several meanings.
one derived from the writings of aristotle defined democracy as a system in which the entire people governed directly.
however this was thought to mean mob rule.
another definition viewed democracy as the condition of primitive societies which was not appropriate for the complex modern world.
british thinkers sometimes used the word when referring to the house of commons the democratic branch of a mixed government.
yet another understanding revolved less around the structure of government than the fact that a government served the interests of the people rather than an elite.
in the wake of the american revolution the term came into wider use to express the popular aspirations for greater equality inspired by the struggle for independence.
how did equality become a stronger component of american freedom after the revolution.
we are all from the cobbler up to the senator become politicians declared a boston letter writer in 1774.
throughout the colonies election campaigns became freewheeling debates on the fundamentals of government.
universal male suffrage religious toleration and even the abolition of slavery were discussed not only by the educated elite but by artisans small farmers and laborers now emerging as a self conscious element in politics.
in many colonies turned states the militia composed largely of members of the lower orders became a school of political democracy its members demanded the right to elect all their officers and to vote for public officials whether or not they met age and property qualifications.
they thereby established the tradition that service in the army enabled excluded groups to stake a claim to full citizenship.
the revolution in p e n n s y lva n i a the revolutions radical potential was more evident in pennsylvania than in any other state.
elsewhere the established leadership either embraced independence by the spring of 1776 or split into pro british and pro independence factions in new york for example the livingstons and their supporters ended up as patriots the de lanceys as loyalists.
but in pennsylvania nearly the entire prewar elite opposed independence fearing that severing the tie with britain would lead to rule by the rabble and to attacks on property.
the vacuum of political leadership opened the door for the rise of a new pro independence grouping based on the artisan and lower class communities of philadelphia and organized in extralegal committees and the local militia.
their leaders included thomas paine the author of common sense benjamin rush a local physician timothy matlack the son of a local brewer and thomas young who had already been involved in the sons of liberty in albany and boston.
as a group these were men of modest wealth who stood outside the merchant elite had little political influence before 1776 and believed strongly in democratic reform.
paine and young had only recently arrived in philadelphia.
they formed a temporary alliance with supporters of independence in the second continental congress then meeting in philadelphia who disapproved of their strong belief in equality but hoped to move pennsylvania toward a break with britain.
as the public sphere expanded far beyond its previous boundaries equality became the rallying cry of pennsylvanias radicals.
they particularly attacked property qualifications for voting.
god gave mankind freedom by nature declared the anonymous author of the pamphlet the people the best governors and made every man equal to his neighbors the people therefore were the best guardians of their own liberties and every free man should be eligible to vote and hold office.
in june 1776 a broadside a printed sheet posted in public places warned citizens to distrust great and over grown rich men who were inclined to be framing distinctions in society three months after independence pennsylvania adopted a new state constitution that sought to institutionalize democracy by concentrating power in a one house legislature elected annually by all men over age twenty one who paid taxes.
it abolished the office of governor dispensed with property qualifications for officeholding and provided that c h.
6 the revolution within democratizing freedom schools with low fees be established in every county.
it also included clauses guaranteeing freedom of speech and of writing and religious liberty.
the john dickinsons copy of the pennsylvania constitution of 1776 with handwritten proposals for changes.
dickinson one of the more conservative advocates of independence felt the new state constitution was far too democratic.
he crossed out a provision that all free men should be eligible to hold office and another declaring the people not bound by laws that did not promote the common good new constitutions like pennsylvania every state adopted a new constitution in the aftermath of independence.
nearly all americans now agreed that their governments must be republics meaning that their authority rested on the consent of the governed and that there would be no king or hereditary aristocracy.
the essence of a republic paine wrote was not the particular form of government but its object the public good but as to how a republican government should be structured so as to promote the public good there was much disagreement.
pennsylvanias new constitution reflected the belief that since the people had a single set of interests a single legislative house was sufficient to represent it.
in part to counteract what he saw as pennsylvanias excessive radicalism john adams in 1776 published thoughts on government which insisted that the new constitutions should create balanced governments whose structure would reflect the division of society between the wealthy represented in the upper house and ordinary men who would control the lower.
a powerful governor and judiciary would ensure that neither class infringed on the liberty of the other.
adamss call for two house legislatures was followed by every state except pennsylvania georgia and vermont.
but only his own state massachusetts gave the governor an effective veto over laws passed by the legislature.
americans had come to believe that excessive royal authority had undermined british liberty.
they had long resented efforts by appointed governors to challenge the power of colonial assemblies.
they preferred power to rest with the legislature.
the right to vote the issue of requirements for voting and officeholding proved far more contentious.
conservative patriots struggled valiantly to reassert the rationale for the old voting restrictions.
it was ridiculous wrote one pamphleteer to think that every silly clown and illiterate mechanic artisan deserved a voice in government.
to john adams as conservative on the internal affairs of america as he had been radical on independence freedom and equality were opposites.
men without property he believed had no judgment of their own and the removal of property qualifications therefore would confound and destroy all distinctions and prostrate all ranks to one common level eliminating traditional social ranks however was precisely the aim of the eras radical democrats including the most influential promoter of independence thomas paine.
the provisions of the new state constitutions reflected the balance of power between advocates of internal change and those who feared excessive democracy.
the least democratization occurred in the southern states whose highly deferential political traditions enabled the landed gentry to retain their control of political affairs.
in virginia and south carolina the new constitutions retained property qualifications for voting and authorized the gentry dominated legislature to choose the governor.
how did equality become a stronger component of american freedom after the revolution.
maryland combined a low property qualification for voting with high requirements for officeholding including 5 000 a veritable fortune for the governor.
the most democratic new constitutions moved much of the way toward the idea of voting as an entitlement rather than a privilege but they generally stopped short of universal suffrage even for free men.
vermonts constitution of 1777 was the only one to sever voting completely from financial considerations eliminating not only property qualifications but the requirement that voters pay taxes.
pennsylvanias constitution no longer required ownership of property but it retained the taxpaying qualification.
as a result it enfranchised nearly all of the states free male population but left a small number mainly paupers and domestic servants still barred from voting.
nonetheless even with the taxpaying requirement it represented a dramatic departure from the colonial practice of restricting the suffrage to those who could claim to be economically independent.
it elevated personal liberty in the words of one essayist to a position more important than property ownership in defining the boundaries of the political nation.
democratizing government overall the revolution led to a great expansion of the right to vote.
by the 1780s with the exceptions of virginia maryland and new york a large majority of the adult white male population could meet voting requirements.
new jerseys new state constitution of 1776 granted the suffrage to all inhabitants who met a property qualification.
until the state added the word male along with white in 1807 property owning women mostly widows did cast ballots.
the new constitutions also expanded the number of legislative seats with the result that numerous men of lesser property assumed political office.
the debate over the suffrage would of course continue for many decades.
for white men the process of democratization did not run its course until the age of jackson for women and nonwhites it would take much longer.
even during the revolution however in the popular language of politics if not in law freedom and an individuals right to vote had become interchangeable.
the suffrage declared a 1776 petition of disenfranchised north carolinians was a right essential to and inseparable from freedom without it americans could not enjoy equal liberty a proposed new constitution for massachusetts was rejected by a majority of the towns in 1778 partly because it contained a property qualification for voting.
all men were born equally free and independent declared the town of lenox.
how could they defend their life and liberty and property without a voice in electing public officials.
a new draft which retained a substantial requirement for voting in state elections but allowed virtually all men to vote for town officers was approved in 1780.
and every state except south carolina provided for annual legislative elections to ensure that representatives remained closely accountable to the people.
henceforth political freedom would mean not only as in the past a peoples right to be ruled by their chosen representatives but also an individuals right to political participation.
6 the revolution within toward religious toleration t o wa r d r e l i g i o u s t o l e r at i o n a 1771 image of new york city lists some of the numerous churches visible from the new jersey shore illustrating the diversity of religions practiced in the city.
as remarkable as the expansion of political freedom was the revolutions impact on american religion.
religious toleration declared one virginia patriot was part of the common cause of freedom in britain dissenters protestants who belonged to other denominations than the anglican church had long invoked the language of liberty in seeking repeal of the laws that imposed various disabilities on non anglicans.
few however included catholics in their ringing calls for religious freedom.
we have already seen that some colonies like rhode island and pennsylvania had long made a practice of toleration.
but freedom of worship before the revolution arose more from the reality of religious pluralism than from a well developed theory of religious liberty.
apart from rhode island new england had little homegrown experience of religious pluralism.
indeed authorities in england had occasionally pressed the regions rulers to become more tolerant.
before the revolution most colonies supported religious institutions with public funds and discriminated in voting and officeholding against catholics jews and even dissenting protestants.
on the very eve of independence baptists who refused to pay taxes to support local congregational ministers were still being jailed in massachusetts.
while our country are pleading so high for liberty the victims complained yet they are denying of it to their neighbors catholic americans the war of independence weakened the deep tradition of american anticatholicism.
the first continental congress denounced the quebec act of 1774 which as noted in the previous chapter allowed canadian catholics to worship freely as part of a plot to establish popery in north america.
but a year later when the second continental congress decided on an ill fated invasion of canada it invited the inhabitants of quebec to join in the struggle against britain assuring them that protestants and catholics could readily cooperate.
however predominantly catholic quebec preferred being ruled from distant london rather than from boston or philadelphia.
in 1778 the united states formed an alliance with france a catholic nation.
benedict arnold justified his treason in part by saying that an alliance with the enemy of the protestant faith was too much for him to bear.
but the indispensable assistance provided by france to american victory strengthened the idea that catholics had a role to play in the newly independent nation.
in fact this represented a marked departure from the traditional notion that the full rights of englishmen only applied to protestants.
when americas first roman catholic bishop james carroll of maryland visited boston in 1791 he received a cordial welcome.
how did the expansion of religious liberty after the revolution reflect the new american ideal of freedom.
the founders and religion the end of british rule immediately threw into question the privileged position enjoyed by the anglican church in many colonies.
in virginia for example backcountry scotch irish presbyterian farmers demanded relief from taxes supporting the official anglican church.
the free exercise of our rights of conscience one patriotic meeting resolved formed an essential part of our liberties many of the leaders of the revolution considered it essential for the new nation to shield itself from the unruly passions and violent conflicts that religious differences had inspired during the past three centuries.
men like thomas jefferson john adams james madison and alexander hamilton believed religion necessary as a foundation of public morality.
but they viewed religious doctrines through the enlightenment lens of rationalism and skepticism.
they believed in a benevolent creator but not in supernatural interventions into the affairs of men.
jefferson wrote a version of the bible and a life of jesus that insisted that while jesus had lived a deeply moral life he was not divine and performed no miracles.
in discussing the natural history of the blue ridge mountains in his book notes on the state of virginia he rejected the biblical account of creation in favor of a prolonged process of geological change.
separating church and state the drive to separate church and state brought together deists like jefferson who hoped to erect a wall of separation that would free politics and the exercise of the intellect from religious control with members of evangelical sects who sought to protect religion from the corrupting embrace of government.
religious leaders continued to adhere to the traditional definition of christian liberty submitting to gods will and leading a moral life but increasingly felt this could be achieved without the support of government.
christs kingdom as isaac backus the baptist leader put it was not of this world the movement toward religious freedom received a major impetus during the revolutionary era.
throughout the new nation states disestablished their established churches that is deprived them of public funding and special legal privileges although in some cases they appropriated money for the general support of protestant denominations.
the seven state constitutions that began with declarations of rights all declared a commitment to the free exercise of religion to be sure every state but new york whose constitution of 1777 established complete religious liberty kept intact colonial provisions barring jews from voting and holding public office.
seven states limited officeholding to protestants.
massachusetts retained its congregationalist establishment well into the nineteenth century.
its new constitution declared church attendance compulsory while guaranteeing freedom of individual worship.
it would not end public financial support for religious institutions until 1833.
throughout the country however catholics gained the right to worship without persecution.
marylands constitution of 1776 restored to the large catholic population the civil and political rights that had been denied them for nearly a century.
6 the revolution within a draft of thomas jeffersons virginia bill for establishing religious freedom published in 1779 in order to encourage public discussion of the issue.
the bill was enacted in 1786.
toward religious toleration jefferson and religious liberty in virginia thomas jefferson drew up a bill for establishing religious freedom which was introduced in the house of burgesses in 1779 and adopted after considerable controversy in 1786.
i have sworn on the altar of god he would later write eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man jefferson viewed established churches as a major example of such despotism and as his statement reveals believed that religious liberty served gods will.
jeffersons bill whose preamble declared that god hath created the mind free eliminated religious requirements for voting and officeholding and government financial support for churches and barred the state from forcing individuals to adopt one or how did the expansion of religious liberty after the revolution reflect the new american ideal of freedom.
another religious outlook.
late in life jefferson would list this measure along with the declaration of independence and the founding of the university of virginia as the three accomplishments leaving out his two terms as president for which he wished to be remembered.
religious liberty became the model for the revolutionary generations definition of rights as private matters that must be protected from governmental interference.
in an overwhelmingly christian though not necessarily churchgoing nation the separation of church and state drew a sharp line between public authority and a realm defined as private reinforcing the idea that rights exist as restraints on the power of government.
it also offered a new justification for the idea of the united states as a beacon of liberty.
in successfully opposing a virginia tax for the general support of christian churches james madison insisted that one reason for the complete separation of church and state was to reinforce the principle that the new nation offered asylum to the persecuted and oppressed of every nation and religion the revolution and the churches thus the revolution enhanced the diversity of american christianity and expanded the idea of religious liberty.
but even as the separation of church and state created the social and political space that allowed all kinds of religious institutions to flourish the culture of individual rights of which that separation was a part threatened to undermine church authority.
one example was the experience of the moravian brethren who had emigrated from germany to north carolina on the eve of independence.
to the dismay of the moravian elders younger members of the community like so many other americans of the revolutionary generation insisted on asserting their alleged freedom and human rights some became unruly and refused to obey the orders of town leaders.
many rejected the communitys tradition of arranged marriages insisting on choosing their own husbands and wives.
to the elders the idea of individual liberty which they called disparagingly the american freedom was little more than an opportunity for temptation a threat to the spirit of self sacrifice and communal loyalty essential to christian liberty.
but despite such fears the revolution did not end the influence of religion on american society quite the reverse.
american churches in the words of one presbyterian leader learned to adapt to living at a time when a spirit of liberty prevails thanks to religious freedom the early republic witnessed an amazing proliferation of religious denominations.
the most well established churches anglican presbyterian and congregationalist found themselves constantly challenged by upstarts like free will baptists and universalists.
today even as debate continues over the ezra stiles the president of yale college drew this sketch of a flag in his diary on april 24 1783 shortly after congress ratified the treaty of paris.
thirteen stars surround the coat of arms of pennsylvania.
the banner text illustrates the linkage among virtue liberty and american independence.
6 the revolution within defining economic freedom proper relationship between spiritual and political authority more than 1 300 religions are practiced in the united states.
a the self an engraving in the columbian magazine 1789 illustrates various admirable qualities radiating outward from the virtuous citizen including love for ones family community and nation.
virtuous citizenry despite the separation of church and state colonial leaders were not hostile to religion.
most were devout christians and even deists who attended no organized church believed religious values reinforced the moral qualities necessary for a republic to prosper.
public authority continued to support religious values in laws barring non christians from office and in the continued prosecution of blasphemy and breaches of the sabbath.
pennsylvanias new democratic constitution required citizens to acknowledge the existence of god and it directed the legislature to enact laws for the prevention of vice and immorality in the nineteenth century pennsylvanias lawmakers took this mandate so seriously that the state became as famous for its laws against swearing and desecrating the sabbath as it had been in colonial times for religious freedom.
patriot leaders worried about the character of future citizens especially how to encourage the quality of virtue the ability to sacrifice self interest for the public good.
some like jefferson john adams and benjamin rush put forward plans for the establishment of free state supported public schools.
these would instruct future citizens in what adams called the principles of freedom equipping them for participation in the nowexpanded public sphere and for the wise election of representatives.
a broad diffusion of knowledge was essential for a government based on the will of the people to survive and for america to avoid the fixed class structure of europe.
no nation jefferson wrote could expect to be ignorant and free defining economic freedom toward free labor in economic as well as political and religious affairs the revolution rewrote the definition of freedom.
in colonial america slavery was one part of a broad spectrum of kinds of unfree labor.
in the generation after independence with the rapid decline of indentured servitude and apprenticeship and the transformation of paid domestic service into an occupation for blacks and white females the halfway houses between slavery and freedom disappeared at least for white men.
the decline of these forms of labor had many causes.
wage workers became more available as indentured servants completed their terms of required labor and considerable numbers of servants and apprentices took advantage of the turmoil of the revolution to escape from their masters.
the democratization of freedom contributed to these changes.
the lack of freedom inherent in apprenticeship and servitude increasingly came how did the definition of economic freedom change after the revolution and who benefited from the changes.
to be seen as incompatible with republican citizenship.
ebenezer fox a young apprentice on a massachusetts farm later recalled how he and other youths made a direct application of the doctrines we heard daily in relation to the oppression of the mother country to our own circumstance.
i thought that i was doing myself a great injustice by remaining in bondage when i ought to go free fox became one of many apprentices during the revolution who decided to run away or as he put it to liberate myself on the eve of the battles of lexington and concord in 1775 fox and a friend set off for rhode island.
after briefly working as a sailor fox still a teenager joined the continental army.
in 1784 a group of respectable new yorkers released a newly arrived shipload of indentured servants on the grounds that their status was contrary to.
the idea of liberty this country has so happily established by 1800 indentured servitude had all but disappeared from the united states.
this development sharpened the distinction between freedom and slavery and between a northern economy relying on what would come to be called free labor that is working for wages or owning a farm or shop and a southern economy ever more heavily dependent on the labor of slaves.
the soul of a republic americans of the revolutionary generation were preoccupied with the social conditions of freedom.
could a republic survive with a sizable dependent class of citizens.
a general and tolerably equal distribution of landed property proclaimed the educator and newspaper editor noah webster is the whole basis of national freedom equality he added was the very soul of a republic it outstripped in importance liberty of the press trial by jury and other palladia of freedom even a conservative like john adams who distrusted the eras democratic upsurge hoped that every member of society could acquire land so that the multitude may be view from bushongo tavern an engraving from the columbian magazine 1788 depicts the landscape of york county pennsylvania exemplifying the kind of rural independence many americans thought essential to freedom.
6 the revolution within defining economic freedom possessed of small estates and the new nation could avoid the emergence of fixed and unequal social classes.
at the revolutions radical edge some patriots believed that government had a responsibility to limit accumulations of property in the name of equality.
to most free americans however equality meant equal opportunity rather than equality of condition.
many leaders of the revolution nevertheless assumed that in the exceptional circumstances of the new world with its vast areas of available land and large population of independent farmers and artisans the natural workings of society would produce justice liberty and equality.
like many other americans of his generation thomas jefferson believed that to lack economic resources was to lack freedom.
jefferson favored a limited state but he also believed that government could help create freedoms institutional framework.
his proudest achievements included laws passed by virginia abolishing entail the limitation of inheritance to a specified line of heirs to keep an estate within a family and primogeniture the practice of passing a familys land entirely to the eldest son.
these measures he believed would help to prevent the rise of a future aristocracy to the same end jefferson proposed to award fifty acres of land to every person of full age who did not already possess it another way government could enhance the liberty of its subjects.
of course the land jefferson hoped would secure american liberty would have to come from indians.
the politics of inflation the revolution thrust to the forefront of politics debates over whether local or national authorities should take steps to bolster household independence and protect americans livelihoods by limiting price increases.
economic dislocations sharpened the controversy.
to finance the war congress issued hundreds of millions of dollars in paper money.
coupled with wartime disruption of agriculture and trade and the hoarding of goods by some americans hoping to profit from shortages this produced an enormous increase in prices.
the country charged a letter to a philadelphia newspaper in 1778 had been reduced to the brink of ruin by the infamous practices of monopolizers hunger the writer warned will break through stone walls between 1776 and 1779 more than thirty incidents took place in which crowds confronted merchants accused of holding scarce goods off the market.
often they seized stocks of food and sold them at the traditional just price a form of protest common in eighteenth century england.
in one such incident a crowd of 100 massachusetts women accused an eminent wealthy stingy merchant of hoarding coffee opened his warehouse and carted off the goods.
a large concourse of men wrote abigail adams stood amazed silent spectators of the whole transaction a broadside printed by the extralegal philadelphia price control committee setting the retail prices of various goods such as coffee sugar and rum.
advocates of a free market strongly opposed the committees efforts.
the debate over free trade in 1779 with inflation totally out of control in one month prices in philadelphia jumped 45 percent congress urged states to adopt measures to fix wages and prices.
the policy embodied the belief that the task of republican government was to promote the public good not individuals self interest.
bitter comments appeared in the philadelphia press about the how did the definition of economic freedom change after the revolution and who benefited from the changes.
citys elite expending huge sums on public dinners and other extravaganzas while many in the city were destitute of the necessities of life but when a committee of safety tried to enforce price controls it met spirited opposition from merchants and other advocates of a free market.
in opposition to the traditional view that men should sacrifice for the public good believers in freedom of trade argued that economic development arose from economic self interest.
just as newton had revealed the inner workings of the natural universe so the social world also followed unchanging natural laws among them that supply and demand regulated the prices of goods.
adam smiths great treatise on economics the wealth of nations published in england in 1776 was beginning to become known in the united states.
smiths argument that the invisible hand of the free market directed economic life more effectively and fairly than governmental intervention offered intellectual justification for those who believed that the economy should be left to regulate itself.
advocates of independence had envisioned america released from the british navigation acts trading freely with all the world.
opponents of price controls advocated free trade at home as well.
let trade be as free as air wrote one merchant.
natural liberty would regulate prices.
here were two competing conceptions of economic freedom one based on the traditional view that the interests of the community took precedence over the property rights of individuals the other that unregulated economic freedom would produce social harmony and public gain.
after 1779 the latter view gained ascendancy.
in 1780 robert morris a philadelphia merchant and banker became director of congressional fiscal policy.
state and federal efforts to regulate prices ceased.
but the clash between these two visions of economic freedom would continue long after independence had been achieved.
yield to the mighty current of american freedom so a member of the south carolina legislature implored his colleagues in 1777.
the current of freedom swept away not only british authority but also the principle of hereditary rule the privileges of established churches long standing habits of deference and hierarchy and old limits on the political nation.
yet in other areas the tide of freedom encountered obstacles that did not yield as easily to its powerful flow.
the limits of liberty colonial loyalists not all americans shared in the democratization of freedom brought on by the american revolution.
loyalists those who retained their allegiance to the crown experienced the conflict and its aftermath as a loss of liberty.
many leading loyalists had supported american resistance in the 1760s but drew back at the prospect of independence and war.
loyalists included some of the most prominent americans and some of the most humble.
altogether an estimated 20 to 25 percent of free americans remained loyal to the british and nearly 20 000 fought on their side.
at some points in the war loyalists serving with the british outnumbered washingtons army.
there were loyalists in every colony but they were most numerous in new york pennsylvania and the backcountry of the carolinas and georgia.
6 the revolution within the limits of liberty some were wealthy men whose livelihoods depended on close working relationships with britain lawyers merchants anglican ministers and imperial officials.
many feared anarchy in the event of an american victory.
liberty one wrote can have no existence without obedience to the laws the struggle for independence heightened existing tensions between ethnic groups and social classes within the colonies.
some loyalist ethnic minorities like highland scots in north carolina feared that local majorities would infringe on their freedom to enjoy cultural autonomy.
in the south many backcountry farmers who had long resented the domination of public affairs by wealthy planters sided with the british.
so did tenants on the new york estates of patriot landlords like the livingston family.
robert livingston had signed the declaration of independence.
when the army of general burgoyne approached livingstons manor in 1777 tenants rose in revolt hoping the british would confiscate his land and distribute it among themselves.
their hopes were dashed by burgoynes defeat at saratoga.
in the south numerous slaves sided with the british hoping an american defeat would bring them freedom.
the a 1780 british cartoon commenting on the cruel fate of american loyalists.
proindependence colonists are likened to savage indians.
loyalists plight the war of independence was in some respects a civil war among americans.
this country wrote a german colonel fighting with the british is the scene of the most cruel events.
neighbors are on opposite sides children are against their fathers freedom of expression is often a casualty of war and many americans were deprived of basic rights in the name of liberty.
after dr abner beebe of east haddam connecticut spoke very freely in favor of the british a mob attacked his house and destroyed his gristmill.
beebe himself was assaulted stripped naked and hot pitch tar was poured upon him the new state governments or in other instances crowds of patriots suppressed newspapers thought to be loyal to britain.
pennsylvania arrested and seized the property of quakers mennonites and moravians pacifist denominations who refused to bear arms because of their religious beliefs.
with the approval of congress many states required residents to take oaths of allegiance to the new nation.
those who refused were denied the right to vote and in many cases forced into exile.
the flames of discord wrote one british observer are sprouting from the seeds of liberty some wealthy loyalists saw their land confiscated and sold at auction.
twenty eight estates belonging to new hampshire governor john wentworth and his family were seized as were the holdings of great new york loyalist landlords like the de lancey and philipse families.
most of the buyers of this land were merchants lawyers and established landowners.
unable to afford the purchase price tenants had no choice but to continue to labor for the new owners.
h o w d i d t h e r e v o l u t i o n d i m i n i s h t h e f r e e d o m s o f b o t h l o y a l i s t s a n d na t i v e a m e r i c a n s.
loyalism in the american revolution hudson bay newfoundland st.
p i e rre mi q u e lon fra n ce lower canada es lak maine part of ma uper i or upper canada on hu r l a k e mi chig ke an la l o lak e ntari o ie er halifax nova scotia new hampshire boston new york pennsylvania massachusetts rhode island connecticut new jersey delaware spanish louisiana virginia maryland a t l an t i c o c e an north carolina be rm u d a south carolina charleston georgia florida gulf of mexico ba ha m a s 400 miles 400 kilometers spanish cuba strongly loyalist colonists loyalist or neutral indians neutral colonists strong patriot support other british territory the revolutionary war was in some ways a civil war within the colonies.
there were loyalists in every colony they were most numerous in new york and north and south carolina.
6 the revolution within the limits of liberty when the war ended as many as 100 000 loyalists including 20 000 slaves were banished from the united states or emigrated voluntarily mostly to britain canada or the west indies rather than live in an independent united states.
but for those who remained hostility proved to be short lived.
in the treaty of paris of 1783 as noted in chapter 5 americans pledged to end the persecution of loyalists by state and local governments and to restore property seized during the war.
american leaders believed the new nation needed to establish an international reputation for fairness and civility.
states soon repealed their test oaths for voting and officeholding.
loyalists who did not leave the country were quickly reintegrated into american society although despite the promise of the treaty of paris confiscated loyalist property was not returned.
the indians revolution another group for whom american independence spelled a loss of freedom the indians was less fortunate.
despite the proclamation of 1763 discussed in chapter 4 colonists had continued to move westward during the 1760s and early 1770s leading indian tribes to complain of intrusions on their land.
lord dunmore virginias royal governor observed in 1772 that he had found it impossible to restrain the americans.
they do not conceive that government has any right to forbid their taking possession of a vast tract of country or to force them to honor treaties with indians.
kentucky the principal hunting ground of southern cherokees and numerous ohio valley indians became a flash point of conflict among settlers land speculators and native americans with the faraway british government seeking in vain to impose order.
many patriot leaders including george washington patrick henry and thomas jefferson were deeply involved in western land speculation.
washington himself had acquired over 60 000 acres of land in western pennsylvania after the seven years war by purchasing land vouchers a form of soldiers wages from his men at discount rates.
indeed british efforts to restrain land speculation west of the line specified by the proclamation of 1763 had been one of the many grievances of virginias revolutionary generation.
about 200 000 native americans lived east of the mississippi river in 1790.
like white americans indians divided in allegiance during the war of independence.
some like the stockbridge tribe in massachusetts suffered heavy losses fighting the british.
many tribes tried to maintain neutrality only to see themselves break into pro american and pro british factions.
most of the iroquois nations sided with the british but the oneida joined the americans.
despite strenuous efforts to avoid conflict members of the iroquois confederacy for the first time faced each other in battle.
after the war the oneida submitted to congress claims for losses suffered during the war including sheep hogs kettles frying pans plows and pewter plates evidence of how fully they had been integrated into the market economy.
in the south younger cherokee leaders joined the british while older chiefs tended to favor the americans.
other southern tribes like the choctaw and creek remained loyal to the crown.
among the grievances listed by jefferson in the declaration of independence was britains enlisting savages to fight on its side.
but in the h o w d i d t h e r e v o l u t i o n d i m i n i s h t h e f r e e d o m s o f b o t h l o y a l i s t s a n d na t i v e a m e r i c a n s.
war that raged throughout the western frontier savagery was not confined to either combatant.
in the ohio country the british encouraged indian allies to burn frontier farms and settlements.
for their part otherwise humane patriot leaders ignored the traditional rules of warfare when it came to indians.
william henry drayton a leader of the patriot cause in south carolina and the states chief justice in 1776 advised officers marching against the cherokees to cut up every indian cornfield burn every indian town and enslave all indian captives.
three years later washington dispatched an expedition led by general john sullivan against hostile iroquois with the aim of the total destruction and devastation of their settlements and the capture of as many prisoners of every age and sex as possible after his campaign ended sullivan reported that he had burned forty indian towns destroyed thousands of bushels of corn and uprooted a vast number of fruit trees and vegetable gardens.
many iroquois communities faced starvation.
in the ohio valley as we will see in chapter 7 fighting did not end until the 1790s.
white freedom indian freedom independence created governments democratically accountable to voters who coveted indian land.
indeed to many patriots access to indian land was one of the fruits of american victory.
driving the indians from the ohio valley wrote jefferson would add to the empire of liberty an extensive and fertile country but liberty for whites meant loss of liberty for indians.
the whites were no sooner free themselves a pequot william apess would later write than they turned on the poor indians independence offered the opportunity to complete the process of dispossessing indians of their rich lands in upstate new york the ohio valley and the southern backcountry.
the only hope for the indians jefferson wrote lay in their removal a cartoon depicting a british officer buying the scalps of patriots from indians.
jefferson listed british incitement of indians against the colonists as one of americans grievances in the declaration of independence.
6 the revolution within slavery and the revolution beyond the mississippi even as the war raged americans forced defeated tribes like the cherokee to cede most of their land.
american independence a group of visiting indians told the spanish governor at st louis was the greatest blow that could have been dealt us the treaty of paris marked the culmination of a century in which the balance of power in eastern north america shifted away from the indians and toward white americans.
the displacement of british power to canada coming twenty years after the departure of the french left indians with seriously diminished white support.
some indian leaders like joseph brant a young mohawk in upstate new york hoped to create an indian confederacy lying between canada and the new united states.
he sided with the british to try to achieve this goal.
but in the treaty of paris the british abandoned their indian allies agreeing to recognize american sovereignty over the entire region east of the mississippi river completely ignoring the indian presence.
to indians freedom meant defending their own independence and retaining possession of their land.
like other americans they appropriated the language of the revolution and interpreted it according to their own experiences and for their own purposes.
the iroquois declared one spokesman were a free people subject to no power on earth creeks and choctaws denied having done anything to forfeit their independence and natural rights when massachusetts established a system of state guardianship over previously self governing tribes a group of mashpees petitioned the legislature claiming for themselves the rights of man and complaining of this infringement of freedom freedom had not played a major part in indians vocabulary before the revolution.
by the early nineteenth century dictionaries of indian languages for the first time began to include the word.
in a sense indians definition of their rights was becoming americanized.
but there seemed to be no permanent place for the descendants of the continents native population in a new nation bent on creating an empire in the west.
slavery and the revolution while indians experienced american independence as a real threat to their own liberty african americans saw in the ideals of the revolution and the reality of war an opportunity to claim freedom.
when the united states declared its independence in 1776 the slave population had grown to 500 000 about one fifth of the new nations inhabitants.
slaveowning and slave trading were accepted routines of colonial life.
advertisements announcing the sale of slaves and seeking the return of runaways filled colonial newspapers.
sometimes the same issues of patriotic newspapers that published accounts of the activities of the sons of liberty or arguments against the stamp act also contained slave sale notices.
the language of slavery and freedom slavery played a central part in the language of revolution.
apart from liberty it was the word most frequently invoked in the eras legal and what was the impact of the revolution on slavery.
political literature.
eighteenth century writers frequently juxtaposed freedom and slavery as the two extremes of happiness and misery in society yet in the eras debates over british rule slavery was primarily a political category shorthand for the denial of ones personal and political rights by arbitrary government.
those who lacked a voice in public affairs declared a 1769 petition demanding an expansion of the right to vote in britain were enslaved by the eve of independence the contrast between britain a kingdom of slaves and america a country of free men had become a standard part of the language of resistance.
such language was employed without irony even in areas where nearly half the population in fact consisted of slaves.
south carolina one writer declared in 1774 was a sacred land of freedom where it was impossible to believe that slavery shall soon be permitted to erect her throne colonial writers of the 1760s occasionally made a direct connection between slavery as a reality and slavery as a metaphor.
few were as forthright as james otis of massachusetts whose pamphlets did much to popularize the idea that parliament lacked the authority to tax the colonies and regulate their commerce.
freedom otis insisted must be universal what man is or ever was born free if every man is not otis wrote of blacks not as examples of the loss of rights awaiting free americans but as flesh and blood british subjects entitled to all the civil rights of such otis was hardly typical of patriot leaders.
but the presence of hundreds of thousands of slaves powerfully affected the meaning of freedom for the leaders of the american revolution.
in a famous speech to parliament warning against attempts to intimidate the colonies the british statesman edmund burke suggested that familiarity with slavery made colonial leaders unusually sensitive to threats to their own liberties.
where freedom was a privilege not a common right he observed those who are free are by far the most proud and jealous of their freedom on the other hand many british observers could not resist pointing out the colonists apparent hypocrisy.
how is it asked dr samuel johnson that we hear the loudest yelps for liberty from the drivers of negroes obstacles to abolition the contradiction between freedom and slavery seems so self evident that it is difficult today to appreciate the power of the obstacles to abolition.
at the time of the revolution slavery was already an old institution in america.
it existed in every colony and formed the basis of the economy and social structure from maryland southward.
at least 40 percent of virginias population and even higher proportions in georgia and south carolina were slaves.
virtually every founding father owned slaves at one point in his life including not only southern planters but northern merchants lawyers and farmers.
john adams and tom paine were notable exceptions.
advertisement for newly arrived slaves in a savannah newspaper 1774.
even as colonists defended their own liberty against the british the buying and selling of slaves continued.
6 the revolution within slavery and the revolution thomas jefferson owned more than 100 slaves when he wrote of mankinds unalienable right to liberty and everything he cherished in his own manner of life from lavish entertainments to the leisure that made possible the pursuit of arts and sciences ultimately rested on slave labor.
some patriots in fact argued that slavery for blacks made freedom possible for whites.
eliminating the great bulk of the dependent poor from the political nation left the public arena to men of propertied independence.
owning slaves offered a route to the economic autonomy widely deemed necessary for genuine freedom a point driven home by a 1780 virginia law that rewarded veterans of the war of independence with 300 acres of land and a slave.
south carolina and georgia promised every white military volunteer a slave at the wars end.
so too the lockean vision of the political community as a group of individuals contracting together to secure their natural rights could readily be invoked to defend bondage.
nothing was more essential to freedom in this view than the right of self government and the protection of property against outside interference.
these principles suggested that for the government to seize property including slave property against the owners will would be an infringement on liberty.
if government by the consent of the governed formed the essence of political freedom then to require owners to give up their slave property would reduce them to slavery.
the a 1775 notice in the massachusetts spy reporting a resolution of the committees of correspondence of worcester county that advocated the abolition of slavery.
cause of general liberty nonetheless by imparting so absolute a value to liberty and defining freedom as a universal entitlement rather than a set of rights specific to a particular place or people the revolution inevitably raised questions about the status of slavery in the new nation.
before independence there had been little public discussion of the institution even though enlightened opinion in the atlantic world had come to view slavery as morally wrong and economically inefficient a relic of a barbarous past.
as early as 1688 a group of german quakers issued a protest regarding the rights of blacks declaring it as unjust to have them slaves as it is to have other white ones samuel sewall a boston merchant published the selling of joseph in 1700 the first antislavery tract printed in america.
all the sons of adam sewall insisted were entitled to have equal right unto liberty slavery as noted in chapter 4 had initially been banned in georgia although it later came to sustain the rice based plantation economy in that colony.
during the course of the eighteenth century antislavery sentiments had spread among pennsylvanias quakers whose belief that all persons possessed the divine inner light made them particularly receptive.
but it was during the revolutionary era that slavery for the first time became a focus of public debate.
the pennsylvania patriot benjamin rush in 1773 called upon advocates for american liberty to espouse the cause of.
general liberty and warned that slavery was one of those what was the impact of the revolution on slavery.
national crimes that one day would bring national punishment jefferson as mentioned in the previous chapter unsuccessfully tried to include criticism of slavery in the declaration of independence.
although a slaveholder himself in private he condemned slavery as a system that every day imposed on its victims more misery than ages of that which the colonists rose in rebellion to oppose petitions for freedom the revolution inspired widespread hopes that slavery could be removed from american life.
most dramatically slaves themselves appreciated that by defining freedom as a universal right the leaders of the revolution had devised a weapon that could be used against their own bondage.
the language of liberty echoed in slave communities north and south.
living amid freedom but denied its benefits slaves appropriated the patriotic ideology for their own purposes.
the most insistent advocates of freedom as a universal entitlement were african americans who demanded that the leaders of the struggle for independence live up to their self proclaimed creed.
as early as 1766 white charlestonians had been shocked when their opposition to the stamp act inspired a group of blacks to parade about the city crying liberty nine years later the provincial congress of south carolina felt compelled to investigate the high notions of liberty the struggle against britain had inspired among the slaves.
the first concrete steps toward emancipation in revolutionary america were freedom petitions arguments for liberty presented to new englands courts and legislatures in the early 1770s by enslaved africanamericans.
how one such petition asked could america seek release from english tyranny and not seek the same for disadvantaged africans in her midst some slaves sued in court for being illegally detained in slavery the turmoil of war offered other avenues to freedom.
many slaves ran away from their masters and tried to pass as freeborn.
the number of fugitive slave advertisements in colonial newspapers rose dramatically in the 1770s and 1780s.
as one owner put it in accounting for his slave jims escape i believe he has nothing in view but freedom in 1776 the year of american independence lemuel haynes a black member of the massachusetts militia and later a celebrated minister urged that americans extend their conception of freedom.
if liberty were truly an innate principle for all mankind haynes insisted even an african had as equally good a right to his liberty in common with englishmen throughout the revolutionary period petitions pamphlets and sermons by blacks expressed astonishment that white patriots failed to realize that every principle from which america has acted demanded emancipation.
blacks sought to make white americans understand slavery as a concrete reality the denial of all the essential elements of freedom not merely as a metaphor for the loss of political self determination.
petitioning for their freedom in 1773 a group of new england slaves exclaimed we have no property.
we have no wives.
no children.
we have no city.
no country most slaves of the revolutionary era were only one or two generations removed from africa.
they did not need the ideology of the revolution to persuade them that freedom was a birthright the experience of their par c h.
6 the revolution within slavery and the revolution ents and grandparents suggested as much.
my love of freedom wrote the black poet phillis wheatley in 1783 arose from the cruel fate of being snatchd from africs shore.
brought as a slave to boston in 1761 wheatley learned to read and published her first poem in a new england newspaper in 1765 when she was around twelve years old.
the fact that a volume of her poems had to be printed with a testimonial from prominent citizens including patriot leader john hancock affirming that she was in fact the author illustrates that many whites found it difficult to accept the idea of blacks intellectual ability.
yet by invoking the revolutions ideology of liberty to demand their own rights and by defining freedom as a universal entitlement blacks demonstrated how american they had become even as they sought to redefine what american freedom in fact represented.
british a portrait of the poet phillis wheatley 1753 1784.
emancipators as noted in the previous chapter some 5 000 slaves fought for american independence and many thereby gained their freedom.
yet far more slaves obtained liberty from the british.
lord dunmores proclamation of 1775 and the phillipsburgh proclamation of general henry clinton issued four years later offered sanctuary to slaves who escaped to british lines.
numerous signers of the declaration of independence lost slaves as a result.
thirty of thomas jeffersons slaves ran away to the british as did slaves owned by patrick henry and james madison.
all told nearly 100 000 slaves including one quarter of all the slaves in south carolina and onethird of those in georgia deserted their owners and fled to british lines.
this was by far the largest exodus from the plantations until the outbreak of the civil war.
some of these escaped slaves were recaptured as the tide of battle turned in the patriots favor.
but at the wars end some 20 000 were living in three enclaves of british control new york charleston and savannah.
george washington insisted they must be returned.
sir guy carleton the british commander in new york replied that to do so would be a dishonorable violation of the public faith since they had been promised their freedom.
in the end more than 15 000 black men women and children accompanied the british out of the country.
they ended up in nova scotia england and sierra leone a settlement for former slaves from the united states established by the british on the coast of west africa.
some were re enslaved in the west indies.
a number of their stories were indeed remarkable.
harry washington an african born slave of george washington had run away from mount vernon in 1771 but was recaptured.
in 1775 he fled to join lord dunmore and eventually became a corporal in a black british regiment the black pioneers.
he eventually ended up in sierra leone where in 1800 he took part in an unsuccessful uprising by black settlers against the british appointed government.
the issue of compensation for the slaves who departed with the british poisoned relations between britain and the new united states for decades to come.
finally in 1827 britain agreed to make payments to 1 100 americans who claimed they had been improperly deprived of their slave property.
what was the impact of the revolution on slavery.
the book of negroes compiled by british commanders when they evacuated new york city in 1783 lists some 3 000 african americans who had sought their freedom behind british lines and departed with the british army.
many ended up in nova scotia some eventually made their way to sierra leone in west africa.
this page includes an entry for deborah formerly a slave of george washington sixth from bottom.
voluntary emancipations for a brief moment the revolutionary upheaval appeared to threaten the continued existence of slavery.
during the war of independence nearly every state prohibited or discouraged the further importation of slaves recent h1 voices of freedom from abigail adams to john adams braintree mass.
march 31 1776 from their home in massachusetts abigail adams maintained a lively correspondence with her husband while he was in philadelphia serving in the continental congress.
in this letter she suggests some of the limits of the patriots commitment to liberty.
which i suppose it will be necessary for you to make i desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands.
remember all men would be tyrants if they could.
if particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion and will not hold ourselves i wish you would write me a letter half as long as i write you and tell me if you may where your fleet have gone.
what sort of defense virginia can make against our common enemy.
whether it is so situated as to make an able defense.
i have sometimes been ready to think that the passion for liberty cannot be equally strong in the breasts of those who have been accustomed to deprive their fellow creatures of theirs.
of this i am certain that it is not founded upon that generous and christian principle of doing to others as we would that others should do unto us.
i long to hear that you have declared an independency and by the way in the new code of laws bound by any such laws in which we have no voice or representation.
that your sex are naturally tyrannical is a truth so thoroughly established as to admit of no dispute but such of you as wish to be happy willingly give up the harsh title of master for the more tender and endearing one of friend.
why then not put it out of the power of the vicious and the lawless to use us with cruelty and indignity with impunity.
men of sense in all ages abhor those customs which treat us only as the vassals of your sex.
regard us then as beings placed by providence under your protection and in imitation of the supreme being make use of that power only for our happiness.
f r o m pe t i t i o n s o f s l a v e s t o the massachusetts legislature 1773 and 1777 many slaves saw the struggle for independence as an opportunity to assert their own claims to freedom.
among the first efforts toward abolition were petitions by massachusetts slaves to their legislature.
the efforts made by the legislative of this province in their last sessions to free themselves from slavery gave us who are in that deplorable state a high degree of satisfaction.
we expect great things from men who have made such a noble stand against the designs of their fellow men to enslave them.
we cannot but wish and hope sir that you will have the same grand object we mean civil and religious liberty in view in your next session.
the divine spirit of freedom seems to fire every breast on this continent.
your petitioners apprehend that they have in common with all other men a natural and unalienable right to that freedom which the great parent of the universe hath bestowed equally on all mankind and which they have never forfeited by any compact or agreement whatever but they were unjustly dragged by the hand of cruel power from their dearest friends and.
from a populous pleasant and plentiful country and in violation of laws of nature and of nations and in defiance of all the tender feelings of humanity brought here.
to be sold like beast s of burden.
among a people professing the mild religion of jesus.
in imitation of the laudable example of the good people of these states your petitioners have long and patiently waited the event of petition after petition by them presented to the legislative body.
they cannot but express their astonishment that it has never been considered that every principle from which america has acted in the course of their unhappy difficulties with great britain pleads stronger than a thousand arguments in favor of your petitioners and their desire to be restored to the enjoyment of that which is the natural right of all men.
questions 1.
what does abigail adams have in mind when she refers to the unlimited power husbands exercise over their wives.
how do the slaves employ the principles of the revolution for their own aims.
what do these documents suggest about the boundaries of freedom in the era of the american revolution.
6 the revolution within slavery and the revolution from africa.
the war left much of the plantation south in ruins.
during the 1780s a considerable number of slaveholders especially in virginia and maryland voluntarily emancipated their slaves.
in 1796 robert carter iii a member of one of virginias wealthiest families provided for the gradual emancipation of the more than 400 slaves he owned.
in the same year richard randolph a member of another prominent virginia family drafted a will that condemned slavery as an infamous practice provided for the freedom of about 90 slaves and set aside part of his land for them to own.
farther south however the abolition process never got under way.
when the british invaded south carolina during the war john laurens whose father henry was charlestons leading merchant and revolutionaryera statesman proposed to lead a corps of emancipated blacks in the defense of liberty south carolinas leaders rejected the idea.
they would rather lose the war than lose their slaves.
however black soldiers from the colony of saint domingue some free and some slave fought on the american side as part of a french contingent in the unsuccessful defense of savannah georgia in 1778.
abolition an engraving from a commemorative pitcher presented to the abolitionist joseph curtis by the new york manumission society in 1819 depicts liberty releasing slaves from bondage.
curtis holds aloft a mirror reflecting the rising sun.
founded in 1785 by alexander hamilton john jay and others the society was instrumental in the passage of new yorks 1799 law providing for the gradual abolition of slavery.
in the north between 1777 when vermont drew up a constitution that banned slavery and 1804 when new jersey acted every state north of maryland took steps toward emancipation the first time in recorded history that legislative power had been invoked to eradicate slavery.
but even here where slavery was peripheral to the economy the method of abolition reflected how property rights impeded emancipation.
generally abolition laws did not free living slaves.
instead they provided for the liberty of any child born in the future to a slave mother but only after he or she had served the mothers master until adulthood as compensation for the owners future economic loss.
children born to slave mothers in pennsylvania after passage of the states emancipation act of 1780 had to serve the owner for twenty eight years far longer than had been customary for white indentured servants.
these laws gave indentured servitude rapidly declining among whites a new lease on life in the case of northern blacks.
abolition in the north was a slow drawn out process.
for slaves alive when the northern laws were passed hopes for freedom rested on their own ability to escape and the voluntary actions of their owners.
and many northern slaveholders proved reluctant indeed when it came to liberating their slaves.
new york city where one fifth of the white families owned at least one slave in 1790 recorded only seventy six such voluntary acts between 1783 and 1800.
the first national census in 1790 recorded 21 000 slaves still living in new york and 11 000 in new jersey.
new yorker john jay chief justice of the united states owned five slaves in 1800.
as late as 1830 the census revealed that there were still 3 500 slaves in the north.
the last slaves in connecticut did not become free until 1848.
in 1860 eighteen elderly slaves still resided in new jersey.
free black communities all in all the revolution had a contradictory impact on american slavery and therefore on american freedom.
gradual as it was the abolition of slav visions of freedom liberty displaying the arts and sciences.
this 1792 painting by samuel jennings is one of the few visual images of the early republic explicitly to link slavery with tyranny and liberty with abolition.
the female figure offers books to newly freed slaves.
other forms of knowledge depicted include a globe an artists palette and the top of a column evoking the republic of ancient rome.
beneath her left foot lies a broken chain.
in the background free slaves enjoy some leisure time.
painted at the same time as the haitian revolution was spreading fear of a slave rebellion the work celebrates emancipation rather than seeing it as threatening.
questions 1.
what attributes of freedom does the artist emphasize most strongly in the painting.
how do the figures in the painting convey ideas about race.
6 the revolution within a tray painted by an unknown artist in the early nineteenth century portrays lemuel haynes a celebrated black preacher and critic of slavery.
daughters of liberty ery in the north drew a line across the new nation creating the dangerous division between free and slave states.
abolition in the north voluntary emancipation in the upper south and the escape of thousands from bondage created for the first time in american history a sizable free black population many of whose members took new family names like freeman or freeland.
on the eve of independence virtually every black person in america had been a slave.
now free communities with their own churches schools and leaders came into existence.
they formed a standing challenge to the logic of slavery a haven for fugitives and a springboard for further efforts at abolition.
in 1776 fewer than 10 000 free blacks resided in the united states.
by 1810 their numbers had grown to nearly 200 000 most of them living in maryland and virginia.
in all the states except virginia south carolina and georgia free black men who met taxpaying or property qualifications enjoyed the right to vote under new state constitutions.
as the widespread use of the term citizens of color suggests the first generation of free blacks at least in the north formed part of the political nation.
for many americans white as well as black the existence of slavery would henceforth be recognized as a standing affront to the ideal of american freedom a disgrace to a free government as a group of new yorkers put it.
in 1792 when samuel jennings of philadelphia painted liberty displaying the arts and sciences he included among the symbols of freedom a slaves broken chain graphically illustrating how freedom had become identified not simply with political independence but with emancipation.
nonetheless the stark fact is that slavery survived the war of independence and thanks to the natural increase of the slave population continued to grow.
the national census of 1790 revealed that despite all those who had become free through state laws voluntary emancipation and escape the number of slaves in the united states had grown to 700 000 200 000 more than in 1776.
daughters of liberty revolutionary women the revolutionary generation included numerous women who contributed to the struggle for independence.
deborah sampson the daughter of a poor massachusetts farmer disguised herself as a man and in 1782 at age twenty one enlisted in the continental army.
sampson displayed remarkable courage participating in several battles and extracting a bullet from her own leg so as not to have a doctor discover her identity.
ultimately her commanding officer discovered her secret but kept it to himself and she was honorably discharged at the end of the war.
years later congress how did the revolution affect the status of women.
awarded her a soldiers pension.
other patriotic women participated in crowd actions against merchants accused of seeking profits by holding goods off the market until their prices rose contributed homespun goods to the army and passed along information about british army movements.
in philadelphia esther reed the wife of patriot leader joseph reed and sarah franklin bache the daughter of benjamin franklin organized a ladies association to raise funds to assist american soldiers.
they issued public broadsides calling for the women of america to name a treasuress in each county in the united states who would collect funds and forward them to the governors wife or if he were unmarried to mistress washington referring to themselves as brave americans who had been born for liberty the ladies association illustrated how the revolution was propelling women into new forms of public activism.
within american households women participated in the political discussions unleashed by independence.
was not every fireside john adams later recalled a theater of politics adamss own wife abigail adams as has been mentioned was a shrewd analyst of public affairs.
mercy otis warren the sister of james otis and husband of james warren a founder of the boston committee of correspondence was another commentator on politics.
she promoted the revolutionary cause in poems and dramas and later published a history of the struggle for independence.
gender and in this painting from 1797 deborah sampson who donned mens clothes to fight in the war of independence is portrayed in genteel female attire.
politics gender nonetheless formed a boundary limiting those entitled to the full blessings of american freedom.
lucy knox the wife of general henry knox wrote her husband during the war that when he returned home he should not consider himself commander in chief of your own house but be convinced that there is such a thing as equal command but the winning of independence did not alter the family law inherited from britain.
the principle of coverture described in chapter 1 remained intact in the new the 1781 cipher book a notebook for mathematics exercises of martha ryan a north carolina girl contains images of ships and a port town and the patriotic slogan liberty or death illustrating how women shared in the political culture of the revolutionary era.
6 the revolution within keep within compass a lateeighteenth century engraving illustrates the happiness of a virtuous woman if she remains within the world of the home and family and some of the troubles awaiting her if she ventures outside.
the woman appears in a space marked off by a compass an instrument for drawing a circle.
daughters of liberty nation.
the husband still held legal authority over the person property and choices of his wife.
the words to have and to hold appeared in deeds conveying land from one owner to another and in common marriage vows.
despite the expansion of democracy politics remained overwhelmingly a male realm.
for men political freedom meant the right to self government the power to consent to the individuals and political arrangements that ruled over them.
for women however the marriage contract superseded the social contract.
a womans relationship to the larger society was mediated through her relationship with her husband.
in both law and social reality women lacked the essential qualification of political participation the opportunity for autonomy based on ownership of property or control of ones own person.
since the common law included women within the legal status of their husbands women could not be said to have property in themselves in the same sense as men.
men took pride in qualities like independence and masculinity that distinguished them from women and still considered control over their families an element of freedom.
among the deprivations of slavery cited by a group of black male petitioners in 1774 was that it prevented their wives from submitting themselves to husbands in all things as the natural order of the universe required.
many women who entered public debate felt the need to apologize for their forthrightness.
a group of quaker women who petitioned congress during the war of independence protesting the mistreatment of men who would not take an oath of loyalty hoped the lawmakers would take no offense at the freedom of women most men considered women to be naturally submissive and irrational and therefore unfit for citizenship.
while public debate in the revolutionary era viewed mens rights as natural entitlements discussions of womens roles emphasized duty and obligations not individual liberty.
their rights were nonpolitical deriving from their roles as wives and mothers.
overall the republican citizen was by definition male.
in a notable case a massachusetts court returned to james martin confiscated property previously owned by his mother who had fled the state during the revolution with her loyalist husband.
like other states massachusetts seized the land of those who had supported the british.
but the court ruled it was unreasonable to expect a wife to exercise independent political judgment.
to rebel against the king was one thing but one could hardly ask mrs martin to rebel against her husband.
therefore the court reasoned she should not have been punished for taking the british side.
republican motherhood the revolution nonetheless did produce an improvement in status for many women.
according to the ideology of republican motherhood that emerged as a result of independence women played an indispensable role by training future citizens.
the foundation of national morality wrote john adams must be laid in private families even though republican motherhood ruled out direct female involvement in politics it encouraged the expansion of educational opportunities for women so that they could how did the revolution affect the status of women.
impart political wisdom to their children.
women wrote benjamin rush needed to have a suitable education to enable them to instruct their sons in the principles of liberty and government the idea of republican motherhood reinforced the trend already evident in the eighteenth century toward the idea of companionate marriage a voluntary union held together by affection and mutual dependency rather than male authority.
in her letter to john adams quoted above abigail adams recommended that men should willingly give up the harsh title of master for the more tender and endearing one of friend the structure of family life itself was altered by the revolution.
in colonial america those living within the household often included indentured servants apprentices and slaves.
after independence southern slaves remained rhetorically at least members of the owners family in the north however with the rapid decline of various forms of indentured servitude and apprenticeship a more modern definition of the household as consisting of parents and their children took hold.
hired workers whether domestic servants or farm laborers were not considered part of the family.
like slaves some free women adapted the rhetoric of the revolution to their own situation.
ann baker carson later recalled how she became estranged from the tyrannical husband she had married at age sixteen.
i was an american she wrote.
a land of liberty had given me birth.
i felt myself his equal she left the marriage rather than continue as a female slave but unlike the case of actual slaves the subordination of women did not become a major source of public debate until long after american independence.
the arduous struggle for portrait of john and elizabeth lloyd cadwalader and their daughter anne.
this 1772 portrait of a prominent philadelphia businessman and his family by the american artist charles willson peale illustrates the emerging ideal of the companionate marriage which is based on affection rather than male authority.
liberty the revolution changed the lives of virtually every american.
as a result of the long struggle against british rule the public sphere and with it the two pages from a little pretty pocketbook intended for the instruction and amusement of little master tommy and pretty miss polly 1787 which taught virtuous behavior to young children.
the revolution stimulated interest in improving female education.
6 the revolution within daughters of liberty america triumphant and britannia in distress.
an elaborate allegory representing american independence as a triumph of liberty from an almanac published in boston in 1781.
an accompanying key explains the symbolism 1 america on the right holds an olive branch of peace and invites all nations to trade with her.
2 news of americas triumph is broadcast around the world.
3 britain seated next to the devil laments the loss of trade with america.
4 the british flag falls from a fortress.
5 european ships in american waters.
6 benedict arnold the traitor hangs himself in new york city in fact arnold died of natural causes in london in 1801.
right to vote expanded markedly.
bound labor among whites declined dramatically religious groups enjoyed greater liberty blacks mounted a challenge to slavery in which many won their freedom and women in some ways enjoyed a higher status.
on the other hand for indians many loyalists and the majority of slaves american independence meant a deprivation of freedom.
in the words of one british admirer the genuine liberty on which america is founded is totally and entirely a new system of things and men a new nation which defined itself as an embodiment of freedom had taken its place on the world stage.
not only britain but all europe are spectators of the conflict the arduous struggle for liberty wrote ezra stiles a future president of yale college in 1775.
we consider ourselves as laying the foundation of a glorious future empire and acting a part for the contemplation of the ages like stiles many other americans were convinced that their struggle for independence had worldwide significance.
american independence indeed formed part of a larger set of movements that transformed the atlantic world.
the year 1776 saw not only paines common sense and jeffersons declaration but also the publication in england of adam smiths the wealth of nations which attacked the british policy of closely regulating trade and jeremy benthams fragment on government which criticized the nature of british government.
the winds of change were sweeping across the atlantic world.
the ideals of the american revolution helped to inspire countless subsequent struggles for social equality and national independence from the french revolution which exploded in 1789 to the uprising that overthrew the slave system in haiti in the 1790s to the latin american wars for independence in the early nineteenth century and numerous struggles of colonial peoples for nationhood in the twentieth.
but within the new republic the debate over who should enjoy the blessings of liberty would continue long after independence had been achieved.
suggested reading suggested reading books berkin carol.
revolutionary mothers women in the struggle for american independence 2005.
presents profiles of women who took part in the movement for independence.
boulton terry.
taming democracy the people the founders and the troubled ending of the american revolution 2007.
argues that the democratic impulse unleashed by the war of independence was to some extent reversed by the events of the 1780s.
brown wallace.
the good americans the loyalists in the american revolution 1969.
a study of americans who remained loyal to great britain during the war of independence.
calloway colin.
the american revolution in indian country 1995.
examines how the revolution affected indians in each region of the united states.
davis david brion.
the problem of slavery in the age of revolution 1975.
an influential study of the emergence of slavery as a major public issue in the atlantic world.
doerflinger thomas m a vigorous spirit of enterprise merchants and economic development in revolutionary philadelphia 1986.
explores how philadelphia merchants participated in and reacted to the upheavals of the revolutionary era.
frey sylvia r water from the rock black resistance in a revolutionary age 1991.
a study of the many ways blacks sought to gain freedom for themselves during the revolution.
hatch nathan o.
the democratization of american christianity 1989.
a comprehensive account of the revolutions impact on religion and its aftermath.
holton woody.
forced founders indians debtors slaves and the making of the american revolution in virginia 1999.
explores how the struggles of those outside virginias elite contributed to the movement for independence.
kruman marc.
between authority and liberty state constitution making in revolutionary america 1997.
the most detailed account of how state constitutions were changed during the era.
the unknown american revolution the unruly birth of democracy and the struggle to create america 2005.
emphasizes the role of ordinary americans in the struggle for independence.
schama simon.
rough crossing britain the slaves and the american revolution 2006.
a detailed look at the experience of the thousands of slaves who escaped to british lines and their fate after the end of the war of independence.
taylor alan.
the divided ground indians settlers and the northern borderland of the american revolution 2006.
examines the revolution and its consequence in the iroquois region of upstate new york.
wood gordon.
the radicalism of the american revolution 1992.
an influential work that sees the revolution as transforming a hierarchical society into a democratic one.
websites creating the united states default aspx religion and the founding of the american republic religion religion html the geography of slavery in virginia c hapter r eview review questions 1.
colonial society was based on inequality and obedience to authority.
how did the american revolution challenge the existing order of society.
why did the revolution cause more radical changes in pennsylvania than elsewhere and how was this radicalism demonstrated in the new state constitution.
even after the american revolution conservatives denied that freedom and equality were synonymous and opposed the growth of democracy.
how did conservatives resist democratization in the south.
what role did the founders forsee for religion in american government and society.
what was the impact of the american revolution on native americans.
what were the most important features of the new state constitutions.
how did popular views of property rights and the marriage contract prevent women and slaves from enjoying all the freedoms of the social contract.
what was republican motherhood and why was it significant.
freedom questions 1.
revolutions create change challenge authority and embolden marginalized groups to apply revolutionary ideals to their own situation.
how did slaves indentured servants women and native americans use the ideals of freedom to further their causes.
wartime patriots insisted that freedom of conscience was a key part of liberty.
what steps were taken to protect religious freedom and did this freedom apply to everyone.
before the american revolution americans commonly held that the role of government was to promote the public good.
after the war merchants and other leaders advocated free trade and free markets ruled by self interest as an expression of freedom.
how did this new concept of freedom for some americans deprive others of their freedoms.
patriots claimed to be fighting a war to protect liberty and freedom in america yet these ideas did not apply to everyone.
how did loyalists and native americans suffer and why were their natural rights not protected.
slavery and liberty were the two most frequently used terms in the debate over freedom.
how did they apply to the political rights of white property owners but then mean something entirely different when referring to african americans held as property.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e one house legislature p 223 freedom and the state constitutions thoughts on government p 224 provision states eliminated property qualification for voting all states except virginia maryland south carolina wall of separation p 227 eliminated all property and tax qualifications for voting vermont bill for establishing religious freedom p 228 granted vote to free blacks who met qualifications all states except virginia south carolina georgia free labor p 231 one house state government pennsylvania georgia vermont free trade p 232 two house state government all states except pennsylvania georgia vermont guaranteed complete religious liberty new york loyalists p 233 stockbridge indians p 236 deprived governor of veto power all states except massachusetts general john sullivan p 237 established annual elections to increase accountability all states except north carolina balanced government p 224 suffrage p 225 inflation p 232 abolition p 239 freedom petitions p 241 lemuel haynes p 241 free blacks p 248 citizens of color p 248 republican motherhood p 250 suitable education p 251 c hapter 7 somerset case articles of confederation drafted articles of confederation ratified letters from an american farmer 1784 land ordinances approved jeffersons notes on the state of virginia 1786 shayss rebellion northwest ordinance of 1787 constitutional convention convened the federalist constitution ratified naturalization act bill of rights ratified little turtle defeats arthur st clairs forces little turtle defeated at battle of fallen timbers treaty of greenville congress prohibits the slave trade founding a nation 1783 1789 america under the confederation the articles of confederation congress and the west settlers and the west the land ordinances the confederations weaknesses shayss rebellion nationalists of the 1780s slavery in the constitution the final document the ratification debate and the origin of the bill of rights the federalist extend the sphere the anti federalists the bill of rights a new constitution the people the structure of government the limits of democracy the division and separation of powers the debate over slavery national identity indians in the new nation blacks and the republic jefferson slavery and race principles of freedom in this late eighteenth century engraving americans celebrate the signing of the constitution beneath a temple of liberty.
f ocus q uestions what were the achievements and problems of the confederation government.
what major disagreements and compromises molded the final content of the constitution.
how did anti federalist concerns raised during the ratification process lead to the creation of the bill of rights.
how did the definition of citizenship in the new republic exclude native americans and africanamericans.
l d uring june and july of 1788 civic leaders in cities up and down the atlantic coast organized colorful pageants to celebrate the ratification of the united states constitution.
for one day benjamin rush commented of philadelphias parade social class forgot its claims as thousands of marchers rich and poor businessman and apprentice joined in a common public ceremony.
new yorks grand federal procession was led by farmers followed by the members of every craft in the city from butchers and coopers makers of wooden barrels to bricklayers blacksmiths and printers.
lawyers merchants and clergymen brought up the rear.
the parades testified to the strong popular support for the constitution in the nations cities.
and the prominent role of skilled artisans reflected how the revolution had secured their place in the american public sphere.
elaborate banners and floats gave voice to the hopes inspired by the new structure of government.
may commerce flourish and industry be rewarded declared philadelphias mariners and shipbuilders.
throughout the era of the revolution americans spoke of their nation as a rising empire destined to populate and control the entire north american continent.
while europes empires were governed by force americas would be different.
in jeffersons phrase it would be an empire of liberty bound together by a common devotion to the principles of the declaration of independence.
already the united states exceeded in size great britain spain and france combined.
as a new nation it possessed many advantages including physical isolation from the old world a significant asset between 1789 and 1815 when european powers were almost constantly at war a youthful population certain to grow much larger and a broad distribution of property ownership and literacy among white citizens.
on the other hand while americans dreamed of economic prosperity and continental empire the nations prospects at the time of independence were not entirely promising.
control of its vast territory was by no means secure.
nearly all of the 3 9 million americans recorded in the first national census of 1790 lived near the atlantic coast.
large areas west of the appalachian mountains remained in indian hands.
the british retained military posts on american territory near the great lakes and there were fears that spain might close the port of new orleans to american commerce on the mississippi river.
away from navigable waterways communication and transportation were primitive.
the country was overwhelmingly rural fewer than one american in thirty lived in a place with 8 000 inhabitants or more.
the population consisted of numerous ethnic and religious groups and some 700 000 slaves making unity difficult to achieve.
no republican government had ever been established over so vast a territory or with so what were the achievements and problems of the confederation government.
diverse a population.
local loyalties outweighed national patriotism.
we have no americans in america commented john adams.
it would take time for consciousness of a common nationality to sink deep roots.
today with the united states the most powerful country on earth it is difficult to recall that in 1783 the future seemed precarious indeed for the fragile nation seeking to make its way in a world of hostile great powers.
profound questions needed to be answered.
what course of development should the united states follow.
how could the competing claims of local self government sectional interests and national authority be balanced.
who should be considered full fledged members of the american people entitled to the blessings of liberty.
these issues became the focus of heated debate as the first generation of americans sought to consolidate their new republic.
a m e r i c a u n d e r t h e c o n f e d e r at i o n the articles of confederation the first written constitution of the united states was the articles of confederation drafted by congress in 1777 and ratified by the states four years later.
the articles sought to balance the need for national coordination of the war of independence with widespread fear that centralized political power posed a danger to liberty.
it explicitly declared the new national government to be a perpetual union but it resembled less a blueprint for a common government than a treaty for mutual defense in its own words a firm league of friendship among the states.
under the articles the thirteen states retained their individual sovereignty freedom and independence the national government consisted of a one house congress in which each state no matter how large or populous cast a single vote.
there was no president to enforce the laws and no judiciary to interpret them.
major decisions required the approval of nine states rather than a simple majority.
the only powers specifically granted to the national government by the articles of confederation were those essential to the struggle for independence declaring war conducting foreign affairs and making treaties with other governments.
congress had no real financial resources.
it could coin money but lacked the power to levy taxes or regulate commerce.
its revenue came mainly from contributions by the individual states.
to amend the articles required the unanimous consent of the states a formidable obstacle to change.
various amendments to strengthen the national government were proposed during the seven years 1781 1788 when the articles of confederation were in effect but none received the approval of all the states.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 slavery and empire agreement whereby spain subcontracted to a foreign power the right to provide slaves to spanish america was an important diplomatic prize.
britains acquisition of the asiento from the dutch in the treaty of utrecht of 1713 was a major step in its rise to commercial supremacy.
in the british empire of the eighteenth century free laborers working for wages were atypical and slavery was the norm.
slave plantations contributed mightily to english economic development.
the first mass consumer goods in international trade were produced by slaves sugar rice coffee and tobacco.
the rising demand for these products fueled the rapid growth of the atlantic slave trade.
atlantic trade in the eighteenth century the caribbean remained the commercial focus of the british empire and the major producer of revenue for the crown.
but slave grown products from the mainland occupied a larger and larger part of atlantic commerce.
a series of triangular trading routes crisscrossed the atlantic carrying british manufactured goods to africa and the colonies colonial products including tobacco indigo sugar and rice to europe and slaves from africa to the new world.
most colonial vessels however went back and forth between cities like new york charleston and savannah and to ports in the caribbean.
areas where slavery was only a minor institution also profited from slave labor.
merchants in new york massachusetts and rhode island participated actively in the slave trade shipping slaves from africa to the caribbean or southern colonies.
the slave economies of the west indies were the largest market for fish grain livestock and lumber exported from new england and the middle colonies.
in 1720 half the ships entering or leaving new york harbor were engaged in trade with the caribbean.
indeed one historian writes the growth and prosperity of the emerging society of free colonial british a mid eighteenth century image of a woman going to church in lima peru accompanied by two slaves.
slavery existed throughout the western hemisphere.
how did african slavery differ regionally in eighteenth century north america.
atlantic trading routes rses glasgow co tobac tores ds o naval s furs fishanufactured go ds oods o m o g red g d e u r t u c t c a f fa u manuo hides man indig e ic r grain rum fish lum manufactured go ber ods mo t pean euro w e st i n d i es caribbean sea slave s go s ru lave m s lisbon spain cadiz ucts prod manufactured goods ber r lum r a k flou vestoc slaves sug slaves sugar fish li es e ric slav spanish florida wi ne rui s f se las s ah ar a d e s e rt africa ld ivory gold coast coast south america america.
were achieved as a result of slave labor in britain itself the profits from slavery and the slave trade stimulated the rise of ports like liverpool and bristol and the growth of banking shipbuilding and insurance.
they also helped to finance the early industrial revolution.
overall in the eighteenth century atlantic commerce consisted primarily of slaves crops produced by slaves and goods destined for slave societies.
it should not be surprising that for large numbers of free colonists and europeans freedom meant in part the power and right to enslave others.
and as slavery became more and more entrenched so too as the quaker abolitionist john woolman commented in 1762 did the idea of slavery being connected with the black color and liberty with the white africa and the slave europe france portugal boston newport new york philadelphia baltimore british norfolk colonies wilmington charleston savannah london l wine fruit north america ine ns ho a tl anti c o cean england bristol trade a few african societies like benin for a time opted out of the atlantic slave trade hoping to avoid the disruptions it inevitably caused.
but most african slave coast 1 000 miles 500 1 000 kilometers a series of trading routes crisscrossed the atlantic bringing manufactured goods to africa and britains american colonies slaves to the new world and colonial products to europe.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 the slave trade in the atlantic world 1460 1770 1 000 miles 500 1 000 kilometers north america england es ni brit ish atlantic ocean spain arab 4 w e st indies berber french caribbean 1 s ah ar a d e s e rt 7 british caribbean 24 s caribbean panish colonies 13 sea central america europe france 3 portugal co lo slavery and empire the mid dle pa africa kaarta ssa ge segu s 7 h colonie dutc ashanti guianas mpire 3 portuguese e hausa kanembornu dahomey oyo benin 2 teke nsundi south america brazil kongo mbundu angola the atlantic slave trade expanded rapidly in the eighteenth century.
the mainland colonies received only a tiny proportion of the africans brought to the new world most of whom were transported to brazil and the west indies.
rulers took part and they proved quite adept at playing the europeans off against one another collecting taxes from foreign merchants and keeping the capture and sale of slaves under their own control.
few europeans ventured inland from the coast.
traders remained in their factories and purchased slaves brought to them by african rulers and dealers.
the transatlantic slave trade made africa a major market for european goods especially textiles and guns.
both disrupted relationships within and among african societies.
cheap imported textiles undermined traditional craft production while guns encouraged the further growth of slavery since the only way to obtain european weapons was to supply slaves.
by the eighteenth century militarized states like ashanti and dahomey would arise in west africa with large armies using european firearms to prey on their neighbors in order to capture slaves.
from a minor institution slavery grew to become more and more central to west african society a source of wealth for african merchants and of power for newly emerging african kingdoms.
the loss every year of tens of thou how did african slavery differ regionally in eighteenth century north america.
sands of men and women in the prime of their lives to the slave trade weakened and distorted west africas society and economy.
the middle passage for slaves the voyage across the atlantic known as the middle passage because it was the second or middle leg in the triangular trading routes linking europe africa and america was a harrowing experience.
since a slave could be sold in america for twenty to thirty times the price in africa men women and children were crammed aboard vessels as tightly as possible to maximize profits.
the height sometimes between decks wrote one slave trader was only eighteen inches so that the unfortunate human beings could not turn around or even on their sides.
and here they are usually chained to the decks by their necks and legs equiano who later described the shrieks of the women and the groans of the dying survived the middle passage but many africans did not.
diseases like measles and smallpox spread rapidly and about one slave in five perished before reaching the new world.
ship captains were known to throw the sick overboard in order to prevent the spread of epidemics.
the crews on slave ships also suffered a high death rate.
only a small proportion less than 5 percent of slaves carried to the new world were destined for mainland north america.
the vast majority landed in brazil or the west indies where the high death rate on the sugar plantations led to a constant demand for new slave imports.
as late as 1700 only about 20 000 africans had been landed in britains colonies in north america.
in the eighteenth century however their numbers increased steadily.
overall the area that was to become the united states imported between 400 000 and 600 000 slaves.
by 1770 due to the natural reproduction of the slave population around one fifth of the estimated 2 3 million persons not including indians living in the english colonies of north america were africans and their descendants.
chesapeake slavery by the mid eighteenth century three distinct slave systems were well entrenched in britains mainland colonies tobacco based plantation slavery in the chesapeake rice based plantation slavery in south carolina and georgia and nonplantation slavery in new england and the middle colonies.
the largest and oldest of these was the tobacco plantation system of the chesapeake where more than 270 000 slaves resided in 1770 nearly half of the regions population.
on the eve of the revolution virginia and maryland were as closely tied to britain as any other an architects plan for a slave ship.
these drawings illustrate the conditions under which slaves endured the middle passage across the atlantic.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 slavery and empire benjamin latrobes watercolor an overseer doing his duty was sketched near fredericksburg virginia in 1798.
the title is meant to be ironic the welldressed overseer relaxes while two female slaves work in the fields.
a detail from a 1768 map of virginia and maryland illustrates a tobacco wharf.
a planter negotiates with a merchant or sea captain while slaves go about their work.
colonies and their economies were models of mercantilist policy described in chapter 3.
they supplied the mother country with a valuable agricultural product imported large amounts of british goods and were closely linked in culture and political values to london.
as we have seen the period after 1680 witnessed a rapid shift from indentured servitude to slavery on the regions tobacco plantations.
in the eighteenth century the growing world demand for tobacco encouraged continued slave imports.
when tobacco prices fell in the early part of the century some planters shifted to grain production.
but tobacco remained their primary source of wealth.
as virginia expanded westward so did slavery.
by the eve of the american revolution the center of gravity of slavery in the colony had shifted from the tidewater the region along the coast to the piedmont farther inland.
most chesapeake slaves male and female worked in the fields but thousands labored as teamsters as boatmen and in skilled crafts.
numerous slave women became cooks seamstresses dairy maids and personal servants.
the son of george mason one of virginias leading planters and statesmen recorded that his fathers slaves included coopers sawyers blacksmiths tanners shoemakers spinners weavers knitters and even a distiller slavery was common on small farms as well as plantations nearly half of virginias white families owned at least one slave in 1770.
because there is little economy of scale in tobacco growing that is enlarging the size of the producing unit does not lower costs and maximize productivity chesapeake plantations tended to be smaller than in the caribbean and daily interactions between masters and slaves were more extensive.
slavery laid the foundation for the consolida how did african slavery differ regionally in eighteenth century north america.
tion of the chesapeake elite a landed gentry that in conjunction with merchants who handled the tobacco trade and lawyers who defended the interests of slaveholders dominated the regions society and politics.
meanwhile even as the consumer revolution improved the standard of living of lesser whites their long term economic prospects diminished.
as slavery expanded planters engrossed the best lands and wealth among the white population became more and more concentrated.
slavery transformed chesapeake society into an elaborate hierarchy of degrees of freedom.
at the top stood large planters below them numerous lesser planters and landowning yeomen and at the bottom a large population of convicts indentured servants tenant farmers who made up half the white households in 1770 and of course the slaves.
freedom and slavery in the chesapeake with the consolidation of a slave society in the chesapeake planters filled the law books with measures enhancing the masters power over his human property and restricting blacks access to freedom.
violence lay at the heart of the slave system.
even a planter like landon carter who prided himself on his concern for the well being of his slaves noted casually in his diary they have been severely whipped day by day race took on more and more importance as a line of social division.
whites increasingly considered free blacks dangerous and undesirable.
free blacks lost the right to employ white servants and to bear arms were subjected to special taxes and could be punished for striking a white person regardless of the cause.
in 1723 virginia revoked the voting privileges of property owning free blacks.
when the lords of trade in london asked virginias governor to justify discriminating among freemen merely upon account of their complexion he responded that a distinction ought to be made between their offspring and the descendants of an englishman with whom they never were to be accounted equal because virginia law required that freed slaves be sent out of the colony free blacks remained only a tiny part of the population less than 4 percent in 1750.
free and white had become virtually identical.
indian slavery in e a r ly carolina farther south a different slave system based on rice production emerged in south carolina and georgia.
the barbadians who initially settled south carolina in the 1670s were quite familiar with african slavery but their first victims were members of the areas native population.
the early carolina economy focused on the export to the caribbean of indian slaves and to england of deerskins and furs obtained from indians.
the local creek indians initially welcomed the settlers and began selling them slaves generally war captives and their families most of whom were sold to the west indies.
they even launched wars against neighboring tribes specifically for the purpose of capturing and selling slaves.
as the plantation system expanded however the creeks became more and more concerned not only because it led to encroachments on their land but also because they feared enslavement themselves.
they were aware that only a handful of slaves worked in nearby spanish florida.
the creeks one leader henry darnall iii painted around 1710 by justus engelhardt khn who produced numerous portraits of prominent marylanders in the early eighteenth century.
the boy clearly the son of a member of the colonys wealthy gentry stands next to a young slave a symbol of his familys wealth.
the background is an idealized european palace and formal garden.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 slavery and empire remarked in 1738 preferred to deal with the spanish who enslave no one as the english do the rice kingdom as in early virginia frontier conditions allowed leeway to south carolinas small population of african born slaves who farmed tended livestock and were initially allowed to serve in the militia to fight the spanish and indians.
and as in virginia the introduction of a marketable staple crop in this case rice led directly to economic development the large scale importation of slaves and a growing divide between white and black.
south carolina was the first mainland colony to achieve a black majority.
by the 1730s by which time north carolina had become a separate colony twothirds of its population was black.
in the 1740s another staple indigo a crop used in producing blue dye was developed.
like rice indigo required large scale cultivation and was grown by slaves.
ironically it was africans familiar with the crop at home who taught english settlers how to cultivate rice which then became the foundation of south carolina slavery and of the wealthiest slaveowning class on the north american mainland.
since rice production requires considerable capital investment to drain swamps and create irrigation systems it is economically advantageous for rice plantations to be as large as possible.
thus south carolina planters owned far more land and slaves than their counterparts in virginia.
moreover since mosquitoes bearing malaria a disease to which africans had developed partial immunity flourished in the watery rice fields planters tended to leave plantations under the control of overseers and the slaves themselves.
in the chesapeake field slaves worked in groups under constant supervision.
under the task system that developed in eighteenth century south carolina individual slaves were assigned daily jobs the completion of which allowed them time for leisure or to cultivate crops of their own.
in 1762 one rice district had a population of only 76 white males among 1 000 slaves.
fearful of the ever increasing black population majority south carolinas legislature took steps to encourage the immigration of poor protestants offering each newcomer a cash bounty and occasionally levying taxes on slave imports only to see such restrictions overturned in london.
by 1770 the number of south carolina slaves had reached 100 000 well over half the colonys population.
the georgia experiment rice cultivation also spread into georgia in the mid eighteenth century.
the colony was founded in 1733 by a group of philanthropists led by james oglethorpe a wealthy reformer whose causes included improved conditions for imprisoned debtors and the abolition of slavery.
oglethorpe hoped to establish a haven where the worthy poor of england could enjoy economic opportunity.
the government in london supported the creation of georgia to protect south carolina against the spanish and their indian allies in florida.
initially the proprietors banned the introduction of both liquor and slaves leading to continual battles with settlers who desired both.
by the visions of freedom slave sale broadside.
this 1769 broadside advertises the sale of ninety four slaves who had just arrived in charleston from west africa.
broadsides like this one were displayed prominently by slave traders to drum up business.
questions 1.
what was the artist who created the broadside trying to convey by the way he depicted the slaves.
how do you think colonists who at this very time were defending their liberty against british policies justified importing and selling slaves.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 slavery and empire 1740s georgia offered the spectacle of colonists pleading for the english liberty of self government so that they could enact laws introducing slavery.
in 1751 the proprietors surrendered the colony to the crown.
the colonists quickly won the right to an elected assembly which met in savannah georgias main settlement.
it repealed the ban on slavery and liquor as well as an early measure that had limited land holdings to 500 acres.
georgia became a miniature version of south carolina.
by 1770 as many as 15 000 slaves labored on its coastal rice plantations.
slavery slavery existed in the eighteenth century in all the colonies.
in this 1741 painting of the potter family of matunuck rhode island a young african american boy serves tea.
in the north compared to the plantation regions slavery was far less central to the economies of new england and the middle colonies where small farms predominated.
slaves made up only a small percentage of these colonies populations and it was unusual for even rich families to own more than one slave.
sections of rhode island and connecticut did develop large tobacco and livestock farms employing slave labor but northern slaves were far more dispersed than in the south.
nonetheless slavery was not entirely marginal to northern colonial life.
slaves worked as farm hands in artisan shops as stevedores loading and unloading ships and as personal servants.
in the early eighteenth century about three quarters of the urban elite owned at least one slave.
but with slaves so small a part of the population that they seemed to pose no threat to the white majority laws were less harsh than in the south.
in new england where in 1770 the 17 000 slaves represented less than 3 percent of the regions population slave marriages were recognized in law the severe physical punishment of slaves was prohibited and slaves could bring suits in court testify against whites and own property and pass it on to their children rights unknown in the south.
slavery had been present in new york from the earliest days of dutch settlement.
with white immigration lagging behind that of pennsylvania the colonys hudson valley landlords small farmers and craftsmen continued to employ considerable amounts of slave labor in the eighteenth century.
as new york citys role in the slave trade expanded so did slavery in the city.
in 1746 its 2 440 slaves amounted to one fifth of new york citys total population.
some 30 percent of its laborers were slaves a proportion second only to charleston among american cities.
most were domestic work how did african slavery differ regionally in eighteenth century north america.
ers but slaves worked in all sectors of the economy.
in 1770 about 27 000 slaves lived in new york and new jersey 10 percent of their total population.
slavery was also a significant presence in philadelphia although the institution stagnated after 1750 as artisans and merchants relied increasingly on wage laborers whose numbers were augmented by population growth and the completion of the terms of indentured servants.
in an urban economy that expanded and contracted according to the ups and downs of international trade many employers concluded that relying on wage labor which could be hired and fired at will made more economic sense than a long term investment in slaves.
s l a v e c u lt u r e s a n d s l a v e r e s i s t a n c e becoming african american the nearly 300 000 africans brought to the mainland colonies during the eighteenth century were not a single people.
they came from different cultures spoke different languages and practiced many religions.
eventually an african american people would emerge from the diverse peoples transported to the british colonies in the middle passage.
slavery threw together individuals who would never otherwise have encountered one another and who had never considered their color or residence on a single continent a source of identity or unity.
their bond was not kinship language or even race but slavery itself.
the process of creating a cohesive culture and community took many years and it proceeded at different rates in different regions.
but by the nineteenth century slaves no longer identified themselves as ibo ashanti yoruba and so on but as african americans.
in music art folklore language and religion their cultural expressions emerged as a synthesis of african traditions european elements and new conditions in america.
for most of the eighteenth century the majority of american slaves were african by birth.
for many years they spoke african languages and practiced african religions.
advertisements seeking information about runaways often described them by african origin young gambia negro new banbara negro fellow and spoke of their bearing on their bodies country marks visible signs of ethnic identity in africa.
indeed during the eighteenth century black life in the colonies was re africanized as the earlier creoles slaves born in the new world came to be outnumbered by large scale importations from africa.
compared with the earliest generation of slaves the newcomers worked harder died earlier and had less access to freedom.
charles hansford a white virginia blacksmith noted in a 1753 poem that he had frequently heard slaves speak of their desire to reenjoy life in africa i oft with pleasure have observd how they their sultry countrys worth strive to display in broken language how they praise their case and happiness when in their native place.
how would they dangers court and pains endure if to their country they could get secure.
table 4 1 slave population as percentage of total population of original thirteen colonies 1770 colony new hampshire slave population percentage 1 massachusetts 4 754 connecticut 5 698 rhode island 3 761 new york 19 062 new jersey 8 220 pennsylvania 5 561 delaware 1 836 maryland 63 818 187 600 north carolina 69 600 south carolina 75 168 georgia 15 000 virginia c h.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 african american s l a v e c u lt u r e s a n d slave resistance c u lt u r e s by the mid eighteenth century the three slave systems in british north america had produced distinct african american cultures.
in the chesapeake because of a more healthful climate the slave population began to reproduce itself by 1740 creating a more balanced sex ratio than in the seventeenth century and making possible the creation of family centered slave communities.
because of the small size of most plantations and the large number of white yeoman farmers slaves here were continuously exposed to white culture.
they soon learned english and many were swept up in the religious revivals known as the great awakening discussed later in this chapter.
in south carolina and georgia two very different black societies emerged.
on the rice plantations slaves lived in extremely harsh conditions and had a low birthrate throughout the eighteenth century making rice production dependent on continued slave imports from africa.
the slaves seldom came into contact with whites and enjoyed far more autonomy than elsewhere in the colonies.
the larger structures of their lives were established by slavery but they were able to create an african based culture.
they constructed african style houses chose african names for their children and spoke gullah a language that mixed various african roots and was unintelligible to most whites.
despite a continuing slave trade in which young single males predominated slaves slowly created families and communities that bridged generations.
the experience of slaves who labored in charleston and savannah as servants and skilled workers was quite different.
these assimilated more quickly into euro american culture and sexual liaisons between white owners and slave women produced the beginnings of a class of free mulattos.
in the northern colonies where slaves represented a smaller part of the population dispersed in small holdings among the white population a distinctive african american culture developed more slowly.
living in close proximity to whites they enjoyed more mobility and access to the mainstream of life than their counterparts farther south.
slaves in cities like philadelphia and new york gathered on holidays to perform african dances.
but they had fewer opportunities to create stable family life or a cohesive community.
resistance to slavery the common threads that linked these regional african american cultures were the experience of slavery and the desire for freedom.
throughout the eighteenth century blacks risked their lives in efforts to resist enslavement.
colonial newspapers especially in the southern colonies were filled with advertisements for runaway slaves.
most fugitives were young african men who had arrived recently.
in south carolina and georgia they fled to florida to uninhabited coastal and river swamps or to charleston and savannah where they could pass for free.
in the chesapeake and middle colonies fugitive slaves tended to be familiar with white culture and therefore as one advertisement put it could pretend to be free what edward trelawny the colonial governor of jamaica called a dangerous spirit of liberty was widespread among the new worlds slaves.
the eighteenth centurys first slave uprising occurred in new york city in 1712 what factors led to distinct african american cultures in the eighteenth century.
when a group of slaves set fire to houses on the outskirts of the city and killed the first nine whites who arrived on the scene.
subsequently eighteen conspirators were executed some were tortured and burned alive in a public spectacle meant to intimidate the slave population.
during the 1730s and 1740s continuous warfare involving european empires and indians opened the door to slave resistance.
in 1731 a slave rebellion in louisiana where the french and natchez indians were at war temporarily halted efforts to introduce the plantation system in that region.
there were uprisings throughout the west indies including in the virgin islands owned by denmark and on the french island of guadeloupe.
on jamaica a major british center of sugar production communities of fugitive slaves known as maroons waged outright warfare against british authorities until a treaty of 1739 recognized their freedom in exchange for which they agreed to return future escapees.
the crisis of 1739 1741 on the mainland slaves seized the opportunity for rebellion offered by the war of jenkins ear which pitted england against spain.
in september 1739 a group of south carolina slaves most of them recently arrived from kongo where some it appears had been soldiers seized a store containing numerous weapons at the town of stono.
beating drums to attract followers the armed band marched southward toward florida burning houses and barns killing whites they encountered and shouting liberty floridas spanish rulers offered liberty and protection to fugitives from the british colonies.
the group eventually swelled to some 100 slaves.
after a pitched battle with the colonys militia the rebels were dispersed.
the rebellion took the lives of more than two dozen whites and as many as 200 slaves.
some slaves managed to reach florida where in 1740 they were armed by the spanish to help repel an attack on st augustine by a force from georgia.
the stono rebellion led to a severe tightening of the south carolina slave code and the temporary imposition of a prohibitive tax on imported slaves.
in 1741 a panic which some observers compared to the fear of witches in salem in the 1690s swept new york city.
after a series of fires broke out rumors spread that slaves with some white allies planned to burn part of the city seize weapons and either turn new york over to spain or murder the white population.
more than 150 blacks and 20 whites were arrested and 34 alleged conspirators including 4 white persons were executed.
historians still disagree as to how extensive the plot was or whether it existed at all.
but dramatic events like revolts along with the constant stream of runaways disproved the idea voiced by the governor of south carolina that slaves had no notion of liberty in eighteenth century america dreams of freedom knew no racial boundary.
when white colonists rose in rebellion against british rule tens of thousands of slaves would seize the opportunity to strike for their own liberty.
an advertisement seeking the return of a runaway slave from port royal in the sea islands of south carolina.
mustee was a term for a person of mixed european and african ancestry.
from the south carolina gazette june 11 1747.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 an empire of freedom an empire of freedom british patriotism despite the centrality of slavery to its empire eighteenth century great britain prided itself on being the worlds most advanced and freest nation.
it was not only the eras greatest naval and commercial power but also the home of a complex governmental system with a powerful parliament representing the interests of a self confident landed aristocracy and merchant class.
in london the largest city in europe with a population approaching 1 million by the end of the eighteenth century britain possessed a single political cultural economic capital.
it enjoyed a common law common language and with the exception of a small number of jews catholics and africans common devotion to protestantism.
for much of the eighteenth century britain found itself at war with france which had replaced spain as its major continental rival.
this situation led to the development of a large military establishment high taxes and the creation of the bank of england to help finance european and imperial conflicts.
for both britons and colonists war helped to sharpen a sense of national identity against foreign foes.
british patriotic sentiment became more and more assertive as the eighteenth century progressed.
symbols of british identity proliferated the songs god save the king and rule britannia and even the modern rules of cricket the national sport.
the rapidly expanding british economy formed another point of pride uniting britons and colonists.
continental peoples according to a popular saying wore wooden shoes that is their standard of living was far below that of britons.
writers hailed commerce as a progressive civilizing force a way for different peoples to interact for mutual benefit without domination or military conflict.
especially in contrast to france britain saw itself as a realm of widespread prosperity individual liberty the rule of law and the protestant faith.
wealth religion and freedom went together.
there is no popish nation wrote the massachusetts theologian cotton mather in 1710 but what by embracing the protestant religion would.
not only assert themselves into a glorious liberty but also double their wealth immediately the british constitution central to this sense of british identity was the concept of liberty.
the fierce political struggles of the english civil war and the glorious revolution bequeathed to eighteenth century britons an abiding conviction that liberty was their unique possession.
they believed power and liberty to be natural antagonists.
to mediate between them advocates of british freedom celebrated the rule of law the right to live under legislation to which ones representatives had consented restraints on the arbitrary exercise of political authority and rights like trial by jury enshrined in the common law.
on both sides of the atlantic every political cause it seemed wrapped itself in the language of liberty and claimed to be defending the rights of englishmen continental writers dissatisfied with the lack of liberty in their own countries looked to britain as a model.
the house of commons house of lords and king each checked the power of the others.
this structure wrote the what were the meanings of british liberty in the eighteenth century.
french political philosopher baron montesquieu made britain the one nation in the world whose constitution has political liberty for its purpose in its balanced constitution and the principle that no man even the king is above the law britons claimed to have devised the best means of preventing political tyranny.
until the 1770s most colonists believed themselves to be part of the freest political system mankind had ever known.
as the coexistence of slavery and liberty within the empire demonstrated british freedom was anything but universal.
it was closely identified with the protestant religion and was invoked to contrast britons with the servile subjects of catholic countries especially france britains main rival in eighteenth century europe.
it viewed nearly every other nation on earth as enslaved to popery tyranny or barbarism.
one german military officer commented in 1743 on the british contempt of foreigners they pride themselves not only upon their being free themselves but being the bulwarks of liberty all over europe and they vilify most of the nations on the continent.
for being slaves as they call us british liberty was fully compatible with wide gradations in personal rights.
yet in the minds of the free residents of great britain and its north american colonies liberty was the bond of empire.
the language of liberty these ideas sank deep roots not only within the political nation those who voted held office and engaged in structured political debate but also far more broadly in british and colonial society.
laborers sailors and artisans spoke the language of british freedom as insistently as pamphleteers and parliamentarians.
increasingly the idea of liberty lost its traditional association with privileges derived from membership in a distinct social class and became more and more identified with a general right to resist arbitrary government.
even though less than 5 percent of the british population enjoyed the right to vote representative government was central to the eighteenth century idea of british liberty.
in this painting from 1793 prime minister william pitt addresses the house of commons.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 an empire of freedom on both sides of the atlantic liberty emerged as the battle cry of the rebellious.
frequent crowd actions protesting violations of traditional rights gave concrete expression to popular belief in the right to oppose tyranny.
ordinary persons thought nothing of taking to the streets to protest efforts by merchants to raise the cost of bread above the traditional just price or the royal navys practice of impressment kidnapping poor men on the streets for maritime service.
republican a 1770 engraving from the boston gazette by paul revere illustrates the association of british patriotism and liberty.
britannia sits with a liberty cap and her national shield and releases a bird from a cage.
liberty liberty was central to two sets of political ideas that flourished in the anglo american world.
one is termed by scholars republicanism although few in eighteenthcentury england used the word which literally meant a government without a king and conjured up memories of the beheading of charles i.
republicanism celebrated active participation in public life by economically independent citizens as the essence of liberty.
republicans assumed that only property owning citizens possessed virtue defined in the eighteenth century not simply as a personal moral quality but as the willingness to subordinate self interest to the pursuit of the public good.
only a virtuous people are capable of freedom wrote benjamin franklin.
in eighteenth century britain this body of thought about freedom was most closely associated with a group of critics of the established political order known as the country party because much of their support arose from the landed gentry.
they condemned what they considered the corruption of british politics evidenced by the growing number of government appointees who sat in the house of commons.
they called for the election of men of independence who could not be controlled by the ministry and they criticized the expansion of the national debt and the growing wealth of financial speculators in a commercializing economy.
britain they claimed was succumbing to luxury and political manipulation in a word a loss of virtue thereby endangering the careful balance of its system of government and indeed liberty itself.
in britain country party publicists like john trenchard and thomas gordon authors of catos letters published in the 1720s had little impact.
but their writings were eagerly devoured in the american colonies whose elites were attracted to trenchard and gordons emphasis on the political role of the independent landowner and their warnings against the constant tendency of political power to infringe upon liberty.
liberal freedom the second set of eighteenth century political ideas celebrating freedom came to be known as liberalism although its meaning was quite different from what the word suggests today.
whereas republican liberty had a public and social quality liberalism was essentially individual and private.
the leading philosopher of liberty was john locke whose two treatises of what were the meanings of british liberty in the eighteenth century.
government written around 1680 had limited influence in his own lifetime but became extremely well known in the next century.
many previous writers had compared government to the family assuming that in both inequality was natural and power always emanated from the top.
locke held that the principles that governed the family were inappropriate for organizing public life.
government he wrote was formed by a mutual agreement among equals the parties being male heads of households not all persons.
in this social contract men surrendered a part of their right to govern themselves in order to enjoy the benefits of the rule of law.
they retained however their natural rights whose existence predated the establishment of political authority.
protecting the security of life liberty and property required shielding a realm of private life and personal concerns including family relations religious preferences and economic activity from interference by the state.
during the eighteenth century lockean ideas individual rights the consent of the governed the right of rebellion against unjust or oppressive government would become familiar on both sides of the atlantic.
like other britons locke spoke of liberty as a universal right yet seemed to exclude many persons from its full benefits.
since the protection of property was one of governments main purposes liberalism was compatible with substantial inequalities in wealth and well being.
moreover while locke was one of the first theorists to defend the property rights of women and even their access to divorce and condemned slavery as a vile and miserable estate of man the free individual in liberal thought was essentially the propertied white man.
locke himself had helped to draft the fundamental constitutions of carolina discussed in chapter 3 which provided for slavery and he was an investor in the royal african company the the polling by the renowned eighteenthcentury british artist william hogarth satirizes the idea that british elections are decided by the reasoned deliberations of upstanding property owners.
inspired by a corrupt election of 1754 hogarth depicts an election scene in which the maimed and dying are brought to the polls to cast ballots.
at the center lawyers argue over whether a man who has a hook for a hand can swear on the bible.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 the public sphere slave trading monopoly.
slaves he wrote cannot be considered as any part of civil society nonetheless by proclaiming that all individuals possess natural rights that no government may violate lockean liberalism opened the door to the poor women and even slaves to challenge limitations on their own freedom.
republicanism and liberalism would eventually come to be seen as alternative understandings of freedom.
in the eighteenth century however these systems of thought overlapped and often reinforced each other.
both political outlooks could inspire a commitment to constitutional government and restraints on despotic power.
both emphasized the security of property as a foundation of freedom.
both traditions were transported to eighteenth century america.
ideas about liberty imported from britain to the colonies would eventually help to divide the empire.
the public sphere the title page of john lockes two treatises of government which traced the origins of government to an original state of nature and insisted that political authorities must not abridge mankinds natural rights.
colonial politics for most of the eighteenth century was considerably less tempestuous than in the seventeenth with its bitter struggles for power and frequent armed uprisings.
political stability in britain coupled with the maturation of local elites in america made for more tranquil government.
new york stood apart from this development.
with its diverse population and bitter memories of leislers rebellion see chapter 3 p 111 new york continued to experience intense political strife among its many economic interests and ethnic groups.
by the 1750s semipermanent political parties competed vigorously for popular support in new york elections.
but in most other colonies although differences over policies of one kind or another were hardly absent they rarely produced the civil disorder or political passions of the previous century.
the the british political philosopher john locke painted by michael dahl around 1696.
right to vote in many respects politics in eighteenth century america had a more democratic quality than in great britain.
suffrage requirements varied from colony to colony but as in britain the linchpin of voting laws was the property qualification.
its purpose was to ensure that men who possessed an economic stake in society and the independence of judgment that went with it determined the policies of the government.
the foundation of liberty the parliamentary leader henry ireton had declared during the english civil war of the 1640s is that those who shall choose the lawmakers shall be men freed from dependence upon others slaves servants tenants adult sons living in the homes of their parents the poor and women all lacked a will of their own and were therefore ineligible to vote.
the wide distribution of property in the colonies however meant that a far higher percentage of the population enjoyed voting rights than in the old world.
it is estimated that between 50 and 80 percent of adult white men could vote in eighteenth century colonial america as opposed to fewer than 5 percent in britain at the time.
colonial politics however was hardly democratic in a modern sense.
in a few instances some towns in massachusetts and on long island propertied women generally widows cast ballots.
but voting was almost what concepts and institutions dominated colonial politics in the eighteenth century.
everywhere considered a male prerogative.
in some colonies jews catholics and protestant dissenters like baptists and quakers could not vote.
propertied free blacks who enjoyed the franchise in virginia north carolina south carolina and georgia in the early days of settlement lost that right during the eighteenth century although north carolina restored it in the 1730s.
in the northern colonies while the law did not bar blacks from voting local custom did.
native americans were generally prohibited from voting.
political c u lt u r e s despite the broad electorate among white men the people existed only on election day.
between elections members of colonial assemblies remained out of touch with their constituents.
strongly competitive elections were the norm only in the middle colonies.
elsewhere many elections went uncontested either because only one candidate presented himself or because the local culture stressed community harmony as in many new england towns.
considerable power in colonial politics rested with those who held appointive not elective office.
governors and councils were appointed by the crown in the nine royal colonies and by the proprietors of pennsylvania and maryland.
only in rhode island and connecticut were these offices elective.
moreover laws passed by colonial assemblies could be vetoed by governors or in london.
in new england most town officers were elected but local officials in other colonies were appointed by the governor or by powerful officials in london.
the duke of newcastle alone could appoint eighty three colonial officials.
property qualifications for officeholding were far higher than for voting.
in south carolina for example nearly every adult male could meet the voting qualification of fifty acres of land or payment of twenty shillings in taxes but to sit in the assembly one had to own 500 acres of land and ten slaves or town property worth 1 000.
as a result throughout the eighteenth century nearly all of south carolinas legislators were planters or wealthy merchants.
despite its boisterous and competitive politics new yorks diminutive assembly with fewer than thirty members was dominated by relatives and allies of the great landed families especially the livingstons and delanceys.
of seventy two men who sat in the new york assembly between 1750 and 1776 fifty two were related to the families who owned the great hudson river estates.
in some colonies a majority of free men possessed the right to vote but an ingrained tradition of deference the assumption among ordinary people that wealth education and social prominence carried a right to public office sharply limited effective choice in elections.
virginia politics for example combined political this anonymous engraving depicting a 1764 pennsylvania election suggests the intensity of political debate in the middle colonies.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 the public sphere democracy for white men with the tradition that voters should choose among candidates from the gentry.
aspirants for public office actively sought to ingratiate themselves with ordinary voters distributing food and liquor freely at the courthouse where balloting took place.
in thomas jeffersons first campaign for the house of burgesses in 1768 his expenses included hiring two men for bringing up rum to the polling place.
even in new england with its larger number of elective positions town leaders were generally the largest property holders and offices frequently passed down from generation to generation of the same family.
few americans vigorously pursued elective office or took an active role in public affairs.
by the mid eighteenth century the typical officeholder was considerably richer than the norm when the century began.
colonial government preoccupied with events in europe and imperial rivalries successive british governments during the first half of the eighteenth century adopted a policy of salutary neglect toward the colonies leaving them largely to govern themselves.
with imperial authority so weak the large landowners merchants and lawyers who dominated colonial assemblies increasingly claimed the right to control local politics.
convinced that they represented the will of the people elected colonial assemblies used their control of finance to exert influence over appointed governors and councils.
although governors desired secure incomes for themselves and permanent revenue for their administrations some like robert hunter of new york demanded a life salary assemblies often authorized salaries only one year at a time and refused to levy taxes except in exchange for concessions on appointments land policy and other issues.
typically members of the british gentry who had suffered financial reversals and hoped to recoup their fortunes in america governors learned that to rule effectively they would have to cooperate with the colonial elite.
the rise of the assemblies in the seventeenth century the governor was the focal point of political authority and colonial assemblies were weak bodies that met infrequently.
but in the eighteenth as economic development enhanced the power of american elites the assemblies they dominated became more and more assertive.
their leaders insisted that assemblies possessed the same rights and powers in local affairs as the house of commons enjoyed in britain.
the most successful governors were those who accommodated the rising power of the assemblies and used their appointive powers and control of land grants to win allies among assembly members.
the most powerful assembly was pennsylvanias where a new charter adopted in 1701 eliminated the governors council establishing the only unicameral one house legislature in the colonies.
controlled until midcentury by an elite of quaker merchants the assembly wrested control of finance appointments and the militia from a series of governors representing the penn family.
close behind in terms of power and legislative independence were the assemblies of new york virginia south carolina and especially massachusetts which successfully resisted governors demands what concepts and institutions dominated colonial politics in the eighteenth century.
for permanent salaries for appointed officials.
many of the conflicts between governors and elected assemblies stemmed from the colonies economic growth.
to deal with the scarcity of gold and silver coins the only legal form of currency some colonies printed paper money although this was strongly opposed by the governors authorities in london and british merchants who did not wish to be paid in what they considered worthless paper.
numerous battles also took place over land policy sometimes involving divergent attitudes toward the remaining indian population and the level of rents charged to farmers on land owned by the crown or proprietors.
in their negotiations and conflicts with royal governors leaders of the assemblies drew on the writings of the english country party whose emphasis on the constant tension between liberty and political power and the dangers of executive influence over the legislature made sense of their own experience.
of the european settlements in north america only the british colonies possessed any considerable degree of popular participation in government.
this fact reinforced the assemblies claim to embody the rights of englishmen and the principle of popular consent to government.
they were defenders of the peoples liberty in the words of one new york legislator.
politics in public this language reverberated outside the relatively narrow world of elective and legislative politics.
the political nation was dominated by the american gentry whose members addressed each other in letters speeches newspaper articles and pamphlets filled with latin expressions and references to classical learning.
but especially in colonial towns and cities the eighteenth century witnessed a considerable expansion of the public sphere the world of political organization and debate independent of the government where an informed citizenry openly discussed questions that had previously been the preserve of officials.
in boston new york and philadelphia clubs proliferated where literary philosophical scientific and political issues were debated.
among the best known was the junto a club for mutual improvement founded by benjamin franklin in philadelphia in 1727 for weekly discussion of political and economic questions.
beginning with only a dozen members it eventually evolved into the much larger american philosophical society.
such groups were generally composed of men of property and commerce but some drew ordinary citizens into discussions of public affairs.
colonial taverns and coffeehouses also became important sites not only for social conviviality but also for political debates.
philadelphia had a larger number of drinking establishments per capita than paris.
in philadelphia one clergyman commented the poorest laborer thinks himself entitled to deliver his sentiments in matters of religion or politics with as much freedom as the gentleman or scholar the colonial press neither the spanish possessions of florida and new mexico nor new france possessed a printing press although missionaries had established one in mexico city in the 1530s.
in british north america however the c h.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 benjamin franklins quest for selfimprovement or as he put it in his autobiography moral perfection is illustrated in this temperance diagram which charts his behavior each day of the week with regard to thirteen virtues.
they are listed on the left by their first letters temperance silence order resolution frugality industry sincerity justice moderation cleanliness tranquility chastity and humility.
franklin did not always adhere to these virtues.
the public sphere press expanded rapidly during the eighteenth century.
so did the number of political broadsides and pamphlets published especially at election time.
widespread literacy created an expanding market for printed materials.
by the eve of the american revolution some three quarters of the free adult male population in the colonies and more than one third of the women could read and write and a majority of american families owned at least one book.
philadelphia boasted no fewer than seventy seven bookshops in the 1770s.
circulating libraries appeared in many colonial cities and towns making possible a wider dissemination of knowledge at a time when books were still expensive.
the first the library company of philadelphia was established by benjamin franklin in 1731.
so few were the readers at that time and the majority of us so poor franklin recalled in his autobiography 1791 that he could find only fifty persons mostly young tradesmen anxious for self improvement and willing to pay for the privilege of borrowing books.
but reading he added soon became fashionable libraries sprang up in other towns and ordinary americans came to be better instructed and more intelligent than people of the same rank abroad.
the first continuously published colonial newspaper the boston newsletter appeared in 1704 a predecessor publick occurrences both foreign and domestick established in boston in 1690 had been suppressed by authorities after a single issue for criticizing military cooperation with the iroquois.
there were thirteen colonial newspapers by 1740 and twentyfive in 1765 mostly weeklies with small circulations an average of 600 sales per issue.
probably the best edited newspaper was the pennsylvania gazette established in 1728 in philadelphia and purchased the following year by benjamin franklin who had earlier worked as an apprentice printer on his brothers boston periodical the new england courant.
at its peak the gazette attracted 2 000 subscribers.
newspapers initially devoted most of their space to advertisements religious affairs and reports on british society and government.
but by the 1730s political commentary was widespread in the american press.
freedom of expression and its limits the public sphere thrived on the free exchange of ideas.
but free expression was not generally considered one of the ancient rights of englishmen.
the phrase freedom of speech originated in britain during the sixteenth century in parliaments struggle to achieve the privilege of unrestrained debate.
a right of legislators not ordinary citizens it referred to the ability of members of parliament to express their views without fear of reprisal on the grounds that only in this way could they effectively represent the people.
outside of parliament free speech had no legal protection.
a subject could be beheaded for accusing the king of failing to hold true religious beliefs and language from swearing to criticism of the government exposed a person to criminal penalties.
as for freedom of the press governments on both sides of the atlantic viewed this as extremely dangerous partly because they considered ordinary citizens prone to be misled by inflammatory printed materials.
during the english civil war of the 1640s the levelers had called for the adoption of a written constitution an agreement of the people containing what concepts and institutions dominated colonial politics in the eighteenth century.
guarantees of religious liberty and freedom of the press.
but until 1695 when a british law requiring the licensing of printed works before publication lapsed no newspaper book or pamphlet could legally be printed without a government license.
the instructions of colonial governors included a warning about the great inconveniences that may arise by the liberty of printing after 1695 the government could not censor newspapers books and pamphlets before they appeared in print although it continued to try to manage the press by direct payments to publishers and individual journalists.
authors and publishers could still be prosecuted for seditious libel a crime that included defaming government officials or punished for contempt.
elected assemblies not governors most frequently discouraged freedom of the press in colonial america.
dozens of publishers were hauled before assemblies and forced to apologize for comments regarding one or another member.
if they refused they were jailed.
james franklin benjamins older brother spent a month in prison in 1722 after publishing a piece satirizing public authorities in massachusetts.
colonial newspapers vigorously defended freedom of the press as a central component of liberty insisting that the citizenry had a right to monitor the workings of government and subject public officials to criticism.
many newspapers reprinted passages from catos letters in which trenchard and gordon strongly opposed prosecutions for libel.
without freedom of thought they declared there can be no such thing as wisdom and no such thing as public liberty without freedom of speech but since government printing contracts were crucial for economic success few newspapers attacked colonial governments unless financially supported by an opposition faction.
the trial of zenger the most famous colonial court case involving freedom of the press demonstrated that popular sentiment opposed prosecutions for criticism of public officials.
this was the 1735 trial of john peter zenger a germanborn printer who had emigrated to new york as a youth.
financed by wealthy opponents of governor william cosby zengers newspaper the weekly journal lambasted the governor for corruption influence peddling and tyranny new yorks council ordered four issues burned and had zenger himself arrested and tried for seditious libel.
the judge instructed the jurors to consider only whether zenger had actually published the offending words not whether they were accurate.
but zengers attorney andrew hamilton urged the jury to judge not the publisher but the governor.
if they decided that zengers charges were correct they must acquit him and hamilton proclaimed every man who prefers freedom to a life of slavery will bless you zenger was found not guilty.
the case sent a warning to prosecutors that libel cases might be very difficult to win especially in the superheated atmosphere of new york partisan politics.
to be sure had zenger lambasted the assembly rather than the governor he would in all likelihood have been lodged in jail without the benefit of a trial.
the law of libel remained on the books.
but the outcome helped to promote the idea that the publication of truth should always be permitted and it demonstrated that the idea of free expression was becoming ingrained in the popular imagination.
a portrait of benjamin franklin in fur hat and spectacles dated 1777 depicts him as a symbol of america.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 the the first page of the new york weekly journal edited by john peter zenger one of four issues ordered to be burned by local authorities.
american the great awakening enlightenment during the eighteenth century many educated americans began to be influenced by the outlook of the european enlightenment.
this philosophical movement which originated among french thinkers and soon spread to britain sought to apply to political and social life the scientific method of careful investigation based on research and experiment.
enlightenment ideas crisscrossed the atlantic along with goods and people.
enlightenment thinkers insisted that every human institution authority and tradition be judged before the bar of reason.
the self educated benjamin franklins wide range of activities establishing a newspaper debating club and library publishing the widely circulated poor richards almanack and conducting experiments to demonstrate that lightning is a form of electricity exemplified the enlightenment spirit and made him probably the best known american in the eighteenth century world.
one inspiration for the enlightenment was a reaction against the bloody religious wars that racked europe in the seventeenth century.
enlightenment thinkers hoped that reason not religious enthusiasm could govern human life.
the criticism of social and political institutions based on tradition and hereditary privilege rather than the dictates of reason could also be applied to established churches.
john locke himself had published the reasonableness of christianity in 1695 which insisted that religious belief should rest on scientific evidence.
during the eighteenth century many prominent americans moved toward the position called arminianism which taught that reason alone was capable of establishing the essentials of religion.
others adopted deism a belief that god essentially withdrew after creating the world leaving it to function according to scientific laws without divine intervention.
belief in miracles in the revealed truth of the bible and in the innate sinfulness of mankind were viewed by arminians deists and others as outdated superstitions that should be abandoned in the modern age.
in the seventeenth century the english scientist isaac newton had revealed the natural laws that governed the physical universe.
here deists believed was the purest evidence of gods handiwork.
many protestants of all denominations could accept newtons findings while remaining devout churchgoers as newton himself had.
but deists concluded that the best form of religious devotion was to study the workings of nature rather than to worship in organized churches or appeal to divine grace for salvation.
by the late colonial era a small but influential group of leading americans including benjamin franklin and thomas jefferson could be classified as deists.
t h e g r e at awa k e n i n g like freedom of the press religion was another realm where the actual experience of liberty outstripped its legal recognition.
religion remained how did the great awakening challenge the religious and social structure of british north america.
central to eighteenth century american life.
sermons theological treatises and copies of the bible were by far the largest category of material produced by colonial printers.
religious disputes often generated more public attention than political issues.
yet many church leaders worried about lax religious observance as colonial economic growth led people to be more and more preoccupied with worldly affairs.
religious revivals many ministers were concerned that westward expansion commercial development the growth of enlightenment rationalism and lack of individual engagement in church services were undermining religious devotion.
these fears helped to inspire the revivals that swept through the colonies beginning in the 1730s.
known as the great awakening the revivals were less a coordinated movement than a series of local events united by a commitment to a religion of the heart a more emotional and personal christianity than that offered by existing churches.
the revivals redrew the religious landscape of the colonies.
the eighteenth century witnessed a revival of religious fundamentalism in many parts of the world in part a response to the rationalism of the enlightenment and a desire for greater religious purity.
in the middle east and central asia where islam was widespread followers of a form of the religion known as wahabbism called for a return to the practices of the religions early days.
in eastern europe hasidic jews emphasized the importance of faith and religious joy as opposed to what they considered the overly academic study of jewish learning and history in conventional judaism.
methodism and other forms of enthusiastic religion were flourishing in europe.
like other intellectual currents of the time the great awakening was a transatlantic movement.
during the 1720s and 1730s the new jersey dutch reformed clergyman theodore frelinghuysen his presbyterian neighbors william and gilbert tennent and the massachusetts congregationalist minister jonathan edwards pioneered an intensely emotional style of preaching.
edwardss famous sermon sinners in the hands of an angry god portrayed sinful man as a loathsome insect suspended over a bottomless pit of eternal fire by a slender thread that might break at any moment.
edwardss preaching declared a member of his congregation inspired worshipers to cry out what shall i do to be saved oh i am going to hell only a new birth immediately acknowledging ones sins and pleading for divine grace could save men from eternal damnation.
it is the new birth that makes sinners free declared the reverend joshua tufts.
the preaching of whitefield religious emotionalism was not confined to the american colonies it spread through much of mid eighteenth century europe as well.
more than any other individual the english minister george whitefield who declared the whole world his parish sparked the great awakening.
for two years after his arrival in america in 1739 whitefield brought his highly emotional brand of preaching to colonies from georgia to new england.
god whitefield proclaimed was merciful.
rather than being predestined jonathan edwards one of the most prominent preachers of the great awakening.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 george whitefield the english evangelist who helped to spark the great awakening in the colonies.
painted around 1742 by john wollaston who had emigrated from england to the colonies the work depicts whitefields powerful effect on male and female listeners.
it also illustrates whitefields eye problem which led critics to dub him dr.
squintum the great awakening for damnation men and women could save themselves by repenting of their sins.
whitefield appealed to the passions of his listeners powerfully sketching the boundless joy of salvation and the horrors of damnation.
in every sermon he asked his listeners to look into their own hearts and answer the question are you saved if not they must change their sinful ways and surrender their lives to christ.
tens of thousands of colonists flocked to whitefields sermons which were widely reported in the american press making him a celebrity and helping to establish the revivals as the first major intercolonial event in north american history.
although a deist benjamin franklin helped to publicize whitefields tour and made a tidy profit by publishing his sermons and journals.
in whitefields footsteps a host of traveling preachers or evangelists meaning literally bearers of good news held revivalist meetings often to the alarm of established ministers.
critics of the great awakening produced sermons pamphlets and newspaper articles condemning the revivalist preachers for lacking theological training encouraging disrespect for the established church and her ministers and filling churches with general disorder connecticut sought to stem the revivalist tide through laws punishing disruptive traveling preachers.
by the time they subsided in the 1760s the revivals had changed the religious configuration of the colonies and enlarged the boundaries of liberty.
whitefield had inspired the emergence of numerous dissenting churches.
congregations split into factions headed by old lights traditionalists and new lights revivalists and new churches proliferated baptist methodist presbyterian and others.
many of these new churches began to criticize the colonial practice of levying taxes to support an established church they defended religious freedom as one of the natural rights government must not restrict.
the awakening s impact although the revivals were primarily a spiritual matter the great awakening reflected existing social tensions threw into question many forms of authority and inspired criticism of aspects of colonial society.
they attracted primarily men and women of modest means rude ignorant void of manners education or good breeding one anglican minister complained.
revivalist preachers frequently criticized commercial society insisting that believers should make salvation not profit the one business of their lives in new england they condemned merchants who ensnared the unwary in debt as greedy and unchristian.
preaching to the small farmers of the southern backcountry baptist and methodist revivalists criticized the worldliness of wealthy planters and attacked as sinful activities such as gambling horse racing and lavish entertainments on the sabbath.
a few preachers explicitly condemned slavery.
and a few converts such as robert carter iii the grandson of the wealthy planter robert king carter emancipated their slaves after concluding that black and white were brothers in christ.
most masters managed to reconcile christianity and slaveholding.
but especially in the chesapeake the revivals brought numerous slaves into the christian fold an important step in their acculturation as african americans.
and a few blacks touched by the word of god took how did the great awakening challenge the religious and social structure of british north america.
up preaching themselves.
the revivals also spawned a group of female exhorters who for a time shattered the male monopoly on preaching.
the revivals broadened the range of religious alternatives available to americans thereby leaving them more divided than before and at the same time more fully integrated into transatlantic religious developments.
but the impact of the great awakening spread beyond purely spiritual matters.
the newspaper and pamphlet wars it inspired greatly expanded the circulation of printed material in the colonies.
the revivals encouraged many colonists to trust their own views rather than those of established elites.
in listening to the sermons of self educated preachers forming bible study groups and engaging in intense religious discussions ordinary colonists asserted the right to independent judgment.
the common people proclaimed baptist minister isaac backus claim as good a right to judge and act for themselves in matters of religion as civil rulers or the learned clergy the revivalists aim was spiritual salvation not social or political revolution.
but the independent frame of mind they encouraged would have significant political consequences.
i m p e r i a l r i va l r i e s spanish north america the rapid growth of britains north american colonies took place at a time of increased jockeying for power among european empires involving much of the area today included in the united states.
but the colonies of englands rivals although covering immense territories remained thinly populated and far weaker economically.
the spanish empire encompassed an area that stretched from the pacific coast and new mexico into the great plains and eastward through texas and florida.
after 1763 it also included louisiana which spain obtained from france.
on paper a vast territorial empire spanish north america actually consisted of a few small and isolated urban clusters most prominently st augustine in florida san antonio in texas and santa fe and albuquerque in new mexico.
in the second half of the century the spanish government made a concerted effort to reinvigorate its empire north of the rio grande.
it stabilized relations with indians especially the nomadic comanches and apaches who had wreaked havoc in new mexico.
but although ranching expanded in new mexico and texas the economy of the spanish colonies essentially rested on trading with and extracting labor from the surviving indian population.
new mexicos population in 1765 was only 20 000 equally divided between spanish settlers and pueblo indians.
spain began the colonization of texas at the beginning of the eighteenth century partly as a buffer to prevent french commercial influence then spreading in the mississippi valley from intruding into new mexico.
the spanish established complexes consisting of religious missions and presidios military outposts at los adaes la baha and san antonio.
but the region attracted few settlers.
texas had only 1 200 spanish colonists in 1760.
florida stagnated as well remaining an impoverished military outpost.
around 1770 its population consisted of about 2 000 spanish 1 000 black slaves and a few hundred indians survivors of many decades of war and disease.
this 1740 pamphlet by gilbert tennent a presbyterian minister in philadelphia defended the great awakening by comparing anti revival ministers to the false prophets described in the bible.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 european empires ft la jonquiere in north imperial rivalries america ca.
ft dauphin canada california san francisco monterey ft vincennes cahokia kaskaskia ste.
genevieve new santa fe fort or presidio mission british settlement british land claims area of french influence area of spanish influence williamsburg atl an t i c ocean ft prudhomme albuquerque ft arkansas charleston savannah ft toulouse los adaes natchitoches apalachee nacogdoches texas baton rouge new orleans st marks san antonio el paso del norte guaymas port royal trois rivieres salem boston albany ft niagara ft st joseph ft.
le boeuf ft pontchartrain new york ft st joseph ft duquesne philadelphia ft st louis ft miami ft crevecoeur baltimore louisiana pac i f i c oc e an quebec montreal sault ste.
marie ft frontenac ft st croix san luis obispo mexico san gabriel santa barbara san juan capistrano socorro san diego tucson guevavi st augustine florida la baha mexico bahamas gulf of mexico 500 miles havana cuba haiti 500 kilometers san blas three great empires the british french and spanish competed for influence in north america for much of the eighteenth century.
jamaica the spanish in california on the pacific coast russian fur traders in the eighteenth century established a series of forts and trading posts in alaska.
although only a handful of russian colonists lived in the region spain alarmed by what it saw as a danger to its american empire ordered the colonization of california.
a string of spanish missions and presidios soon dotted the california coastline from san diego to los angeles santa barbara monterey san francisco and sonoma.
born on the spanish mediterranean island of mallorca father junpero serra became one of the most controversial figures in californias early history.
he founded the first california mission in san diego in 1769 and administered the mission network until his death in 1784.
serra was widely praised in spain for converting thousands of indians to christianity teaching them spanish and working to transform their hunting and gathering economies by introducing settled agriculture and skilled crafts.
today he is being considered by the catholic church for elevation to sainthood.
but forced labor and disease took a heavy toll among indians who lived at the missions serra directed.
how did the spanish and french empires in america develop in the eighteenth century.
present day california was a densely populated area with a native population of perhaps 250 000 when spanish settlement began.
but as in other regions the coming of soldiers and missionaries proved a disaster for the indians.
more than any other spanish colony california was a mission frontier.
these outposts served simultaneously as religious institutions and centers of government and labor.
their aim was to transform the culture of the local population and eventually assimilate it into spanish civilization.
father serra and other missionaries hoped to convert the natives to christianity and settled farming.
the missions also relied on forced indian labor to grow grain work in orchards and vineyards and tend cattle.
the combination of new diseases and the resettlement of thousands of indians in villages around the missions devastated indian society.
by 1821 when mexico won its independence from spain californias native population had declined by more than one third.
but the area had not attracted spanish settlers.
in 1800 los angeles with a population of 300 was the largest town.
when spanish rule came to an end in 1821 californios california residents of spanish descent numbered only 3 200.
the french empire spains north american colonies remained peripheral parts of its empire when compared with its possessions in central and south america and the caribbean.
a greater rival to british power in north america as well as in europe and the caribbean was france.
during the eighteenth century the population and economy of canada expanded.
at the same time french traders pushed into the mississippi river valley southward from the great lakes and northward from mobile founded in 1702 and new orleans established in 1718.
in the st lawrence river valley of french canada prosperous farming communities developed.
by 1750 the area had a population of about 55 000 colonists.
another 10 000 about half europeans half african american slaves resided in louisiana mostly concentrated on the lower mississippi river and along the gulf coast.
by mid century sugar plantations had sprung up in the area between new orleans and baton in this lithograph from 1816 indians perform a dance at mission san francisco in california.
priests watch from the front of the mission church.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 a sketch of new orleans as it appeared in 1720.
battle for the continent rouge.
new orleans already had a vibrant social life as well as an established community with churches schools and governmental buildings.
nonetheless the population of french north america continued to be dwarfed by the british colonies.
prejudice against emigration to north america remained widespread in france.
a french novel written in 1731 known today as the basis for the nineteenth century opera manon told the story of a prostitute punished by being transported to louisiana and of her noble lover who followed her there.
it expressed the popular view of the colony as a place of cruel exile for criminals and social outcasts.
nonetheless by claiming control of a large arc of territory and by establishing close trading and military relations with many indian tribes the french empire posed a real challenge to the british.
french forts and trading posts ringed the british colonies.
in present day mississippi and alabama and in the western regions of georgia and the carolinas french and british traders competed to form alliances with local indians and control the trade in deerskins.
the french were a presence on the new england and new york frontiers and in western pennsylvania.
b at t l e f o r t h e c o n t i n e n t the middle ground for much of the eighteenth century the western frontier of british north america was the flashpoint of imperial rivalries.
the ohio valley became caught up in a complex struggle for power involving the french british rival indian communities and settlers and land companies pursuing their own interests.
here by mid century resided numerous indians including shawnees and delawares who had been pushed out of pennsylvania by advancing white settlement cherokees and chickasaws from the southern colonies who looked to the region for new hunting grounds and iroquois seeking to exert control over the areas fur trade.
on this middle ground between european empires and indian sovereignty villages sprang up where members of numerous tribes lived side by side along with european traders and the occasional missionary.
by the mid eighteenth century indians had learned that direct military confrontation with europeans meant suicide and that an alliance with a w h a t w a s t h e i m p a c t o f t h e s e v e n ye a r s wa r o n i m p e r i a l a n d i n d i a n w h i t e r e l a t i o n s.
single european power exposed them to danger from others.
the indians of the ohio valley recognized that the imperial rivalry of britain and france posed both threat and opportunity.
as one delaware spokesman remarked it was impossible to know where the indians land lay for the french claimed all the land on one side of the ohio river and the english on the other side on the other hand indians sought with some success to play european empires off one another and to control the lucrative commerce with whites.
the iroquois were masters of balance of power diplomacy.
the british accepted their sovereignty in the ohio valley but it was challenged by the french and their indian allies.
in 1750 few white settlers inhabited the ohio valley.
but already scotchirish and german immigrants virginia planters and land speculators were eyeing the regions fertile soil.
in 1749 the government of virginia awarded an immense land grant half a million acres to the ohio company an example of the huge domains being parceled out to those with political connections.
the companys members included the colonys royal governor robert dinwiddie and the cream of virginia society lees carters and the young george washington.
the land grant threatened the regions indians as well as pennsylvania land speculators who also had claims in the area.
it sparked the french to bolster their presence in the region.
it was the ohio companys demand for french recognition of its land claims that inaugurated the seven years war known in the colonies as the french and a map of upstate new york by governor william tryon of colonial new york demonstrates that the area was considered the realm of the six iroquois nations whose domain also stretched into the ohio valley.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 battle for the continent indian war the first of the centurys imperial wars to begin in the colonies and the first to result in a decisive victory for one combatant.
it permanently altered the global balance of power.
the the cover of a magazine published in pennsylvania in 1758 depicts an englishman and a frenchman attempting to trade with an indian.
the frenchman offers a tomahawk and musket the englishman a bible and cloth.
of course the depictions of the two europeans reflect pro british stereotypes.
seven years war before 1688 england was a marginal power.
spains empire was far more extensive france had greater influence in europe and the dutch dominated overseas trade and finance.
only in the eighteenth century after numerous wars against its great rivals france and spain did britain emerge as the worlds leading empire and its center of trade and banking.
the war of the spanish succession known in the colonies as queen annes war lasted from 1702 to 1713 the war of jenkins ear named after a british seaman mistreated by the spanish from 1739 to 1742 and king georges war from 1740 to 1748.
to finance these wars britains public expenditures taxes and national debt rose enormously.
the high rate of taxation inspired discontent at home and would later help to spark the american revolution.
by the 1750s british possessions and trade reached around the globe.
every part of the world affects us in some way or another remarked the duke of newcastle.
the existence of global empires implied that warfare among them would also be global.
what became a worldwide struggle for imperial domination which eventually spread to europe west africa and asia began in 1754 with british efforts to dislodge the french from forts they had constructed in western pennsylvania.
in the previous year george washington then only twenty one years old had been dispatched by the colonys governor on an unsuccessful mission to persuade french soldiers to abandon a fort they were building on lands claimed by the ohio company.
in 1754 washington returned to the area with two companies of soldiers.
he hastily constructed fort necessity.
after an ill considered attempt to defend it against a larger french and indian force resulting in the loss of one third of his men washington was forced to surrender.
soon afterward an expedition led by general edward braddock against fort duquesne todays pittsburgh was ambushed by french and indian forces leaving braddock and two thirds of his 3 000 soldiers dead or wounded.
for two years the war went against the british.
french and indian forces captured british forts in northern new york.
the southern backcountry was ablaze with fighting among british forces colonists and indians.
inhumanity flourished on all sides.
indians killed hundreds of colonists in western pennsylvania and pushed the line of settlement all the way back to carlisle only 100 miles west of philadelphia.
in nova scotia the british rounded up around 5 000 local french residents called acadians confiscated their land and expelled them from the region selling their farms to settlers from new england.
some of those expelled eventually returned to france others ended up as far away as louisiana where their descendants came to be known as cajuns.
as the british government under prime minister william pitt who took office in 1757 raised huge sums of money and poured men and naval forces into the war the tide of battle turned.
pitts strategy was to provide funds to prussia and austria to enable them to hold the line against france and its ally spain in europe while the british struck at the french weak point its colonies.
by 1759 britain with colonial and indian soldiers playing a w h a t w a s t h e i m p a c t o f t h e s e v e n ye a r s wa r o n i m p e r i a l a n d i n d i a n w h i t e r e l a t i o n s.
major role had captured the pivotal french outposts of forts duquesne ticonderoga north of albany and louisbourg on cape breton island which guarded the mouth of the st lawrence river.
in september of that year a french army was defeated on the plains of abraham near quebec.
in 1760 montreal the last outpost of new france surrendered.
british forces also seized nearly all the islands in the french caribbean and established control of india.
in europe meanwhile prussia and austria managed to fend off the coalition of france russia and spain.
a world transformed as long as the world has stood there has not been such a war declared a british emissary to the delaware indians.
britains victory fundamentally reshaped the world balance of power.
in the peace of paris in 1763 france ceded canada to britain receiving back in return the sugar islands of guadeloupe and martinique far more lucrative colonies from the point of view of french authorities.
as part of the reshuffling of imperial possessions spain ceded florida to britain in exchange for the return of the philippines and cuba seized by the british during the war.
spain also acquired from france the vast louisiana colony.
frances 200 year old north american empire had come to an end.
with the exception of two tiny islands retained by france off the coast of newfoundland the entire continent east of the mississippi river was now in british hands.
peace remarked prime minister pitt will be as hard to make as war eighteenth century warfare conducted on land and sea across the globe was enormously expensive.
the seven years war put strains on all the participants.
the wars cost produced a financial crisis in france that almost three decades later would help to spark the french revolution.
the british would try to recoup part of the cost of war by increasing taxes on their american colonies.
we no sooner leave fighting our neighbors the french commented the british writer dr samuel johnson but we must fall to quarreling among ourselves in fact the peace of paris was soon followed by open warfare in north america between the british and native americans.
pontiac s rebellion throughout eastern north america the abrupt departure of the french in the aftermath of the seven years war eliminated the balance of power diplomacy that had enabled groups like the iroquois to maintain a significant degree of autonomy.
even as england and its colonies celebrated their victory as a triumph of liberty indians saw it as a threat to their own freedom.
indians had fought on both sides in the war although mainly as allies of the french.
their primary aim however was to maintain their independence from both empires.
domination by any outside power indians feared meant the loss of freedom.
without consulting them the french had ceded land indians claimed as their own to british control.
the treaty of paris left indians more dependent than ever on the british and ushered in a period of confusion over land claims control of the fur trade and tribal relations in general.
to indians it was clear that continued expansion of the british colonies posed a dire threat.
one british army officer reported that native americans say we mean to make slaves of them by taking their land.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 battle for the continent in 1763 in the wake of the french defeat indians of the ohio valley and great lakes launched a revolt against british rule.
although known as pontiacs rebellion after an ottawa war leader the rebellion owed at least as much to the teachings of neolin a delaware religious prophet.
during a religious vision the master of life instructed neolin that his people must reject european technology free themselves from commercial ties with whites and dependence on alcohol clothe themselves in the garb of their ancestors and drive the british from their territory although friendly french inhabitants could remain.
neolin combined this message with the relatively new idea of pan indian identity.
all indians he preached were a single people and only through cooperation could they regain their lost independence.
the common experience of dispossession the intertribal communities that had developed in the ohio country and the mixing of indian warriors in french armies had helped to inspire this sense of identity as indians rather than members of individual tribes.
the proclamation line in the spring and summer of 1763 ottawas hurons and other indians besieged detroit then a major british military outpost seized nine other forts and killed hundreds of white settlers who had intruded onto indian lands.
british forces soon launched a counterattack and over the next few years the tribes one by one made peace.
but the uprising inspired the government in london to issue the proclamation of 1763 prohibiting further colonial settlement west of the appalachian mountains.
these lands were reserved exclusively for indians.
moreover the proclamation banned the sale of indian lands to private individuals.
henceforth only colonial governments could arrange such purchases.
the british aim was less to protect the indians than to stabilize the situation on the colonial frontier and to avoid being dragged into an endless series of border conflicts.
but the proclamation enraged both settlers and speculators hoping to take advantage of the expulsion of the french to consolidate their claims to western lands.
they ignored the new policy.
george washington himself ordered his agents to buy up as much indian land as possible while keeping the transactions a profound secret because of their illegality.
failing to offer a viable solution to the question of westward expansion the proclamation of 1763 ended up further exacerbating settlerindian relations.
p e n n s y lva n i a and the indians the seven years war not only redrew the map of the world but produced dramatic changes within the american colonies as well.
nowhere was this more evident than in pennsylvania where the conflict shattered the decades old rule of the quaker elite and dealt the final blow to the colonys policy of accommodation with the indians.
during the war with the frontier ablaze with battles between settlers and french and indian warriors western pennsylvanians demanded that colonial authorities adopt a more aggressive stance.
when the governor declared war on hostile delawares raised a militia and offered a bounty for indian scalps many of the assemblys pacifist quakers resigned their seats effectively ending their control w h a t w a s t h e i m p a c t o f t h e s e v e n ye a r s wa r o n i m p e r i a l a n d i n d i a n w h i t e r e l a t i o n s.
eastern north america after the peace of paris 1763 gulf of st lawrence province of quebec quebec r la w ren ce algonquians lake superior s t hudson s bay company ojibwas penboscots montreal abnakis mohegans nipissings la ro n n lake michiga hu eo lak n o tari boston detroit l e ak er ie massachusetts new york hartford newport albany rhode island new haven connecticut new york perth amboy burlington pennsylvania iroquois sauks delawares annapolis delaware williamsburg maryland virginia tuscaroras new bern cherokees chickasaws philadelphia new castle north carolina ap pa la ch ia n shawnees mo un tain s new jersey wyandots mis sissi ppi r.
maine part of massachusetts new hampshire portsmouth ke foxes potawatomis halifax passamaquoddies atlantic ocea n corees south carolina catawbas charleston georgia creeks yazoos savannah yamasees choctaws west florida mose st augustine apalachees natchez new orleans ea st gulf of mexico flo rid a of pennsylvania politics.
the war deepened the antagonism of western farmers toward indians and witnessed numerous indiscriminate assaults on indian communities both allies and enemies.
in december 1763 while pontiacs rebellion still raged a party of fifty armed men mostly scotch irish farmers from the vicinity of the pennsylvania town of paxton destroyed the indian village of conestoga massacring half 400 miles 400 kilometers colonial capitals proclamation line of 1763 spanish territory english territory the peace of paris which ended the seven years war left all of north america east of the mississippi in british hands ending the french presence on the continent.
voices of freedom from the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano o r g u s t a v u s va s s a t h e a f r i c a n 1 7 8 9 olaudah equianos autobiography published in london was the most prominent account of the slave experience written in the eighteenth century.
in this passage which comes after equianos description of a slave auction in the caribbean he calls on white persons to live up to their professed different lots and it was very moving on this occasion to see and hear their cries at parting.
o ye nominal christians.
might not an african ask you learned you this from your god.
who says unto you do unto all men as you would men should do belief in liberty.
is it not enough that we are torn from our we were not many days in the merchants custody country and friends to toil for your luxury and lust of gain.
must every tender feeling be sacrificed to your avarice.
are the dearest friends and relations now before we were sold after their usual manner which is this on a signal given as the beat of a drum the buyers rush in at once into the yard where the slaves are confined and make choice of that parcel they like best.
in this manner without scruple are relations and friends separated most of them never to see each other again.
i remember in the vessel in which i was brought over.
there were several brothers who in the sale were sold in rendered more dear by their separation from their kindred still to be parted from each other and thus prevented from cheering the gloom of slavery with the small comfort of being together and mingling their sufferings and sorrows.
why are parents to lose their children brothers their sisters or husbands their wives.
surely this is a new refinement in cruelty.
from pontiac speeches 1762 and 1763 pontiac was a leader of the pan indian resistance to english rule known as pontiacs rebellion which followed the end of the seven years war.
neolin was a delaware religious prophet who helped to inspire the rebellion.
why do you not clothe yourselves in skins as they did use bows and arrows and the stone pointed lances which they used.
you have bought guns knives kettles and blankets from the white man until you can no longer do without them and what is worse you have drunk the poison firewater which turns you into fools.
fling all these things away live as your wise forefathers did before you.
englishmen although you have conquered the french you have not yet conquered us.
we are not your slaves.
these lakes these woods and mountains and as for these english these dogs dressed in red who have come to rob you of your hunting grounds and drive away the game you must lift the hatchet were left to us by our ancestors.
they are our inheritance and we will part with them to none.
your against them.
wipe them from the face of the earth and then you will win my favor back again and once nation supposes that we like the white people cannot live without bread and pork and beef.
but you ought to know that he the great spirit and more be happy and prosperous.
master of life has provided food for us in these spacious lakes and on these woody mountains.
the master of life has said to neolin i am the maker of heaven and earth the trees questions lakes rivers and all else.
i am the maker of all mankind and because i love you you must do my 1.
what aspect of slavery does equiano emphasize in his account and why do you think he does so.
the land on which you live i have made for you and not for others.
why do you suffer the white man 2.
what elements of indian life does neolin criticize most strongly.
to dwell among you.
my children you have forgotten the customs and traditions of your forefathers.
how do equiano and pontiac differ in the ways they address white audiences.
4 slavery freedom and the struggle for empire to 1763 benjamin franklin produced this famous cartoon in 1754 calling on britains north american colonies to unite against the french.
battle for the continent a dozen men women and children who lived there under the protection of pennsylvanias governor.
they then marched on lancaster where they killed fourteen additional indians.
like participants in bacons rebellion nearly a century earlier they accused colonial authorities of treating indians too leniently.
they petitioned the legislature to remove all indians from the colony.
the indians claim to freedom and independency they insisted threatened pennsylvanias stability.
when the paxton boys marched on philadelphia in february 1764 intending to attack moravian indians who resided near the city the governor ordered the expulsion of much of the indian population.
by the 1760s pennsylvanias holy experiment was at an end and with it william penns promise of true friendship and amity between colonists and the native population.
no other large colony had a smaller indian population or a more remorseless determination on the part of settlers to eliminate those who remained.
colonial identities like the indians colonists emerged from the seven years war with a heightened sense of collective identity.
before the war the colonies had been largely isolated from one another.
outside of new england more americans probably traveled to england than from one colony to another.
in 1751 governor george clinton of new york had called for a general conference on indian relations but only three colonies bothered to send delegates.
the albany plan of union of 1754 drafted by benjamin franklin at the outbreak of the seven years war envisioned the creation of a grand council composed of delegates from each colony with the power to levy taxes and deal with indian relations and the common defense.
rejected by the colonial assemblies whose powers franklins proposal would curtail the plan was never sent to london for approval.
participation in the seven years war created greater bonds among the colonies.
but the war also strengthened colonists pride in being members of the british empire.
it has been said that americans were never more british than in 1763.
colonial militiamen and british regulars fought alongside each other against the french.
tensions developed between the professional british military and the often undisciplined american citizen soldiers but the common experience of battle and victory also forged bonds between them.
for much of the century new englanders had called for the conquest of canada as a blow for protestant freedom against popish slavery now that this had been accomplished british victory in the seven years war seemed a triumph of liberty over tyranny.
the defeat of the catholic french reinforced the equation of british nationality protestantism and freedom.
in fact however after 1763 britains global empire was not predominantly protestant or british or free.
it now included tens of thousands of french catholics and millions of persons in india governed as subjects rather than as citizens.
the english statesman edmund burke wondered whether british liberty could be reconciled with rule over this vast heterogeneous intricate mass of interests burke was almost alone in seeing the newly expanded empire as a challenge to the principles of british freedom.
but soon the american colonists would come to believe that membership in the empire jeopardized their liberty.
when they did they set out on a road that led to independence.
suggested reading suggested reading books anderson fred.
crucible of war the seven years war and the fate of empire in british north america 1754 1766 2000.
a general history of the seven years war and its consequences.
beeman richard r varieties of political experience in eighteenth century america 2004.
explores how political life differed from colony to colony and what characteristics they had in common.
blackburn robin.
the making of new world slavery from the baroque to the modern 1492 1800 1997.
a comprehensive history of the rise of slavery in the western hemisphere and its centrality to european empires.
calloway colin g the scratch of a pen 1763 and the transformation of north america 2006.
examines the impact of the peace of paris on north america especially the native american population.
clark charles e the public prints the newspaper in anglo american culture 1665 1740 1994.
presents the early history of newspapers in colonial america.
colley linda.
britons forging the nation 1707 1837 1992.
an influential study of the rise of a sense of national identity in great britain relevant also for the american colonies.
gomez michael a.
exchanging our country marks the transformation of african identities in the colonial and antebellum south 1998.
the most detailed study of the process by which africans became african americans.
greene jack p the quest for power the lower houses of assembly in the southern royal colonies 1689 1776 1963.
a careful examination of how elected assemblies expanded their authority in the eighteenth century south.
morgan philip d slave counterpoint black culture in the eighteenth century chesapeake and lowcountry 1998.
a detailed comparison of the nature of slave life in the two key slave systems of british north america.
the rise of evangelicalism the age of edwards whitefield and the wesleys 2004.
explores the great awakening on both sides of the atlantic and its impact on religious life.
rediker marcus.
the slave ship a human history 2007.
a fascinating and disturbing account of the atlantic slave trade that focuses on the captains sailors and slaves aboard the slave ships.
weber david j.
the spanish frontier in north america 1992.
the most comprehensive account of spanish settlement in what is now the united states.
white richard.
the middle ground indians empires and republics in the great lakes region 1650 1815 1991.
the book that developed the idea of a middle ground where europeans and indians both exercised authority.
wood peter h black majority negroes in colonial south carolina from 1670 through the stono rebellion 1974.
examines how the expansion of rice production affected the slave system and the lives of slaves in south carolina.
websites africans in america.
web de anza c hapter r eview review questions 1.
why was father junpero serra such a controversial and significant figure.
how did the ideas of republicanism and liberalism differ in eighteenth century british north america.
three distinct slave systems were well entrenched in britains mainland colonies.
describe the main characteristics of each system.
what were the bases of the colonists sense of a collective british identity in the eighteenth century.
what ideas generated by the american enlightenment and the great awakening prompted challenges to religious social and political authorities in the british colonies.
how involved were colonial merchants in the atlantic trading system and what was the role of the slave trade in their commerce.
we often consider the impact of the slave trade only on the united states but its impact extended much further.
how did it affect west african nations and society other regions of the new world and the nations of europe.
using eighteenth century concepts explain who had the right to vote in the british colonies and why the restrictions were justified.
freedom questions 1.
although many british colonists claimed theirs was an empire of freedom most african americans disagreed.
why would african americans instead have viewed spain as a beacon of freedom and what events in the eighteenth century demonstrated this.
the eighteenth century saw the simultaneous expansion of both freedom and slavery in the north american colonies.
explain the connection between these two contradictory forces.
explain how the ideals of republican liberty and liberal freedoms became the widespread rallying cries of people from all social classes in the british empire.
today we treasure freedom of expression in all its forms and codify these rights in the first amendment.
why were these freedoms considered dangerous in the eighteenth century and thus not guaranteed to everyone in the british empire.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e the interesting narrative of the life of olaudah equiano p 136 major labor systems of eighteenth century north america atlantic slave trade p 137 middle passage p 141 task system p 144 creoles p 147 gullah p 148 region tobacco smaller plantations with substantial master slave contact south carolina and georgia rice and indigo large plantations with intensive slave labor middle colonies large scale farms family farms urban trade and commerce indentured servants on large farms urban laborers and artisans new england family farms urban trade and commerce family members on farms urban laborers and artisans new spain large scale agriculture cattle raising native americans attached to lands republicanism p 152 virtue p 152 liberalism p 152 dominant labor force chesapeake and north carolina runaways p 149 stono rebellion p 149 major economy two treatises of government p 152 deference p 155 salutary neglect p 156 circulating libraries p 158 freedom of expression p 158 freedom of the press p 158 seditious libel p 159 american enlightenment p 160 great awakening p 161 presidios p 163 father junpero serra p 164 middle ground p 166 acadians p 168 pontiacs rebellion p 170 neolin p 170 albany plan of union p 174 part 2 a new nation 1763 1840 c d uring the 1760s and 1770s a dispute over taxation within the british empire escalated into a conflict that gave birth to a new nation the united states of america.
the american revolution inaugurated an era of political upheaval throughout the western world known to historians ever since as the age of revolution.
it helped to inspire popular uprisings in europe the caribbean and latin america and forever changed the course of american development.
liberty emerged as the eras foremost rallying cry.
the revolutionary generation insisted that the meaning of their struggle lay not only in political independence but also in the establishment of what the writer thomas paine called an asylum of liberty for all mankind.
the american revolution not only broke the political bond with great britain but also inspired groups within american society to claim greater rights for themselves.
propertyless men demanded the right to vote.
women began to challenge their subordination to men.
indentured servants ran away from their masters.
and slaves seized the opportunity to gain their freedom by fighting in the continental army or by escaping to the british side.
by the time it had run its course the revolution had greatly expanded some realms of american freedom.
it severed the connection between church and state promoted the emergence of a lively public sphere in which ordinary men and sometimes women participated in political debate and it challenged the monopoly on political power by colonial elites.
it set in motion the abolition of slavery in the northern states.
on the other hand for some americans independence meant a loss of liberty.
many of those who had remained loyal to england were persecuted and forced to leave the country.
the end of the british presence removed the last barrier to the westward expansion of the american population making inevitable the dispossession of the remaining indian population east of the mississippi river.
and the formation of a national government in which slaveowners occupied the presidency for most of the half century after independence helped to consolidate the institution of slavery in the south.
three processes set in motion by the revolution gained strength in the early decades of the nineteenth century and profoundly affected americans ideas about freedom.
the first was the democratization of politics.
most members of the convention that drafted the nations constitution in 1787 assumed that men of property and education would dominate the new american government.
but the democratic upsurge inspired by the revolution coupled with the swift emergence of political parties offering radically different programs for national development encouraged a broad popular participation in politics.
by the 1830s a flourishing democratic system was firmly in place.
property qualifications for voting had been eliminated in nearly every state two parties competed throughout the country and voter turnout stood at record levels.
political democracy had become a defining element of american freedom.
second the development of steamboats canals and railroads brought rapid improvements in transportation and communication and created a broad market for farm products and manufactured goods.
the market revolution opened up vast areas of the american interior to commercial farming and it stimulated the early development of factory production.
it offered new opportunities for personal advancement to many americans while reducing others to what seemed an unfree situation working for wages under the constant supervision of an employer.
the market revolution also made possible the third major development of this era the populations westward movement and the rise of the west as a distinct social and political region.
the market revolution and westward shift of population also helped to reshape the idea of freedom identifying it more and more closely with economic opportunity physical mobility and individual self definition and fulfillment.
many of the founding fathers had feared that economic growth rapid territorial expansion and the development of political parties would endanger the unity of the new republic.
and between the coming of independence and 1840 the new nation faced a series of crises as americans divided according to political and regional loyalties and battled for advantage in the expanding economy.
political conflict often revolved around the relationship between government and the economy.
should the national government seek to promote economic development and direct its course by enacting a system of tariffs internal improvements and a national bank.
or should it stand aside and allow americans to pursue economic self interest without governmental interference.
in the 1790s the former view was represented by the federalist party the latter by the jeffersonian republicans.
in the 1830s a similar division emerged between whigs and democrats.
advocates of both visions of the role of the national government insisted that theirs was the best program to promote american liberty.
american freedom also continued to be shaped by the presence of slavery.
rather than dying out as some of the founders had hoped slavery expanded rapidly in territorial extent and economic importance.
slavery helped to define the boundaries of american freedom.
the privileges of voting officeholding and access to economic opportunity were increasingly restricted to whites.
women too were barred from these elements of freedom.
their role according to the prevailing social values was to remain in the private sphere of the home.
the contradiction embedded in american life from the earliest days of settlement expanding freedom for some coexisting with and indeed depending on lack of freedom for others continued to bedevil the new nation.
c hapter 5 george iii assumes the british throne sugar act stamp act sons of liberty organized stamp act congress townshend acts liberty riots british troops stationed in boston boston massacre tea act boston tea party intolerable acts continental congress convenes thomas jeffersons a summary view of the rights of british america lord dunmores proclamation battles at lexington and concord thomas paines common sense declaration of independence battle of trenton battle of saratoga french treaty of amity and commerce cornwallis surrenders treaty of paris the american revolution 1763 1783 the crisis begins consolidating the empire taxing the colonies the stamp act crisis taxation and representation liberty and resistance politics in the streets the regulators the tenant uprising the road to revolution the townshend crisis homespun virtue the boston massacre wilkes and liberty the tea act the intolerable acts the coming of independence the sweets of liberty the outbreak of war independence.
common sense paines impact the declaration of independence the declaration and american freedom an asylum for mankind the global declaration of independence securing independence the balance of power blacks in the revolution the first years of the war the battle of saratoga the war in the south victory at last the continental congress the continental association the apotheosis of benjamin franklin and george washington a cotton fabric printed in great britain soon after the end of the american war of independence and used as a bedcover.
franklin accompanied by a goddess of liberty with her liberty cap carries a banner reading where liberty dwells there is my country while angels display a map of the united states.
f ocus q uestions what were the roots and significance of the stamp act controversy.
what key events sharpened the divisions between britain and the colonists in the late 1760s and early 1770s.
what key events marked the move toward american independence.
how were american forces able to prevail in the revolutionary war.
l o n the night of august 26 1765 a violent crowd of bostonians assaulted the elegant home of thomas hutchinson chief justice and lieutenant governor of massachusetts.
hutchinson and his family were eating dinner when the rioters arrived.
they barely had time to escape before the crowd broke down the front door and proceeded to destroy or carry off most of their possessions including paintings furniture silverware and notes for a history of massachusetts hutchinson was writing.
by the time they departed only the outer walls of the home remained standing.
the immediate cause of the riot was the stamp act a recently enacted british tax that many colonists felt violated their liberty.
critics of the measure had spread a rumor that hutchinson had written to london encouraging its passage in fact he privately opposed it.
only a few days earlier hutchinson had helped to disperse a crowd attacking a building owned by his relative andrew oliver a merchant who had been appointed to help administer the new law.
both crowds were led by ebenezer mackintosh a shoemaker who had fought against the french during the seven years war and enjoyed a wide following among bostons working people.
arrested after the destruction of hutchinsons home mackintosh was released after the intervention of the loyal nine a group of merchants and craftsmen who had taken the lead in opposing the stamp act.
the violence had gone far beyond what the loyal nine intended and they promised authorities that resistance to the stamp act would henceforth be peaceful.
the riot nonetheless convinced hutchinson that for britain to rule america effectively there must be an abridgement of what are called english liberties whether colonists would accept such an abridgement however was very much in doubt.
the riot of august 26 was one small episode in a series of events that launched a half century of popular protest and political upheaval throughout the western world.
the momentous era that came to be called the age of revolution began in british north america spread to europe and the caribbean and culminated in the latin american wars for independence.
in all these struggles liberty emerged as the foremost rallying cry for popular discontent.
rarely has the idea played so central a role in political debate and social upheaval.
if the attack on hutchinsons home demonstrated the depths of feeling aroused by britains efforts to impose greater control over its empire it also revealed that revolution is a dynamic process whose consequences no one can anticipate.
the crowds fury expressed resentments against the rich and powerful quite different from colonial leaders objections to parliaments attempt to tax the colonies.
the stamp act crisis inaugurated not only a struggle for colonial liberty in relation to great britain but also a multi sided battle to define and extend liberty within america.
what were the roots and significance of the stamp act controversy.
the crisis begins when george iii assumed the throne of great britain in 1760 no one on either side of the atlantic imagined that within two decades britains american colonies would separate from the empire.
but the seven years war which left britain with an enormous debt and vastly enlarged overseas possessions to defend led successive governments in london to seek ways to make the colonies share the cost of empire.
having studied the writings of british opposition thinkers who insisted that power inevitably seeks to encroach upon liberty colonial leaders came to see these measures as part of a british design to undermine their freedom.
having only recently gloried in their enjoyment of british liberty they came to conclude that membership in the empire was a threat to freedom rather than its foundation.
this conviction set the colonies on the road to independence.
consolidating the empire the seven years war to which the colonists contributed soldiers and economic resources underscored for rulers in london how important the empire was to britains well being and its status as a great power.
now they believed new regulations were needed to help guarantee the empires continued strength and prosperity.
before 1763 parliament had occasionally acted to forbid the issuance of paper money in america and to restrict colonial economic activities that competed with businesses at home.
the wool act of 1699 hat act of 1732 and iron act of 1750 forbade colonial manufacture of these items.
the molasses act of 1733 sought to curtail trade between new england and the french caribbean by imposing a prohibitive tax on french produced molasses used to make rum in american distilleries.
and the navigation acts discussed in chapter 3 sought to channel key american exports like tobacco through british ports.
the colonists frequently ignored all these measures.
as to internal affairs within the colonies the british government frequently seemed uninterested.
there was no point one official said in worrying about the behavior of colonists who plant tobacco and puritanism only like fools beginning in the late 1740s the board of trade which was responsible for overseeing colonial affairs attempted to strengthen imperial authority.
it demanded that colonial laws conform to royal instructions and encouraged colonial assemblies to grant permanent salaries to royal governors.
but the outbreak of the seven years war suspended this initiative.
having treated the colonists as allies during the war britain reverted in the mid 1760s to seeing them as subordinates whose main role was to enrich the mother country.
during this period the government in london concerned itself with the colonies in unprecedented ways hoping to make british rule more efficient and systematic and to raise funds to help pay for the war and to finance the empire.
nearly all british political leaders supported the new laws that so enraged the colonists.
americans britons felt should be grateful to the empire.
to fight the seven years war britain had borrowed from banks and individual investors more than 150 million the equivalent of tens of trillions of dollars in todays money.
an engraving from a massachusetts almanac published in 1774 depicts lieutenant governor thomas hutchinson whose house had been destroyed by a mob nine years earlier.
the devil carries a list of hutchinsons crimes it was common in this period to use religious symbols to demonize political opponents.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 according to the doctrine of virtual representation the house of commons represented all residents of the british empire whether or not they could vote for members.
in this 1775 cartoon criticizing the idea a blinded britannia on the far right stumbles into a pit.
next to her two colonists complain of being robbed by british taxation.
in the background according to an accompanying explanation of the cartoon stand the catholic city of quebec and the protestant town of boston the latter in flames.
the crisis begins interest on the debt absorbed half the governments annual revenue.
the tax burden in britain had reached unprecedented heights.
it seemed only reasonable that the colonies should help pay this national debt foot part of the bill for continued british protection and stop cheating the treasury by violating the navigation acts.
nearly all britons moreover believed that parliament represented the entire empire and had a right to legislate for it.
millions of britons including the residents of major cities like manchester and birmingham had no representatives in parliament.
but according to the widely accepted theory of virtual representation which held that each member represented the entire empire not just his own district the interests of all who lived under the british crown were supposedly taken into account.
when americans began to insist that because they were unrepresented in parliament the british government could not tax the colonies they won little support in the mother country.
to their surprise however british governments found that the effective working of the empire required the cooperation of local populations.
time and again british officials backed down in the face of colonial resistance only to return with new measures to centralize control of the empire that only stiffened colonial resolve.
the british government had already alarmed many colonists by issuing writs of assistance to combat smuggling.
these were general search warrants that allowed customs officials to search anywhere they chose for smuggled goods.
in a celebrated court case in boston in 1761 the lawyer james otis insisted that the writs were an instrument of arbitrary power destructive to english liberty and the fundamental principles of the constitution and that parliament therefore had no right to authorize them.
american independence was then and there born john adams later remarked a considerable exaggeration.
many colonists were also outraged by the proclamation of 1763 mentioned in the previous chapter barring further settlement on lands west of the appalachian mountains.
taxing the colonies in 1764 the sugar act introduced by prime minister george grenville reduced the existing tax on molasses imported into north america from the french west indies from six pence to three pence per gallon.
but the act also established a new machinery to end widespread smuggling by colonial merchants.
and to counteract the tendency of colonial juries to acquit merchants charged with violating trade regulations it strengthened the admiralty courts where accused smugglers could be judged without benefit of a jury trial.
thus colonists saw the measure not as a welcome reduction in taxation but as an attempt to get them to pay a levy they would otherwise have evaded.
at the same time a revenue act placed goods such as wool and hides which had previously been traded freely with holland france and southern what were the roots and significance of the stamp act controversy.
europe on the enumerated list meaning they had to be shipped through england.
together these measures threatened the profits of colonial merchants and seemed certain to aggravate an already serious economic recession resulting from the end of the seven years war.
they were accompanied by the currency act which reaffirmed the earlier ban on colonial assemblies issuing paper as legal tender that is money that individuals are required to accept in payment of debts.
the stamp act crisis the sugar act was an effort to strengthen the long established and longevaded navigation acts.
the stamp act of 1765 represented a new departure in imperial policy.
for the first time parliament attempted to raise money from direct taxes in the colonies rather than through the regulation of trade.
the act required that all sorts of printed material produced in the colonies newspapers books court documents commercial papers land deeds almanacs etc carry a stamp purchased from authorities.
its purpose was to help finance the operations of the empire including the cost of stationing british troops in north america without seeking revenue from colonial assemblies.
whereas the sugar act had mainly affected residents of colonial ports the stamp act managed to offend virtually every free colonist rich and poor farmers artisans and merchants.
it was especially resented by members of the public sphere who wrote published and read books and newspapers and followed political affairs.
the prospect of a british army permanently stationed on american soil also alarmed many colonists.
and by imposing the stamp tax without colonial consent parliament directly challenged the authority of local elites who through the assemblies they controlled had established their power over the raising and spending of money.
they were ready to defend this authority in the name of liberty.
opposition to the stamp act was the first great drama of the revolutionary era and the first major split between colonists and great britain over the meaning of freedom.
nearly all colonial political leaders opposed the act.
in voicing their grievances they invoked the rights of the freeborn englishman which they insisted colonists should also enjoy.
opponents of the act occasionally referred to the natural rights of all mankind.
more frequently however they drew on time honored british principles such as a communitys right not to be taxed except by its elected representatives.
liberty they insisted could not be secure where property was taken away without consent taxation and an engraving of james otis graces the cover of the boston almanack for 1770.
he is flanked by the ancient gods hercules and minerva carrying a liberty cap.
representation at stake were clashing ideas of the british empire itself.
american leaders viewed the empire as an association of equals in which free settlers overseas enjoyed the same rights as britons at home.
colonists in other outposts of the empire such as india the west indies and canada echoed this outlook.
all in the name of liberty claimed the right to govern their own affairs.
british residents of calcutta india demanded the rights inherent in englishmen british merchants in quebec said that to allow french this teapot protesting the stamp act was produced in england and marketed in colonial america illustrating the close political and economic connections between the two.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 a woodcut depicting a crowd attempting to intimidate a new hampshire official charged with carrying out the stamp act.
they throw stones at his effigy while to the left a mock funeral begins.
the crisis begins laws to remain in force would reduce them to slavery the british government and its appointed representatives in america by contrast saw the empire as a system of unequal parts in which different principles governed different areas and all were subject to the authority of parliament.
to surrender the right to tax the colonies would set a dangerous precedent for the empire as a whole.
in an empire extended and diversified as that of great britain declared governor francis bernard of massachusetts in 1765 there must be a supreme legislature to which all other powers must be subordinate parliament bernard continued was the sanctuary of liberty a description with which many americans were beginning to disagree.
some opponents of the stamp act distinguished between internal taxes like the stamp duty which they claimed parliament had no right to impose and revenue legitimately raised through the regulation of trade.
but more and more colonists insisted that britain had no right to tax them at all since americans were unrepresented in the house of commons.
no taxation without representation became their rallying cry.
virginias house of burgesses approved four resolutions offered by the fiery orator patrick henry.
they insisted that the colonists enjoyed the same liberties privileges franchises and immunities as residents of the mother country and that the right to consent to taxation was a cornerstone of british freedom the house of burgesses rejected as too radical three other resolutions including henrys call for outright resistance to unlawful taxation but these were also reprinted in colonial newspapers.
in october 1765 the stamp act congress with twenty seven delegates from nine colonies including some of the most prominent men in america met in new york and endorsed virginias position.
its resolutions began by affirming the allegiance of all colonists to the crown of great britain and their due subordination to parliament.
but they went on to insist that the right to consent to taxation was essential to the freedom of a people soon merchants throughout the colonies agreed to boycott british goods until parliament repealed the stamp act.
this was the first major cooperative action among britains mainland colonies.
in a sense by seeking to impose uniformity on the colonies rather than dealing with them individually as in the past parliament had inadvertently united america.
liberty and resistance no word was more frequently invoked by critics of the stamp act than liberty throughout the colonies opponents of the new tax staged mock funerals in which libertys coffin was carried to a burial ground only to have the occupant miraculously revived at the last moment whereupon the assembled crowd repaired to a tavern to celebrate.
as the crisis continued what were the roots and significance of the stamp act controversy.
symbols of liberty proliferated.
the large elm tree in boston on which protesters had hanged an effigy of the stamp distributor andrew oliver to persuade him to resign his post came to be known as the liberty tree.
its image soon began to appear in prints and pamphlets throughout the colonies.
open air meetings were held beneath the tree and as a result the space came to be called liberty hall.
in new york city a pine mast erected in 1766 as a meeting place for opponents of the stamp act was called the liberty pole.
colonial leaders resolved to prevent the new laws implementation and by and large they succeeded.
even before the passage of the stamp act a committee of correspondence in boston communicated with other colonies to encourage opposition to the sugar and currency acts.
now such committees sprang up in other colonies exchanging ideas and information about resistance.
initiated by colonial elites the movement against the stamp act quickly drew in a far broader range of americans.
the act wrote john adams a boston lawyer who drafted a set of widely reprinted resolutions against the measure had inspired the people even to the lowest ranks to become more attentive to their liberties more inquisitive about them and more determined to defend them than they were ever before known political debate adams added pervaded the colonies our presses have groaned our pulpits have thundered our legislatures have resolved our towns have voted politics in the streets opponents of the stamp act however did not rely solely on debate.
even before the law went into effect crowds forced those chosen to administer it to resign and destroyed shipments of stamps.
in new york city processions involving hundreds of residents shouting liberty paraded through the streets nearly every night in late 1765.
they were organized by the newly created sons of liberty a body led by talented and ambitious lesser merchants like alexander mcdougall isaac sears and john lamb.
fluent in dutch french and german lamb became the sons liaison to the citys numerous ethnic groups.
these self made men had earned fortunes as privateers plundering french shipping during the seven years war and complained new yorks lieutenant governor opposed every limitation of trade and duty on it while they enjoyed no standing among the colonys wealthy elite and carried little weight in municipal affairs they enjoyed a broad following among the citys craftsmen laborers and sailors.
the sons posted notices reading liberty property and no stamps and took the lead in enforcing the boycott of british imports.
their actions were viewed with increasing alarm by the aristocratic livingston and de lancey families who dominated new york politics.
as the assault on thomas hutchinsons house in boston demonstrated crowds could easily get out of hand.
in november 1765 a new york crowd reportedly a warning by the sons of liberty against using the stamps required by the stamp act which are shown on the left.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 the crisis begins composed of sailors blacks laborers and youths hurled stones at fort george at the tip of manhattan island.
they then proceeded to destroy the home of major thomas james a british officer who was said to have boasted that he would force the stamps down new yorkers throats.
stunned by the ferocity of american resistance and pressured by london merchants and manufacturers who did not wish to lose their american markets the british government retreated.
in 1766 parliament repealed the stamp act.
but this concession was accompanied by the declaratory act which rejected americans claims that only their elected representatives could levy taxes.
parliament proclaimed this measure possessed the power to pass laws for the colonies and people of america.
in all cases whatever since the debt ridden british government continued to need money raised in the colonies passage of the declaratory act promised further conflict.
the regulators the stamp act crisis was not the only example of violent social turmoil during the 1760s.
many colonies experienced contentious internal divisions as well.
as population moved westward the conflicting land claims of settlers speculators colonial governments and indians sparked fierce disputes.
rural areas had a long tradition of resistance by settlers and small farmers against the claims of land speculators and large proprietors.
as in the stamp act crisis liberty was their rallying cry but in this case liberty had less to do with imperial policy than secure possession of land.
beginning in the mid 1760s a group of wealthy residents of the south carolina backcountry calling themselves regulators protested the underrepresentation of western settlements in the colonys assembly and the legislators failure to establish local governments that could regularize land titles and suppress bands of outlaws.
the lack of courts in the area they claimed had led to a breakdown of law and order allowing an infernal gang of villains to commit shocking outrages on persons and property.
they added we are free men british subjects not born slaves a parallel movement in north carolina mobilized small farmers who refused to pay taxes kidnapped local officials assaulted the homes of land speculators merchants and lawyers and disrupted court proceedings.
here the complaint was not a lack of government but corrupt county authorities.
these local officials the regulators claimed threatened inexpensive access to land and the prosperity of ordinary settlers through high taxes and court fees.
demanding the democratization of local government the regulators condemned the rich and powerful the colonys elite who used their political authority to prosper at the expense of poor industrious farmers.
at their peak the regulators numbered around 8 000 armed farmers.
the region remained in turmoil until 1771 when in the battle of alamance the farmers were suppressed by the colonys militia.
the tenant uprising also in the mid 1760s tenants on the livingston philipse and cortland manors along the hudson river north of new york city stopped paying rent and began seizing land.
like opponents of the stamp act they called what were the roots and significance of the stamp act controversy.
themselves the sons of liberty.
the original sons however opposed their uprising and it was soon suppressed by british and colonial troops.
meanwhile small farmers in the green mountains took up arms to protect their holdings against intrusions by new york landlords.
the legal situation there was complex.
the area was part of new york but during the 1750s the governor of new hampshire had issued land grants to new england families pocketing a fortune in fees.
when new yorkers tried to enforce their own title to the area the settlers leader ethan allen insisted that land should belong to the person who worked it.
outsiders he claimed were trying to enslave a free people in the mid 1770s allen and his green mountain boys gained control of the region which later became the state of vermont.
the emerging rift between britain and america eventually superimposed itself on conflicts within the colonies.
but the social divisions revealed in the stamp act riots and backcountry uprisings made some members of the colonial elite fear that opposition to british measures might unleash turmoil at home.
as a result they were more reluctant to challenge british authority when the next imperial crisis arose.
the road to revolution the townshend crisis in 1767 the government in london decided to impose a new set of taxes on americans.
they were devised by the chancellor of the exchequer the cabinets chief financial minister charles townshend.
in opposing the stamp act some colonists including benjamin franklin then representing the pennsylvania assembly in london had seemed to suggest that they would not object if britain raised revenue by regulating trade.
taking them at their word townshend persuaded parliament to impose new taxes on goods imported into the colonies and to create a new board of customs commissioners to collect them and suppress smuggling.
he intended to use the new revenues to pay the salaries of american governors and judges thus freeing them from dependence on colonial assemblies.
although many merchants objected to the new enforcement procedures opposition to the townshend duties developed more slowly than in the case of the stamp act.
leaders in several colonies nonetheless decided in 1768 to reimpose the ban on importing british goods.
homespun virtue the boycott began in boston and soon spread to the southern colonies.
reliance on american rather than british goods on homespun clothing rather than imported finery became a symbol of american resistance.
it also reflected as the colonists saw it a virtuous spirit of self sacrifice as compared with the self indulgence and luxury many americans were coming to associate with britain.
women who spun and wove at home so as not to purchase british goods were hailed as daughters of liberty.
the idea of using homemade rather than imported goods especially appealed to chesapeake planters who found themselves owing increasing c h.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 the road to revolution amounts of money to british merchants.
nonimportation wrote george washington reflecting virginia planters concern about their growing burden of debt gave the extravagant man an opportunity to retrench his expenses by reducing the purchase of british luxuries without having to advertise to his neighbors that he might be in financial distress.
in this way washington continued virginians could maintain the liberty which we have derived from our ancestors while reducing their considerable debts.
virginias leaders also announced a temporary ban on the importation of slaves but smaller planters in the piedmont region away from the coast where the institution was expanding ignored this restriction.
urban artisans who welcomed an end to competition from imported british manufactured goods strongly supported the boycott.
philadelphia and new york merchants at first were reluctant to take part although they eventually agreed to go along.
nonimportation threatened their livelihoods and raised the prospect of unleashing further lower class turmoil.
as had happened during the stamp act crisis the streets of american cities filled with popular protests against the new duties.
extralegal local committees attempted to enforce the boycott of british goods.
the boston massacre boston once again became the focal point of conflict.
royal troops had been stationed in the city in 1768 after rioting that followed the british seizure of the ship liberty for violating trade regulations.
the sloop belonged to john hancock one of the citys most prominent merchants.
the soldiers who competed for jobs on bostons waterfront with the citys laborers became more and more unpopular.
on march 5 1770 a fight between a snowball throwing crowd of bostonians and british troops escalated into an armed confrontation that left five bostonians dead.
one of those who fell in what came to be called the boston massacre was crispus attucks a sailor of mixed indian african white ancestry.
attucks would later be remembered as the first martyr of the american revolution the commanding officer and eight soldiers were put on trial in massachusetts.
ably defended by john adams who viewed lower class crowd actions as a dangerous method of opposing british policies seven were found not guilty while two were convicted of manslaughter.
but paul revere a member of the boston sons of liberty and a silversmith and engraver helped to stir up indignation against the british army by producing a widely circulated and quite inaccurate print of the boston massacre depicting a line of british soldiers firing into an unarmed crowd.
by 1770 as merchants profits shriveled and many members of the colonial elite found they could not do without british goods the nonimportation movement was collapsing.
the value of british imports to the colonies declined by about one third during 1769 but then rebounded to its former level.
british merchants who wished to remove a possible source of future interruption of trade pressed for repeal of the townshend duties.
when the british ministry agreed leaving in place only a tax on tea and agreed to remove troops from boston american merchants quickly abandoned the boycott.
visions of freedom the boston massacre.
less than a month after the boston massacre of 1770 in which five colonists died paul revere produced this engraving of the event.
although it inaccurately depicts what was actually a disorganized brawl between residents of boston and british soldiers this image became one of the most influential pieces of political propaganda of the revolutionary era.
questions 1.
how does revere depict the british and colonists in this encounter and who does he blame for the five colonists deaths.
what attitude toward british authorities is revere attempting to promote through this engraving.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 wilkes and the road to revolution liberty once again an immediate crisis had been resolved.
nonetheless many americans concluded that britain was succumbing to the same pattern of political corruption and decline of liberty that afflicted other countries.
the overlap of the townshend crisis with a controversy in britain over the treatment of john wilkes reinforced this sentiment.
a radical journalist known for scandalous writings about the king and ministry wilkes had been elected to parliament from london but was expelled from his seat.
wilkes and liberty became a popular rallying cry on both sides of the atlantic.
in addition rumors circulated in the colonies that the anglican church in england planned to send bishops to america.
among members of other protestant denominations the rumors strongly denied in london sparked fears that bishops would establish religious courts like those that had once persecuted dissenters.
the conviction that the british government had set itself on a course dangerous to liberty underpinned colonial resistance when the next crisis arose.
the william hogarths depiction of john wilkes holding a liberty cap.
wilkess publication north briton bitterly attacked the king and prime minister for which wilkes was arrested tried and acquitted by a london jury.
he became a popular symbol of freedom on both sides of the atlantic.
the bostonians paying the excise man a 1774 engraving shows colonists pouring tea down the throat of a tax collector who has been covered with tar and feathers.
a noose hangs menacingly from the liberty tree.
in the background is the boston tea party.
tea act the next crisis underscored how powerfully events in other parts of britains global empire affected the american colonies.
the east india company a giant trading monopoly effectively governed recently acquired british possessions in india.
numerous british merchants bankers and other individuals had invested heavily in its stock.
a classic speculative bubble ensued with the price of stock in the company rising sharply and then collapsing.
to rescue the company and its investors the british government decided to help it market its enormous holdings of chinese tea in north america.
tea once a preserve of the wealthy had by now become a drink consumed by all social classes in england and the colonies.
to further stimulate its sales and bail out the east india company the british government now headed by frederick lord north offered the company a series of rebates and tax exemptions.
these enabled it to dump low priced tea on the american market undercutting both established merchants and smugglers.
money raised through the taxation of imported tea would be used to help defray the costs of colonial government thus threatening once again the assemblies control over finance.
the tax on tea was not new.
but many colonists insisted that to pay it on this large new body of imports would acknowledge britains right to tax the colonies.
as tea shipments arrived resistance developed in the major ports.
on december 16 1773 a group of colonists disguised as indians boarded three ships at anchor in boston harbor and threw more than 300 chests of tea into the water.
the event became known as the boston tea party.
the loss to the east india company was around 10 000 the equivalent of more than 4 million today.
the intolerable acts the british government declared lord north must now demonstrate whether we have or have not any authority in that country its response to the boston tea party was swift and decisive.
parliament closed the port of what key events sharpened the divisions between britain and the colonists in the late 1760s and early 1770s.
boston to all trade until the tea was paid for.
it radically altered the massachusetts charter of 1691 by curtailing town meetings and authorizing the governor to appoint members to the council positions previously filled by election.
parliament also empowered military commanders to lodge soldiers in private homes.
these measures called the coercive or intolerable acts by americans united the colonies in opposition to what was widely seen as a direct threat to their political freedom.
at almost the same time parliament passed the quebec act.
this extended the southern boundary of that canadian province to the ohio river and granted legal toleration to the roman catholic church in canada.
with an eye to the growing tensions in colonies to the south the act sought to secure the allegiance of quebecs catholics by offering rights denied to their coreligionists in britain including practicing their faith freely and holding positions in the civil service.
the act not only threw into question land claims in the ohio country but persuaded many colonists that the government in london was conspiring to strengthen catholicism dreaded by most protestants in its american empire.
fears of religious and political tyranny mingled in the minds of many colonists.
especially in new england the cause of liberty became the cause of god.
a gathering of 1 000 residents of farmington connecticut in may 1774 adopted resolutions proclaiming that as the sons of freedom they would resist every attempt to take away our liberties and properties and to enslave us forever they accused the british ministry of being instigated by the devil the coming of independence the continental congress british actions had destroyed the legitimacy of the imperial government in the eyes of many colonists.
opposition to the intolerable acts now spread to small towns and rural areas that had not participated actively in previous resistance.
in september 1774 in the town of worcester massachusetts 4 600 militiamen from thirty seven towns half the adult male population of the entire county lined both sides of main street as the british appointed officials walked the gauntlet between them.
in the same month a convention of delegates from massachusetts towns approved a series of resolutions called the suffolk resolves for the county in which boston is located that urged americans to refuse obedience to the new laws withhold taxes and prepare for war.
to coordinate resistance to the intolerable acts a continental congress convened in philadelphia that month bringing together the most prominent political leaders of twelve mainland colonies georgia did not take part.
from massachusetts came the brace of adamses john and his the mitred minuet a british cartoon from 1774 shows four roman catholic bishops dancing around a copy of the quebec act.
on the left british officials lord bute lord north and lord mansfield look on while the devil oversees the proceedings.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 the coming of independence more radical cousin samuel.
virginias seven delegates included george washington richard henry lee and the renowned orator patrick henry.
henrys power as a speaker came from a unique style that combined moral appeals with blunt directness.
his manner one contemporary observed was vehement without transporting him beyond the power of self command.
his lightning consisted in quick successive flashes the distinctions between virginians pennsylvanians new yorkers and new englanders henry declared are no more.
i am not a virginian but an american in march 1775 henry concluded a speech urging a virginia convention to begin military preparations with a legendary credo give me liberty or give me death the continental association before it adjourned at the end of october 1774 with an agreement to reconvene the following may if colonial demands had not been met the congress endorsed the suffolk resolves and adopted the continental association which called for an almost complete halt to trade with great britain and the west indies at south carolinas insistence exports of rice to europe were exempted.
the association also encouraged domestic manufacturing and denounced every species of extravagance and dissipation congress authorized local committees of safety to oversee its mandates and to take action against enemies of american liberty including businessmen who tried to profit from the sudden scarcity of goods.
the committees of safety began the process of transferring effective political power from established governments whose authority derived from great britain to extralegal grassroots bodies reflecting the will of the people.
by early 1775 some 7 000 men were serving on local committees throughout the colonies a vast expansion of the political nation the committees became training grounds where small farmers city artisans propertyless laborers and others who had heretofore had little role in government discussed political issues and exercised political power.
in philadelphia the extralegal committees of the 1760s that oversaw the boycott of british goods had been composed almost entirely of prominent lawyers and merchants.
but younger merchants shopkeepers and artisans dominated the committee elected in november 1774 to enforce the continental association.
they were determined that resistance to british measures not be dropped as it had been in 1770.
when the new york assembly refused to endorse the association local committees continued to enforce it anyway.
the sweets of liberty by 1775 talk of liberty pervaded the colonies.
the past few years had witnessed an endless parade of pamphlets with titles like a chariot of liberty and oration on the beauties of liberty the latter a sermon delivered in boston by joseph allen in 1772 became the most popular public address of the years before independence.
sober men spoke longingly of the sweets of liberty while sleeping americans dreamed of liberty.
one anonymous essayist reported a night vision of the word written in the suns rays.
commented a british emigrant who arrived in maryland early in 1775 they are all liberty mad what key events marked the move toward american independence.
the right to resist oppressive authority and the identification of liberty with the cause of god so deeply ingrained by the imperial struggles of the eighteenth century were now invoked against britain itself by colonists of all backgrounds.
the first mass meeting in the history of northampton county pennsylvania whose population was overwhelmingly of german ancestry gathered in 1774.
by the following year a majority of the countys adult population had joined militia associations.
many german settlers whose close knit communities had earlier viewed with some suspicion the famous english liberty as a byword for selfish individualism now claimed all the rights and privileges of natural born subjects of his majesty as the crisis deepened americans increasingly based their claims not simply on the historical rights of englishmen but on the more abstract language of natural rights and universal freedom.
the first continental congress defended its actions by appealing to the principles of the english constitution the liberties of free and natural born subjects within the realm of england and the immutable law of nature john lockes theory of natural rights that existed prior to the establishment of government offered a powerful justification for colonial resistance.
americans declared thomas jefferson in a summary view of the rights of british america written in 1774 to instruct virginias delegates to the continental congress were a free people claiming their rights as derived from the laws of nature and not as the gift of their chief magistrate americans jefferson insisted still revered the king.
but he demanded that empire henceforth be seen as a collection of equal parts held together by loyalty to a constitutional monarch not a system in which one part ruled over the others.
the outbreak of war by the time the second continental congress convened in may 1775 war had broken out between british soldiers and armed citizens of massachusetts.
on april 19 a force of british soldiers marched from boston toward the nearby town of concord seeking to seize arms being stockpiled there.
riders from boston among them paul revere warned local leaders of the troops approach.
militiamen took up arms and tried to resist the british advance.
skirmishes between americans and british soldiers took place at lexington and again at concord.
by the time the british retreated to the safety of boston some fortynine americans and seventy three members of the royal army lay dead.
what the philosopher ralph waldo emerson would later call the shot heard round the world began the american war of independence.
it reverberated throughout the colonies.
when news of the skirmish reached lemuel roberts a poor new york farmer he felt his bosom glow with the call of liberty roberts set off for massachusetts to enlist in the army.
in may 1775 ethan allen and the green mountain boys together with militiamen from connecticut led by benedict arnold surrounded the battle of concord as depicted in a 1775 engraving by amos doolittle a new haven silversmith.
under musket fire from colonials the british retreat across concords north bridge.
in his poem concorde hymn 1837 ralph waldo emerson immortalized the moment by the rude bridge that arched the flood their flag to aprils breeze unfurled here once the embattled farmers stood and fired the shot heard round the world.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 in march 1776 james pike a soldier in the massachusetts militia carved this scene on his powder horn to commemorate the battles of lexington and concord.
at the center stands the liberty tree.
the coming of independence fort ticonderoga in new york and forced it to surrender.
the following winter henry knox george washingtons commander of artillery arranged for some of the ticonderoga cannon to be dragged hundreds of miles to the east to reinforce the siege of boston where british forces were ensconced.
on june 17 1775 two months after lexington and concord the british had dislodged colonial militiamen from breeds hill although only at a heavy cost in casualties.
the battle came to be named after the nearby bunker hill.
but the arrival of american cannon in march 1776 and their entrenchment above the city made the british position in boston untenable.
the british army under the command of sir william howe was forced to abandon the city.
before leaving howes forces cut down the original liberty tree.
meanwhile the second continental congress authorized the raising of an army printed money to pay for it and appointed george washington its commander.
washington who had gained considerable fighting experience during the seven years war was not only the colonies best known military officer but also a prominent virginian.
john adams who proposed his name recognized that having a southerner lead american forces would reinforce colonial unity.
in response britain declared the colonies in a state of rebellion dispatched thousands of troops and ordered the closing of all colonial ports.
independence.
by the end of 1775 the breach with britain seemed irreparable.
but many colonists shied away from the idea of independence.
pride in membership in the british empire was still strong and many political leaders especially in colonies that had experienced internal turmoil feared that a complete break with the mother country might unleash further conflict.
anarchy from below in their view was as much a danger as tyranny from above.
many advocates of independence one opponent warned would find it very agreeable to divide the property of the rich among the poor.
such fears affected how colonial leaders responded to the idea of independence.
the elites of massachusetts and virginia who felt supremely confident of their ability to retain authority at home tended to support a break with britain.
massachusetts had borne the brunt of the intolerable acts.
southern leaders not only were highly protective of their political liberty but also were outraged by a proclamation issued in november 1775 by the earl of dunmore the british governor and military commander in virginia offering freedom to any slave who escaped to his lines and bore arms for the king.
in new york and pennsylvania however the diversity of the population made it difficult to work out a consensus on how far to go in resisting british measures.
here opposition to previous british laws had unleashed demands by small farmers and urban artisans for a greater voice in political affairs.
as a result many established leaders drew back from further what key events marked the move toward american independence.
resistance.
joseph galloway a pennsylvania leader and delegate to the second continental congress who worked to devise a compromise between british and colonial positions warned that independence would be accompanied by constant disputes within america.
he even predicted a war between the northern and southern colonies.
americans galloway declared could only enjoy true liberty self government and security for their persons and property by remaining within the empire.
common sense as 1776 dawned america presented the unusual spectacle of colonists at war against the british empire but still pleading for their rights within it.
even as fighting raged congress in july 1775 had addressed the olive branch petition to george iii reaffirming americans loyalty to the crown and hoping for a permanent reconciliation ironically it was a recent emigrant from england not a colonist from a family long established on american soil who grasped the inner logic of the situation and offered a vision of the broad significance of american independence.
an english craftsman and minor government official thomas paine had emigrated to philadelphia late in 1774.
he quickly became associated with a group of advocates of the american cause including john adams and dr benjamin rush a leading philadelphia physician.
it was rush who suggested to paine that he write a pamphlet supporting american independence.
its author listed only as an englishman common sense appeared in january 1776.
the pamphlet began not with a recital of colonial grievances but with an attack on the so much boasted constitution of england and the principles of hereditary rule and monarchical government.
rather than being the most perfect system of government in the world paine wrote the english monarchy was headed by the royal brute of england and the english constitution was composed in large part of the base remains of two ancient tyrannies.
monarchical tyranny in the person of the king and aristocratical tyranny in the persons of the peers of more worth is one honest man to society and in the sight of god he continued than all the crowned ruffians that ever lived far preferable than monarchy would be a democratic system based on frequent elections with citizens rights protected by a written constitution.
turning to independence paine drew on the colonists experiences to make his case.
there is something absurd he wrote in supposing a continent to be perpetually governed by an island within the british empire americas prospects were limited liberated from the navigation acts and trading freely with the entire world its material eminence was certain.
paine tied the economic hopes of the new nation to the idea of commercial freedom.
with independence moreover the colonies could for the first time insulate themselves from involvement in the endless imperial wars of europe.
britain had dragged its american colonies into conflicts with countries like spain and france which never were.
our enemies as americans but as our being the subjects of great britain membership in the british empire paine insisted was a burden to the colonies not a benefit.
toward the close of the pamphlet paine moved beyond practical considerations to outline a breathtaking vision of the historical importance of the thomas paine advocate of american independence in a 1791 portrait.
the cover of common sense thomas paines influential pamphlet denouncing the idea of hereditary rule and calling for american independence.
voices of freedom from thomas paine common sense 1776 a recent emigrant from england thomas paine in january 1776 published common sense a highly influential pamphlet that in stirring language made the case for american independence.
day a year or an age posterity are virtually involved in the context and will be more or less affected even to the end of time by the proceedings now.
now is the seed time of continental union faith and honor.
i challenge the warmest advocate for reconciliation to show a single advantage that this continent can reap by being connected with great britain.
but in the following pages i offer nothing more than simple facts plain arguments and common sense.
male and female are the distinctions of nature good and bad the distinctions of heaven but how a race of men came into the world so exalted above the rest and distinguished like some new species is worth enquiring into and whether they are the means of happiness or of misery to mankind.
one of the strongest natural proofs of the folly of hereditary right in kings is that nature disapproves it otherwise she would not so frequently turn it into ridicule by giving mankind an ass for a lion.
the sun never shined on a cause of greater worth.
tis not the affair of a city a country a province or a kingdom but of a continent of at least one eighth part of the habitable globe.
tis not the concern of a the injuries and disadvantages which we sustain by that connection are without number.
any submission to or dependence on great britain tends directly to involve this continent in european wars and quarrels and set us at variance with nations who would otherwise seek our friendship and against whom we have neither anger nor complaint.
o ye that love mankind.
ye that dare oppose not only the tyranny but the tyrant stand forth.
every spot of the old world is overrun with oppression.
freedom hath been hunted round the globe.
asia and africa have long expelled her.
europe regards her like a stranger and england hath given her warning to depart.
receive the fugitive and prepare in time an asylum for mankind.
from james chalmers plain truth addressed to the inhabitants of america 1776 common sense inspired a wide ranging debate about whether american freedom would be more secure inside or outside the british empire.
james chalmers a maryland plantation owner made the case for the loyalists as those who opposed american independence were called.
as near to perfection as human kind can bear.
his scheme of independency would soon very soon give way to a government imposed on us by some cromwell of our armies.
a failure of commerce would preclude the numerous tribe of planters farmers and others from paying their debts.
a war will ensue between the creditors and their debtors which will eventually end in a if indignant at the doctrine contained in the general abolition of debts.
volumes were insufficient to describe the horror pamphlet entitled common sense i have expressed myself in the following observations with some ardor.
it is because i adore my country.
passion misery and desolation awaiting the people at large in the form of american independence.
in short i affirm that it would be most excellent policy in ately devoted to true liberty i glow with the purest those who wish for true liberty to submit by an flame of patriotism and have an abhorrence of independency which if effected would inevitably plunge our once preeminently envied country into advantageous reconciliation to the authority of great britain.
independence and slavery are synonymous terms.
ruin horror and desolation.
can a reasonable being for a moment believe that great britain whose political existence depends on our constitutional obedience who but yesterday made such prodigious efforts to save us from france will not exert herself as powerfully to preserve us from our frantic schemes of independency.
we remember with unfeigned gratitude the many benefits derived through our connections with great britain by whom but yesterday we were emancipated from slavery and death.
we venerate the constitution which with all its imperfections too often exaggerated we apprehend almost approaches questions 1.
what does paine see as the global significance of the american struggle for independence.
why does chalmers equate independence with slavery.
how does the language used by the two writers differ and what does this tell us about their views of politics.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 the coming of independence american revolution.
the cause of america he proclaimed in stirring language is in great measure the cause of all mankind the new nation would become the home of freedom an asylum for mankind paines impact most of paines ideas were not original.
what made common sense unique was his mode of expressing them and the audience he addressed.
previous political writings had generally been directed toward the educated elite.
when i mention the public declared john randolph of virginia in 1774 i mean to include the rational part of it.
the ignorant vulgar are unfit.
to manage the reins of government just as evangelical ministers had shattered the trained clergys monopoly on religious preaching paine pioneered a new style of political writing one designed to expand dramatically the public sphere where political discussion took place.
he wrote clearly and directly and he avoided the complex language and latin phrases common in pamphlets aimed at educated readers.
common sense quickly became one of the most successful and influential pamphlets in the history of political writing selling by paines estimate some 150 000 copies.
paine directed that his share of the profits be used to buy supplies for the continental army.
in february 1776 the massachusetts political leader joseph hawley read common sense and remarked every sentiment has sunk into my well prepared heart the hearts of hawley and thousands of other americans had been prepared for paines arguments by the extended conflict over britains right to tax the colonies the outbreak of war in 1775 and the growing conviction that britain was a corrupt society where liberty was diminishing.
the intensification of fighting in the winter of 1775 1776 when americans unsuccessfully invaded canada while the british burned falmouth now portland maine and bombarded norfolk virginia gave added weight to the movement for independence.
in the spring of 1776 scores of american communities adopted resolutions calling for a separation from britain.
only six months elapsed between the appearance of common sense and the decision by the second continental congress to sever the colonies ties with great britain.
the declaration of independence on july 2 1776 the congress formally declared the united states an independent nation.
two days later it approved the declaration of independence written by thomas jefferson and revised by the congress before approval.
see the appendix for the full text.
most of the declaration consists of a lengthy list of grievances directed against king george iii ranging from quartering troops in colonial homes to imposing taxes without the colonists consent.
britains aim it declared was to establish absolute tyranny over the colonies.
one clause in jeffersons draft which condemned the inhumanity of the slave trade and criticized the king for overturning colonial laws that sought to restrict the importation of slaves was deleted by the congress at the insistence of georgia and south carolina.
the declarations enduring impact came not from the complaints against what key events marked the move toward american independence.
an early draft with corrections of the declaration of independence in thomas jeffersons handwriting.
note how the elimination of unnecessary words added to the documents power all men are created equal and independent became all men are created equal and inherent and inalienable rights became inalienable in the final version this would be changed to unalienable.
george iii but from jeffersons preamble especially the second paragraph which begins we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness by unalienable rights jefferson meant rights so basic so rooted in human nature itself or in what john locke had called the state of nature that no government could take them away.
jefferson then went on to justify the breach with britain.
government he wrote derives its powers from the consent of the governed when a government threatens its subjects natural rights the people have the authority to alter or to abolish it the declaration of independence is ultimately an assertion of the right of revolution.
the declaration and american freedom the declaration of independence changed forever the meaning of american freedom.
it completed the shift from the rights of englishmen to the rights of mankind as the object of american independence.
in jeffersons language the laws of nature and of natures god not the british constitution or the heritage of the freeborn englishman justified independence.
no longer a set of specific rights no longer a privilege to be enjoyed by a corporate body or people in certain social circumstances liberty had become a universal entitlement.
jeffersons argument natural rights the right to resist arbitrary authority etc drew on the writings of john locke who as explained in the previous chapter saw government as resting on a social contract viola c h.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 the coming of independence tion of which destroyed the legitimacy of authority.
but when jefferson substituted the pursuit of happiness for property in the familiar lockean triad that opens the declaration he tied the new nations star to an open ended democratic process whereby individuals develop their own potential and seek to realize their own life goals.
individual self fulfillment unimpeded by government would become a central element of american freedom.
tradition would no longer rule the present and americans could shape their society as they saw fit.
an america as a symbol of liberty a 1775 engraving from the cover of the pennsylvania magazine edited by thomas paine soon after his arrival in america.
the shield displays the colonys coat of arms.
the female figure holding a liberty cap is surrounded by weaponry of the patriotic struggle including a cartridge box marked liberty hanging from a tree right.
asylum for mankind a distinctive definition of nationality resting on american freedom was born in the revolution.
from the beginning the idea of american exceptionalism the belief that the united states has a special mission to serve as a refuge from tyranny a symbol of freedom and a model for the rest of the world has occupied a central place in american nationalism.
the new nation declared itself in the words of virginia leader james madison the workshop of liberty to the civilized world paines remark in common sense we have it in our power to begin the world over again and his description of the new nation as an asylum for mankind expressed a sense that the revolution was an event of global historical importance.
countless sermons political tracts and newspaper articles of the time repeated this idea.
unburdened by the institutions monarchy aristocracy hereditary privilege that oppressed the peoples of the old world america and america alone was the place where the principle of universal freedom could take root.
this was why jefferson addressed the declaration to the opinions of mankind not just the colonists themselves or great britain.
first to add his name to the declaration of independence was the massachusetts merchant john hancock president of the second continental congress with a signature so large he declared according to legend that king george iii could read it without his spectacles.
the of global declaration independence the american colonists were less concerned with securing human rights for all mankind than with winning international recognition in their struggle for independence from britain.
but jefferson hoped that this rebellion would become the signal of arousing men to burst the chains.
and to assume the blessings and security of self government and for more than two centuries the declaration has remained an inspiration not only to generations of americans denied the enjoyment of their natural rights but to colonial peoples around the world seeking independence.
the what key events marked the move toward american independence.
declaration quickly appeared in french and german translations although not at first in spanish since the government feared it would inspire dangerous ideas among the peoples of spains american empire.
in the years since 1776 numerous anti colonial movements have modeled their own declarations of independence on americas.
the first came in flanders part of todays belgium then part of the austrian empire where rebels in 1790 echoed jeffersons words by declaring that their province is and of rights ought to be a free and independent state by 1826 the year of jeffersons death some twenty other declarations of independence had been issued in europe the caribbean and spanish america.
today more than half the countries in the world in places as far flung as china issued after the revolution of 1911 and vietnam 1945 have such declarations.
many of these documents like jeffersons listed grievances against an imperial power to justify revolution.
few of these documents however have affirmed the natural rights life liberty and the pursuit of happiness jefferson invoked.
over time the declaration in a global context has become an assertion of the right of various groups to form independent states rather than a list of the rights of citizens that their governments could not abridge.
but even more than the specific language of the declaration the principle that legitimate political authority rests on the will of the people has been adopted around the world.
in 1776 the declaration inspired critics of the british system of government to demand political reform.
in 1780 even as the american war of independence raged a jesuit educated indian of peru took the name of the last inca ruler tpac amaru and led an uprising against spanish rule.
by the time it was suppressed in 1783 some 10 000 spanish and 100 000 indians had perished.
in the dutch french and spanish empires where european governments had been trying to tighten their control much as the british had done in north america local elites demanded greater autonomy often drawing on the constitutional arguments of american patriots.
the idea that the people possess rights was quickly internationalized.
slaves in the caribbean colonial subjects in india and indigenous inhabitants of latin america could all speak this language to the dismay of those who exercised power over them.
securing independence the balance of power declaring americans independent was one thing winning independence another.
the newly created american army confronted the greatest military power on earth.
viewing the americans as traitors britain resolved to crush the rebellion.
on the surface the balance of power seemed heavily weighted in britains favor.
it had a well trained army supplemented by hired soldiers from inspired by the american revolution the british reformer john cartwright published an appeal for the annual election of parliament as essential to liberty in britain.
he included an engraving contrasting the principles of reform on the left with despotism on the right.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 a french engraving depicts new yorkers tearing down the statue of king george iii in july 1776 after the approval of the declaration of independence.
the statue was later melted down to make bullets for the continental army.
securing independence german states like hesse the worlds most powerful navy and experienced military commanders.
the americans had to rely on local militias and an inadequately equipped continental army.
washington himself felt that militiamen were too accustomed to unbounded freedom to accept the proper degree of subordination necessary in soldiers.
moreover many americans were not enthusiastic about independence and some actively supported the british.
on the other hand many american soldiers did not lack military experience having fought in the seven years war or undergone intensive militia training in the early 1770s.
they were fighting on their own soil for a cause that inspired devotion and sacrifice.
during the eight years of war from 1775 to 1783 some 200 000 men bore arms in the american army whose soldiers were volunteers and militias where service was required of every able bodied man unless he provided a substitute.
as the war progressed enlistment waned among propertied americans and the continental army increasingly drew on young men with limited economic prospects landless sons of farmers indentured servants laborers and african americans.
the patriots suffered dearly for the cause.
of the colonies free white male population aged sixteen to forty five one in twenty died in the war of independence the equivalent of nearly 3 million deaths in todays population.
but so long as the americans maintained an army in the field the idea of independence remained alive no matter how much territory the british occupied.
despite british power to conquer the thirteen colonies would be an enormous and expensive task and it was not at all certain that the public at home wished to pay the additional taxes that a lengthy war would require.
the british moreover made a string of serious mistakes.
from the outset the british misjudged the degree of support for independence among the american population as well as the capacity of american citizen soldiers.
these people admitted the british general thomas gage h o w w e r e a m e r i c a n f o r c e s a b l e t o p r e v a i l i n t h e r e v o l u t i o n a r y wa r.
show a spirit and conduct against us that they never showed against the french in the seven years war and everybody has judged them from their former appearance and behavior which has led many into great mistakes moreover european rivals notably france welcomed the prospect of a british defeat.
if the americans could forge an alliance with france a world power second only to britain it would go a long way toward equalizing the balance of forces.
blacks in the revolution at the wars outset george washington refused to accept black recruits.
but he changed his mind after lord dunmores 1775 proclamation mentioned above which offered freedom to slaves who joined the british cause.
some 5 000 blacks enlisted in state militias and the continental army and navy.
since individuals drafted into the militia were allowed to provide a substitute slaves suddenly gained considerable bargaining power.
not a few acquired their freedom by agreeing to serve in place of an owner or his son.
in 1778 rhode island with a higher proportion of slaves in its population than any other new england state formed a black regiment and promised freedom to slaves who enlisted while compensating the owners for their loss of property.
blacks who fought under george washington and in other state militias did so in racially integrated companies although invariably under white officers.
they were the last black american soldiers to do so officially until the korean war except for the few black and white soldiers who fought alongside each other in irregular units at the end of world war ii.
except for south carolina and georgia the southern colonies also enrolled free blacks and slaves to fight.
they were not explicitly promised freedom but many received it individually after the war ended.
and in 1783 the virginia legislature emancipated slaves who had contributed towards the establishment of american liberty and independence by serving in the army.
fighting on the side of the british also offered opportunities for freedom.
before his forces were expelled from virginia 800 or more slaves had escaped from their owners to join lord dunmores ethiopian regiment wearing uniforms that bore the motto liberty to slaves during the war blacks fought with the british in campaigns in new york new jersey and south carolina.
other escaped slaves served the royal army as spies guided their troops through swamps and worked as military cooks laundresses and construction workers.
george washington himself saw seventeen of his slaves flee to the british some of whom signed up to fight the colonists.
there is not a man of them but would leave us if they believed they could make their escape his cousin lund washington reported.
liberty is sweet american foot soldiers yorktown campaign a 1781 watercolor by a french officer includes a black soldier from the first rhode island regiment an all black unit of 250 men.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 triumphant entry of the royal troops into new york an engraving showing the army of sir william howe occupying the city in 1776.
new york city would remain in british hands for the duration of the war of independence.
the first securing independence years of the war had the british commander sir william howe prosecuted the war more vigorously at the outset he might have nipped the rebellion in the bud by destroying washingtons army.
but while he suffered numerous defeats in the first years of the war washington generally avoided direct confrontations with the british and managed to keep his army intact.
having abandoned boston howe attacked new york city in the summer of 1776.
washingtons army had likewise moved from massachusetts to brooklyn to defend the city.
howe pushed american forces back and almost cut off washingtons retreat across the east river.
washington managed to escape to manhattan and then north to peekskill where he crossed the hudson river to new jersey.
but the 3 000 men he had left behind at fort washington on manhattan island were captured by howe.
howe pursued the american army but never managed to inflict a decisive defeat.
demoralized by successive failures however many american soldiers simply went home.
once 28 000 men washingtons army dwindled to fewer than 3 000.
indeed washington feared that without a decisive victory it would melt away entirely.
to restore morale and regain the initiative he launched successful surprise attacks on hessian soldiers at trenton new jersey on december 26 1776 and on a british force at princeton on january 3 1777.
shortly before crossing the delaware river to attack the hessians washington had thomas paines inspiring essay the american crisis read to his troops.
these are the times that try mens souls paine wrote.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis h o w w e r e a m e r i c a n f o r c e s a b l e t o p r e v a i l i n t h e r e v o l u t i o n a r y wa r.
the revolutionary war in the british north america canada st north e enc wr a l.
1775 1781 r ke burgoyne la maine part of massachusetts h u ro n fort ticonderoga july 1777 saratoga oct 1777 new hampshire lake ontario lak lexington april 1775 albany ma new york ie e er concord april 1775 bennington aug 1777 fort detroit pennsylvania halifax washington e how boston bunker hill june 1775 ri ct we ho nt on morristown new york trenton dec 1776 valley forge princeton jan 1777 cli york philadelphia r.
io oh maryland new jersey delaware a t lant ic ocean virginia north carolina south carolina 200 miles 200 kilometers shrink from the service of their country but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of man and woman the battle of saratoga in the summer of 1777 a second british army led by general john burgoyne advanced south from canada hoping to link up with howe and isolate new british victories american victories forts british troop movements american troop movements proclamation line of 1763 key battles in the north during the war of independence included lexington and concord which began the armed conflict the campaign in new york and new jersey and saratoga sometimes called the turning point of the war.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 securing independence england.
but in july howe instead moved his forces from new york city to attack philadelphia.
in september the continental congress fled to lancaster in central pennsylvania and howe occupied the city of brotherly love.
not having been informed of burgoynes plans howe had unintentionally abandoned him.
american forces blocked burgoynes way surrounded his army and on october 17 1777 forced him to surrender at saratoga.
the victory provided a significant boost to american morale.
during the winter of 1777 1778 the british army now commanded by sir henry clinton was quartered in philadelphia.
in the revolution as in most eighteenth century wars fighting came to a halt during the winter.
british officers took part in an elegant social life complete with balls and parties.
most notable was the great meschianza an extravaganza that included a regatta a procession of medieval knights and a jousting tournament.
meanwhile washingtons army remained encamped at valley forge where they suffered terribly from the frigid weather.
but saratoga helped to persuade the french that american victory was possible.
in 1778 american diplomats led by benjamin franklin concluded a treaty of amity and commerce in which france recognized the united states and agreed to supply military assistance.
still smarting from their defeat in the seven years war the french hoped to weaken britain their main european rival and perhaps regain some of their lost influence and territory in the western hemisphere.
soon afterward spain also joined the war on the american side.
french assistance would play a decisive part in the wars end.
at the outset however the french fleet showed more interest in attacking british outposts in the west indies than directly aiding the americans.
and the spanish confined themselves to regaining control of florida which they had lost to the british in the seven years war.
nonetheless french and spanish entry transformed the war of independence into a global conflict.
by putting the british on the defensive in places ranging from gibraltar to the west indies it greatly complicated their military prospects.
the war in the south in 1778 the focus of the war shifted to the south.
here the british hoped to exploit the social tensions between backcountry farmers and wealthy planters that had surfaced in the regulator movements to enlist the support of the numerous colonists in the region who remained loyal to the crown and to disrupt the economy by encouraging slaves to escape.
in december 1778 british forces occupied savannah georgia.
in may 1780 clinton captured charleston south carolina and with it an american army of 5 000 men.
the year 1780 was arguably the low point of the struggle for independence.
congress was essentially bankrupt and the army went months without being paid.
the british seemed successful in playing upon social conflicts within the colonies as thousands of southern loyalists joined up with british forces fourteen regiments from savannah alone and tens of thousands of slaves sought freedom by fleeing to british lines.
in august lord charles cornwallis routed an american army at camden south carolina.
the following month one of washingtons ablest commanders benedict arnold defected and almost succeeded in turning over to the h o w w e r e a m e r i c a n f o r c e s a b l e t o p r e v a i l i n t h e r e v o l u t i o n a r y wa r.
the revolutionary 1775 1781 war in the south lake erie new york philadelphia ue h an york r na s wa lafayette nd oa hr shena mt.
vernon virginia ha r jam r d an ug ton a g hin delaware.
po tom maryland ac r r 1 ocham 781 beau sus q es isla new jersey pennsylvania kanaw g lo n richmond chesapeake bay cor nwa llis a pril 178 co rnwa llis pee sav ann yo rk 0f n nto cli charleston may 12 1780 d an ll wa n r co fe is b ah r georgia r south carolina.
wilmington dee camden aug 16 1780 hr ne w sou t cowpens jan 17 1781 ro m greene 1781 charlotte hillsborough north carolina greensboro 8 1 17 mor gan an dg guilford court house march 15 1781 1 e n re e 1 gree ne ok yorktown aug 30 oct.
19 1781 roan 1 er.
savannah dec 29 1778 100 miles 100 kilometers after 1777 the focus of the war of independence shifted to the south where it culminated in 1781 with the british defeat at yorktown.
a t l an t i c o c e an british victories american victories british troop movements american troop movements nd c h.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 securing independence british the important fort at west point on the hudson river.
on january 1 1781 1 500 disgruntled pennsylvania soldiers stationed near morristown new jersey killed three officers and marched toward philadelphia where congress was meeting.
their mutiny ended when the soldiers were promised discharges or bounties for reenlistment.
harsher treatment awaited a group of new jersey soldiers who also mutinied.
on washingtons orders two of their leaders were executed.
but the british failed to turn these advantages into victory.
british commanders were unable to consolidate their hold on the south.
wherever their forces went american militias harassed them.
hit and run attacks by militiamen under francis marion called the swamp fox because his men emerged from hiding places in swamps to strike swiftly and then disappear eroded the british position in south carolina.
a bloody civil war engulfed north and south carolina and georgia with patriot and loyalist militias inflicting retribution on each other and plundering the farms of their opponents supporters.
the brutal treatment of civilians by british forces under colonel banastre tarleton persuaded many americans to join the patriot cause.
victory a 1781 french engraving showing the surrender of lord charles cornwalliss army at yorktown ending the war of independence.
the french fleet sits just offshore.
at last in january 1781 american forces under daniel morgan dealt a crushing defeat to tarleton at cowpens south carolina.
two months later at guilford courthouse north carolina general nathanael greene while conducting a campaign of strategic retreats inflicted heavy losses on lord charles cornwallis the british commander in the south.
cornwallis moved into virginia and encamped at yorktown located on a peninsula that juts into chesapeake bay.
brilliantly recognizing the opportunity to surround cornwallis washington rushed his forces augmented by french troops under the marquis de lafayette to block a british escape by land.
h o w w e r e a m e r i c a n f o r c e s a b l e t o p r e v a i l i n t h e r e v o l u t i o n a r y wa r.
north america un exp lor ed russia unexplored hudson bay british north america disputed by england and united states disputed by england and united states hudson s bay nova scotia company new brunswick disputed by russia spain and england united states louisiana atl antic o cean disputed by spain and united states pa cific oce a n spanish florida mexico gulf of mexico bahamas b ri t i sh j a m a i ca b ri t i s h england spain russia france united states h i s p a ni o l a cu ba british honduras s a i nt d o m i ng ue caribbean sea central america 500 miles 500 kilometers meanwhile a french fleet controlled the mouth of the chesapeake preventing supplies and reinforcements from reaching cornwalliss army.
imperial rivalries had helped to create the american colonies.
now the rivalry of european empires helped to secure american independence.
taking land and sea forces together more frenchmen than americans participated in the decisive yorktown campaign.
on october 19 1781 south america the newly independent united states occupied only a small part of the north american continent in 1783.
5 the american revolution 1763 1783 a satirical cartoon depicts america represented by an indian holding a flag and liberty cap celebrating her independence while her allies the king of france a dutchman and a spaniard complain that they have not been reimbursed for their support.
on the left king george iii recognizes american independence while ireland above demands its own freedom.
securing independence cornwallis surrendered his army of 8 000 men.
when the news reached london public support for the war evaporated and peace negotiations soon began.
given its immense military prowess britain abandoned the struggle rather quickly.
many in britain felt the west indies were more valuable economically than the mainland colonies.
in any event british merchants expected to continue to dominate trade with the united states and did so for many years.
two years later in september 1783 american and british negotiators concluded the treaty of paris.
the american delegation john adams benjamin franklin and john jay achieved one of the greatest diplomatic triumphs in the countrys history.
they not only won recognition of american independence but also gained control of the entire region between canada and florida east of the mississippi river and the right of americans to fish in atlantic waters off of canada a matter of considerable importance to new englanders.
at british insistence the americans agreed that colonists who had remained loyal to the mother country would not suffer persecution and that loyalists property that had been seized by local and state governments would be restored.
until independence the thirteen colonies had formed part of britains american empire along with canada and the west indies.
but canada rebuffed repeated calls to join the war of independence and leaders of the west indies fearful of slave uprisings also remained loyal to the crown.
with the treaty of paris the united states of america became the western hemispheres first independent nation.
its boundaries reflected not so much the long standing unity of a geographical region but the circumstances of its birth.
suggested reading suggested reading books armitage david.
the declaration of independence a global history 2007.
traces the international impact of the declaration of independence in the years since it was written.
bailyn bernard.
the ideological origins of the american revolution 1967.
a classic study of the ideas that shaped the movement for independence.
bloch ruth.
visionary republic millennial themes in american thought 1756 1800 1988.
explores how the religious vision of a more perfect society contributed to the coming of the revolution.
breen t h marketplace of revolution how consumer politics shaped american independence 2004.
an examination of how the colonists very dependence on british consumer goods led them to resent interference with trade.
countryman edward.
the american revolution rev.
a brief summary of the revolutions causes conduct and consequences.
foner eric.
tom paine and revolutionary america 1976.
examines the ideas of the eras greatest pamphleteer of revolution and how they contributed to the struggle for independence.
gross robert.
the minutemen and their world 1976.
a social history of the militia of concord massachusetts where the war of independence began.
maier pauline.
american scripture making the declaration of independence 1997.
the most detailed study of the writing of the declaration and of previous calls for independence within the colonies.
middlekauff robert.
the glorious cause the american revolution 1763 1789 1982.
a comprehensive history of the revolution.
morgan edmund s and helen m morgan.
the stamp act crisis prologue to revolution 1953.
an influential study of the first crisis over british taxation of the colonies.
the urban crucible social change political consciousness and the origins of the american revolution 1979.
explores how the social history of american cities contributed to the coming of the revolution.
raphael ray.
the first american revolution before lexington and concord 2002.
a study of grassroots resistance to british measures before the outbreak of war.
royster charles.
a revolutionary people at war the continental army and american character 1979.
a social history of the army and the impact of military service on american soldiers.
withington anne.
toward a more perfect union virtue and the formation of american republics 1991.
considers how the boycotts of british goods promoted the idea of americas superior virtue contributing to the movement for independence.
websites declaring independence the american revolution and its era maps and charts of north america and the west indies.
html the coming of the american revolution c hapter r eview review questions 1.
explain what homespun virtue meant and how it set the colonists apart from the british.
patrick henry proclaimed that he was not a virginian but rather an american.
what unified the colonists and what divided them at the time of the revolution.
discuss the ramifications of using slaves in the british and continental armies.
why did the british authorize the use of slaves.
why did the americans.
how did the slaves benefit.
why did the colonists reach the conclusion that membership in the empire threatened their freedoms rather than guaranteed them.
describe how common sense and the declaration of independence reflected the ideas put forth by philosophers such as john locke that liberty was a natural right.
why did they have such an appeal to colonists of all social classes.
how would you justify the british view that the colonists owed loyalty to the existing government and gratitude for past actions.
summarize the difference of opinion between british officials and colonial leaders over the issues of taxation and representation.
trace the growth of colonial cooperation against the british government and the development of an american identity.
freedom questions 1.
the grand ideas of liberty and freedom are contagious and often spread rapidly.
why were many colonial elites who held one definition of liberty alarmed by the actions and claims of average citizens in the decade before independence.
almost every colonist even those like thomas hutchinson who later became loyalists opposed the stamp act.
identify the many ways colonists identified the stamp act as a threat to their freedoms.
explain how each of the following could be viewed as a threat to freedom by different groups of colonists the growing debt of virginia planters a lack of courts in the carolina backcountry imports of british manufactured goods and imports of lowpriced tea.
why did some americans view freedom as dependent upon their remaining loyal to the british government and remaining part of the empire.
many historians say that the declaration of independence is the most important document in u s history.
how did it permanently change the meaning of american freedom.
what concepts make it so appealing to people of all social classes across time and the globe.
study and review at key terms r e v i e w ta b l e loyal nine p 184 british acts imposed on the colonies virtual representation p 186 act date function proclamation of 1763 sugar act p 186 to halt colonial settlement west of the appalachian mountains and prevent warfare with indians committees of correspondence p 189 sugar act to collect revenue by reducing the tax on molasses and discouraging smuggling stamp act to directly tax all printed materials declaratory act to declare that the british parliament had the power to make laws for its colonies townshend act to tax imported goods such as paper glass paint lead and tea tea act to tax tea as part of an effort to help the failing east india company intolerable acts to close the port of boston and restrict the colonys political autonomy quebec act to grant religious toleration for catholics in canada writs of assistance p 186 sons of liberty p 189 regulators p 190 daughters of liberty p 191 boston massacre p 192 crispus attucks p 192 wilkes and liberty p 194 boston tea party p 194 quebec act p 195 suffolk resolves p 195 committees of safety p 196 lord dunmores proclamation p 198 olive branch petition p 199 common sense p 199 declaration of independence p 202 american exceptionalism p 204 the american crisis p 208 valley forge p 210 benedict arnold p 210 treaty of paris p 214 c hapter 6 samuel sewalls the selling of joseph first antislavery tract in america 1770s freedom petitions presented by slaves to new england courts adam smiths the wealth of nations john adamss thoughts on government vermont state constitution bans slavery thomas jefferson writes bill for establishing religious freedom phillipsburgh proclamation robert morris becomes director of congressional fiscal policy deborah sampson enlists in continental army first national census liberty displaying the arts and sciences the revolution within democratizing freedom the limits of liberty the dream of equality expanding the political nation the revolution in pennsylvania the new constitutions the right to vote democratizing government colonial loyalists the loyalists plight the indians revolution white freedom indian freedom toward religious toleration the language of slavery and freedom obstacles to abolition the cause of general liberty petitions for freedom british emancipators voluntary emancipations abolition in the north free black communities catholic americans the founders and religion separating church and state jefferson and religious liberty the revolution and the churches a virtuous citizenry defining economic freedom toward free labor the soul of a republic the politics of inflation the debate over free trade slavery and the revolution daughters of liberty revolutionary women gender and politics republican motherhood the arduous struggle for liberty in side of the old lutheran church in 1800 york pa a watercolor by a local artist depicts the interior of one of the numerous churches that flourished after independence.
while the choir sings a man chases a dog out of the building and another man stokes the stove.
the institutionalization of religious liberty was one of the most important results of the american revolution.
f ocus q uestions how did equality become a stronger component of american freedom after the revolution.
how did the expansion of religious liberty after the revolution reflect the new american ideal of freedom.
how did the definition of economic freedom change after the revolution and who benefited from the changes.
how did the revolution diminish the freedoms of both loyalists and native americans.
what was the impact of the revolution on slavery.
how did the revolution affect the status of women.
l b orn in massachusetts in 1744 abigail adams became one of the revolutionary eras most articulate and influential women.
at a time when educational opportunities for girls were extremely limited she taught herself by reading books in the library of her father a congregational minister.
in 1764 she married john adams a young lawyer about to emerge as a leading advocate of resistance to british taxation and eventually of american independence.
during the war of independence with her husband away in philadelphia and europe serving the american cause she stayed behind at their massachusetts home raising their four children and managing the familys farm.
the letters they exchanged form one of the most remarkable correspondences in american history.
she addressed john as dear friend and signed her letters portia after brutuss devoted wife in shakespeares play julius caesar.
though denied an official role in politics abigail adams was a keen observer of public affairs.
she kept her husband informed of events in massachusetts and offered opinions on political matters.
later when adams served as president he relied on her advice more than on members of his cabinet.
in march 1776 a few months before the second continental congress declared american independence abigail adams wrote her best known letter to her husband.
she began by commenting indirectly on the evils of slavery.
how strong she wondered could the passion for liberty be among those accustomed to deprive their fellow citizens of theirs she went on to urge congress when it drew up a code of laws for the new republic to remember the ladies all men she warned would be tyrants if they could women she playfully suggested will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice or representation it was the leaders of colonial society who initiated resistance to british taxation.
but as abigail adamss letter illustrates the struggle for american liberty emboldened other colonists to demand more liberty for themselves.
all revolutions enlarge the public sphere inspiring previously marginalized groups to express their own dreams of freedom.
at a time when so many americans slaves indentured servants women indians apprentices propertyless men were denied full freedom the struggle against britain threw into question many forms of authority and inequality.
abigail adams did not believe in female equality in a modern sense.
she accepted the prevailing belief that a womans primary responsibility was to her family.
but she resented the absolute power husbands exercised over their wives.
put it out of the power of husbands she wrote to use us as they will a discreet reference to mens legal control over the bodies of their wives and their right to inflict physical punishment on them.
her letter is widely remembered today.
less familiar is how did equality become a stronger component of american freedom after the revolution.
john adamss response which illuminated how the revolution had unleashed challenges to all sorts of inherited ideas of deference and authority we have been told that our struggle has loosened the bands of government everywhere that children and apprentices were disobedient that schools and colleges were grown turbulent that indians slighted their guardians and negroes grew insolent to their masters to john adams this upheaval including his wifes claim to greater freedom was an affront to the natural order of things.
to others it formed the essence of the american revolution.
d e m o c r at i z i n g f r e e d o m the dream of equality the american revolution took place at three levels simultaneously.
it was a struggle for national independence a phase in a century long global battle among european empires and a conflict over what kind of nation an independent america should be.
with its wide distribution of property lack of a legally established hereditary aristocracy and established churches far less powerful than in britain colonial america was a society with deep democratic potential.
but it took the struggle for independence to transform it into a nation that celebrated equality and opportunity.
the revolution unleashed public debates and political and social struggles that enlarged the scope of freedom and challenged inherited structures of power within america.
in rejecting the crown and the principle of hereditary aristocracy many americans also rejected the society of privilege patronage and fixed status that these institutions embodied.
to be sure the men who led the revolution from start to finish were by and large members of the american elite.
the lower classes did not rise to power as a result of independence.
nonetheless the idea of liberty became a revolutionary rallying cry a standard by which to judge and challenge home grown institutions as well as imperial ones.
jeffersons seemingly straightforward assertion in the declaration of independence that all men are created equal announced a radical principle whose full implications no one could anticipate.
in both britain and its colonies a well ordered society was widely thought to depend on obedience to authority the power of rulers over their subjects husbands over wives parents over children employers over servants and apprentices slaveholders over slaves.
inequality had been fundamental to the colonial social order the revolution challenged it in many ways.
henceforth american freedom would be forever linked with the idea of equality equality before the law equality in political rights equality of economic opportunity and for some equality of condition.
whenever i use the words freedom or rights wrote thomas paine i desire to be understood to mean a perfect equality of them.
the floor of freedom is as level as water abigail adams a portrait by gilbert stuart painted over several years beginning in 1800.
stuart told a friend that as a young woman adams must have been a perfect venus covered in chapter 7 history 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including the revolution and drafting of the declaration of independence and describe their causes and effects.
history 1c explain the significance of the following dates 1776 adoption of the declaration of independence.
history 4a analyze the causes of the american revolution including the proclamation of 1763 the intolerable acts the stamp act mercantilism la representation in parliament and british economic policies following the french and indian war.
history 4b explain the roles played by significant individuals during the american revolution including abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell samuel adams mercy otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin bernardo de galvez crispus attucks king george iii haym salomon patrick henry thomas jefferson the marquis de lafayette thomas paine and george washington.
history 4c explain the issues surrounding important events of the american revolution including declaring independence fighting the battles of lexington concord saratoga and yorktown enduring the winter at valley forge and signing the treaty of paris of 1783.
geography 10a locate places and regions of importance in the united states during the 18th century.
geography ioc analyze the effects of physical and human geographic factors on major historical and contemporary events in the united states.
government 15c identify colonial grievances listed in the declaration of independence citizenship 19a define and give examples of unalienable rights.
citizenship.
the student understands the importance of voluntary individual participation in the democratic process.
the student is expected to citizenship 2oa explain the role of significant individuals such as john locke and william blackstone in the development of self government in colonial america.
citizenship 20c analyze reasons for and the impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in u s history such as the boston tea party citizenship 21a identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
citizenship 22b describe the contributions of significant political social and military leaders of the united states such as john paul jones culture 23e identify the political social and economic contributions of women to american society.
in this chapter you will study one of the most important events in american history the american revolution.
you will learn how british colonists in north america objected to new taxes imposed by the british.
this dispute along with other issues such as the proclamation line of 1763 eventually brought the colonists into armed conflict with great britain.
actual fighting between the british army and the colonists broke out in massachusetts at lexington and concord in 1775.
open warfare finally pushed colonial leaders to declare their independence from england a year later.
87 name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 89 french and indian war proclamation line 176pj king george iii samuel adams sugar act stamp act poston massacre 1770 john adams u abigail adams patrick henry wentworth cheswell mary otis warren crispus attucks poston tea party lexington concord george washington valley forge intolerable acts marquis de lafayette haym solomon pernardo de galvez penjamin franklin thomas jefferson thomas paine peel of independence unalienable rights pattle of saratoga pattle of yorktown john paul jones james armistead by the 1750s the british claimed control of the ohio river valley just across the appalachians from the british colonies.
meanwhile the french had built forts along the great lakes.
they also claimed control of the ohio river valley southwest of their settlements.
war between britain and france broke out in 1754.
because many indian tribes sided with the french the conflict became known in north america as the french and indian war.
french military bases were located in quebec and montreal while the british had bases along the hudson river.
the area between them became the main battleground.
in 1756 the war spread from north america to europe.
the french and indian war was fought for control of north america.
a british force captured the french city of quebec in 1759.
this victory gave the british control of the st lawrence river.
under the terms of the peace treaty 1763 france lost most of its colonial empire in north america including canada and all lands east of the mississippi river.
these lands became british.
what was the main cause of the french and indian war.
what were the main effects of the british victory in the french and indian war.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 91 the issue of taxation disagreements quickly arose over the right of the british parliament to tax the colonists.
after the french and indian war britain faced a huge national debt.
it also cost money to station british troops in the 13 colonies and the west indies.
in britain people already paid higher taxes than the colonists.
the british government therefore proposed a series of new taxes on the colonists.
however these taxes were passed by the british parliament without first consulting the colonists.
british leaders thought this was only right because the colonists were not paying their fair share towards their own defense.
since the colonists lived so far away from london it seemed impossible for them to participate effectively in the british parliament.
taxation without representation.
wealthy colonial merchants and landowners used to acting in their colonial assemblies with little british interference resented these new policies.
colonial leaders were also influenced by enlightenment writers like john locke and william blackstone.
locke had written that government was a social contract he said the purpose of government was to protect individual freedom and property.
if a government failed to do this locke argued its citizens had the right to overthrow it.
blackstone defined the rights of individuals in english law as well as property rights that could not be violated even by the king.
following both locke and english traditions samuel adams and other colonists argued that the british government should not tax the colonists w nists believed that taxation without representation wa the stamp act.
the next new british tax was the stamp act 1765.
parliament ordered that every newspaper pamphlet and other public or legal document had to be printed or written on paper with an official stamp or seal on it.
this was a form of tax because the british government was to be paid for the official stamp.
the stamp act created a firestorm of protests in the colonies.
colonists objected that the british government had imposed this new tax without their consent.
colonists held meetings boycotted refused to buy british goods and even attacked british officials in protest.
in virginia patrick henry 1736 1799 denounced the stamp act and the house of burgesses passed resolutions against it.
samuel adams organized a series of protests in boston.
a stamp act congress against the act was held in new york city.
colonists produced petitions to the king and parliament stating their position on these new taxes.
these petitions argued that the colonists could only be taxed by their own consent.
john locke liout their consent.
these colo tyranny a british tax collector is tied to a pole by an unruly crowd.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 93 crispus attucks a man of mixed african and native american indian ancestry was the first colonist killed.
the soldiers were put on trial but were ably defended by a young attorney john adams 1735 1826.
adams argued that the soldiers acted in self defense and they were found to be innocent.
nevertheless his cousin samuel adams and other opponents of british rule called this incident the boston massacre they circulated pictures and used this tragedy to win public support against the british.
acting as an amateur historian the following statement was given by captain thomas preston of the 29th british regiment concerning events on march 5 1770 the boston massacre.
i was soon informed of a mob of colonists intention to carry off a soldier and murder him.
i sent an officer and 12 men to protect the sentry and followed myself.
the mob became more outrageous raising their bludgeons and calling out come on you scoundrels fire if you dare i used all my power to persuade them to retire peaceably.
they continued to advance.
someone asked if i intended to order the men to fire.
i answered no.
while speaking a soldier received a severe blow and instantly fired his gun.
turning to ask him why he fired without orders i was struck with a club on my arm which had it been on my head would have destroyed me how do you think samuel adams description of this event might have differed.
in 1772 samuel adams formed the first committee of correspondence with james warren and his wife mercy otis warren 1728 1874.
mary wrote a series of pamphlets and satires against the british.
the new committees of correspondence organized opponents of british polices throughout the colonies.
with her husband off fighting mercy wrote the first history of the american revolutionary war using her notes from meetings and conversations.
her ideas and writings convinced many people in the colonies to take up the patriot cause.
mercy otis warren the tea duty and the boston tea party.
in response to colonial protests the british again canceled all of the new taxes except the duty on tea.
in the evening of december 1773 a group of colonists dressed as mohawk indians boarded three british ships in boston harbor and seized 45 tons of tea.
they protested against the tea tax by dumping the tea into boston harbor.
boston tea party name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 95 learning with graphic organizers describe each of the milestones along the road to the american revolution.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence the struggle spreads in may 1775 colonial representatives met again in philadelphia for the second continental congress.
all of the colonies sent delegates to philadelphia.
delegates included john and samuel adams from massachusetts benjamin franklin from pennsylvania and thomas jefferson from virginia.
the delegates quickly voted to join massachusetts in its fight.
in williamsburg virginia patrick henry 1736 1799 considered the finest orator in america convinced the house of burgesses to support the war with his stirring speech 97 patrick henry the voice of the american revolution give me liberty or give me death although the second continental congress lacked the legal authority to govern it boldly assumed that responsibility.
the continental congress appointed george washington a virginian who had fought in the french and indian war to lead the continental army.
the selection of a virginian helped to unify the colonies.
washington proceeded directly to boston.
in march 1776 using cannons captured by ethan allen at fort ticonderoga in upstate new york washington drove the british out of boston.
the british retreated to new york city.
imagine that you and your classmates are representatives meeting in the continental congress.
hold an imaginary session in which you discuss 1 complaints of the colonists against great britain and 2 possible solutions to the crisis.
thomas paine s common sense a variety of colonial viewpoints developed in response to the outbreak of war.
loyalists still wanted to remain under british rule.
in the provinces of canada colonists stayed loyal to the crown.
there were also many loyalists in the thirteen colonies.
some wanted to stay a part of the british empire but with more rights for the colonists.
the iroquois sided with the british as did many black slaves who were promised their freedom for helping the british in the war.
thomas paine an englishman living in the colonies published a pamphlet common sense early in 1776.
paine believed it was ridiculous for america to be governed by a small distant island across the vast ocean.
he said the colonists derived no benefit from british rule.
in fact the british had dragged the colonists into european wars.
many patriots supporters of the revolution began to demand complete independence.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 99 this philosophy teaches that each individual is endowed at birth with rights that are unalienable because they were given to us by our creator.
this idea of unalienable rights became a basic belief of american government that some rights are derived from nature and may not be taken or violated by the government.
a acting as an amateur.
historian jefferson argued that citizens had the right to overthrow an oppressive government to protect these unalienable rights.
this argument is found in the most important paragraph of the declaration we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it and to institute new government briefly summarize this paragraph in your own words.
fc what justification did this paragraph give for the revolution against king george hi.
a the declaration of independence went on to list the grievances of the colonists against king george iii and his ministers.
most of these grievances related to the belief that the british crown was threatening the colonists rights in favor of tyrannical rule.
the king imposed taxes on the colonists without their consent.
he made the military superior to the civil government.
he refused to answer colonial petitions for the redress of grievances.
grievances against the king in the declaration of independence he asked citizens to give up their rights of representation.
he quartered large numbers of soldiers among the colonists.
he deprived the colonists of j trial by jury.
1 z z he dissolved the colonists rep he protected his soldiers against he waged war against the i resentative assemblies.
trial for murders of colonists.
american colonists.
1 the road to victory in the first years of the war the colonial army barely managed to escape disaster.
washington and the continental army occupied new york city in 1776.
however the british drove washington and his army out of new york after the battle of long island.
british troops then occupied new york city.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence the plan then failed entirely when the largest army commanded by general john burgoyne was defeated at saratoga in 1777 by general horatio gates.
general burgoyne was unprepared because like many british generals he held the erroneous belief that the rebels were ignorant farmers who could easily be swept away by highly trained british regulars.
one of those fighting in saratoga was church leader historian and judge wentworth cheswesl 1746 1817.
cheswell is considered the first african american elected to public office in america.
the battle of saratoga marked a turning point in the war.
the victory at saratoga helped ben franklin and john adams who had been sent overseas to persuade the french government to supply military assistance to the americans.
101 the winter of at valley forge despite the victory at saratoga the war was far from over.
the continental congress had to leave philadelphia which was occupied by british troops.
washington and his battle weary army spent the winter at valley forge in pennsylvania.
here washington faced the problem of feeding his 12 000 troops and even faced threats to his leadership from some of his officers.
long marches had destroyed the soldiers shoes and warm blankets were scarce.
there were desertions and many suffered from diseases such as typhus typhoid and pneumo nia.
although no battle was fought at valley forge it represented a major test for the new continental army.
washington used his time at valley forge to train and discipline his troops.
foreign volunteers like baron von steuben from germany and the marquis de lafayette 1757 1834 from france helped train the soldiers of the continental army.
although the french king forbid him from going to america because france was not at war with england lafayette purchased a ship and gathered a group of french officers to help in the struggle.
his volunteer service was seen as a major triumph for the american cause.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 103 cornwallis surrenders to washington.
the battle of yorktown 1781 after several more years of fighting general washington managed with french help to force general charles cornwallis and the main british army into a comer at yorktown virginia.
the french fleet blocked their escape by sea.
after a few days of combat cornwallis and his 8 000 british soldiers were forced to surrender in october 1781.
the battle of yorktown turned out to be the last major battle of the war.
occasional fighting contin ued after the surrender at yorktown and washington feared the war might still drag on for another year.
however when word reached england of the defeat at yorktown the prime minister was forced to resign and the new government decided to give up the fight.
independence recognized the treaty of paris of 1783 formally ended the american revolutionary war.
under its terms the british recognized the independence of the colonies.
the british promised to remove all of their troops from the country.
in addition they gave all the land between the mississippi river and the atlantic from the great lakes to the border with florida to the new united states.
this move gave the new nation twice the area of the former colonies.
a variety of factors were responsible for the american victory over great britain then the worlds richest and most powerful empire i the american victory was due to many factors hi fighting for their homeland.
the colonists were defending their own soil.
the british were fighting a war thousands of miles from their homeland.
methods of warfare.
colonial forces used unconventional methods to fight the british.
they took advantage of hiding behind trees and other tactics.
the british fought in a more traditional manner with soldiers aligned in a straight formation out in the open.
local support.
the continental army received support from the local population including women.
the british were fighting a war on a hostile terrain.
nevertheless the british did receive support from loyalists and used canada as a refuge and as a staging ground for attacks against the colonists.
leadership.
washington was a very capable general.
he received help from experienced foreign military leaders such as baron von steuben kasimir pulaski and marquis de lafayette.
these european volunteers helped turn the continental army into a more disciplined fighting force.
the french alliance.
volunteers money troops and naval support from france were essential to the american victory.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 105 benjamin franklin j.
here bernardo de galvez i put your picture i here 1 i 1.
patrick henry.
put your picture here thomas jefferson put your picture 5 here marquis de lafayette put your picture here thomas paine put your picture here haym solomon put your picture here name lexington and concord winter at valley forge treaty of paris justified overthrow of oppressive government j emergence of colonial self government yorktown j key developments thomas jefferson main author key battles second continental congress declares independence thomas paine common sense traditions of english liberty declaration of independence causes jr listed grievances stamp act against k j of the jr king george iii vocation without representation z unalienable rights townshend duties french and indian war tea tax proclamation line of 1763 colonial protests x important people boycotts boston massacre sons of liberty boston tea party ame revolution abigail adams john adams wentworth cheswell samuel adams mary otis warren james armistead benjamin franklin blrnardo di.
galvf7 crispus attucks king george iii haym solomon patrick henry thomas jefferson marquis de lafayette thomas paine george washington chapter study cards american revolution declaration of independence 1776 fa causes of revolution.
british wanted to tax colonies to repay debts from the french and indian war colonists felt they were not being represented in british parliament.
proclamation line of 1763 stamp act 1765 townshend acts 1767 tea act 1773 boston tea party 1773 intolerable acts 1774 effects of revolution.
declaration of independence 1776 british recognized american independence.
issued by the second continental congress 1 on july 4 1776.
written primarily by thomas jefferson.
j stated to the world the reasons why the i colonies were declaring their independence.
announced the purpose of government was to protect the people s unalienable rights i life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
j a it declared the right of people to overthrow a government that oppresses its people.
i included a list of grievances by the colonists against the british king george iii.
i 107 name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 109 first examine the question.
this question tests your ability to identity what is common among a group of events along a timeline.
recall what you know.
each of these events are tied together by being related in some way to the american revolutionary war.
apply what you know to the choices.
choices a b and d are ail related to the american revolution but they are too narrowly defined to include all of the events on the timeline.
you should realize that only choice c would be an appropriate title that ties all of these events together under one title.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 the economic system illustrated by this cartoon was opposed by later american colonists because it f supported colonial manufacturing hist 4 a g took gold and silver from american mines h required colonists to sell their raw materials to and buy their finished goods from england j prohibited colonists from fishing or trading in furs use the two newspaper articles and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
lite jbnatmt baxvttc site i mthmt fettle april 1775 april 1775 the british redcoats came in sight just before sunrise.
the british commanding officer spoke to our militia disperse you rebels throw down vour arms and disperse.
upon w hich american troops gave a yell and immediately one or two british officers discharged their pistols followed by gun fire from four or five british soldiers.
six companies ol light infantry at lexington found a body of the country people under arms.
the king s troops marched up to them to ask the reason of their being so assembled.
several guns were fired on the king s troops from behind a stone wall and from other houses.
as a result the troops returned fire and killed several of them.
glisilglsm 3 these two accounts relate to the firing of the first shots of the american revolution at lexington massachusetts.
based on these accounts what conclusion can be drawn.
a american militia men fired the first shots at lexington.
citi 21 apj b the british fired the first shots of the american revolution.
c secondary sources are more accurate than primary sources.
d the point of view of the writer may lead to some bias in the account.
name chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 111 10 the american colonists used the slogan no taxation without representation to express their belief in the need for f economic interdependence h mercantilism c hist 4 a j g the consent of the governed j parliamentary supremacy use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
i challenge the warmest advocate for reconciliation to show a single advantage that this continent can reap by being connected with great britain.
i repeat not a single advantage is derived.
our com will fetch its price in any market in europe and our imported goods must be paid buy them where we will thomas paine 1776 11 in this statement paine suggested that the american colonies should a negotiate an end to the conflict with england b form an alliance with england c declare independence from england d boycott goods from england 12 which document included the idea first suggested by john locke that people have a right to overthrow a government that oppresses them.
f mayflower compact g declaration of independence h fundamental orders of connecticut j proclamation of 1763 use the chart and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
13 based on the chart what was a major effect of the stamp act.
a the colonists no longer needed british goods.
ttist 4 a b the british refused to sell certain products to the colonists.
c the law led to a decline in the value of colonial currency.
d many colonists participated in actions in opposition to the act.
chapter 7 the american revolution the road to independence 113 19 which statement is most consistent with the views of samuel adams.
a taxation without representation is tyranny.
f hisy4 jq j b colonists should be grateful to be part of the british empire.
c citizens under british rule should support king george iii.
d the english king deserves respect and loyalty from his subjects.
20 which action by the colonists could be categorized as an act of civil disobedience.
f colonists throwing british tea into boston harbor f citi 20 c j g placing restrictions on trade with spain and france h paying the stamp tax to british tax collectors j firing guns at british soldiers at lexington and concord massachusetts use the diagram and your knowledge of social studies to answer following question.
21 which title best completes this web diagram.
a signers of the declaration of independence hist 4 b b participants in the boston massacre c heroes of the american revolution d artists of the colonial period use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
i long to hear that you have declared an independency and by the way in the new code of laws which i suppose it will be necessary for you to make i desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands.
remember men would be tyrants if they could.
if particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion 22 whose views are represented in this passage.
f benjamin franklin h bernardo de galvez chist4 b j g haym solomon j abigail adams 23 why were the colonists angered by issuance of the proclamation of 1763.
a it took too much land from canada.
6 hist 4 a j b it gave territory in florida to france.
c it limited their freedom to move west.
d it promoted raids by native american indians.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 115 a.
after declaring independence from great britain each colony became an independent state and adopted its own state constitution.
the second continental congress enacted the articles of confederation.
this created a loose confederation of states.
each state had one vote in the confederation congress and nine states were needed to pass a law.
the confederation congress controlled foreign affairs but was unable to raise its own army or collect taxes.
it depended on the state governments for support.
c the confederation congress passed the northwest ordinance in 1787 establishing principles for the orderly future expansion of the united states.
slavery was prohibited in the northwest territory.
d during the critical period 1781 1787 the new nation faced many problems under the articles of confederation.
states taxed goods from other states and each state printed its own money making trade difficult.
e in 1786 farmers in massachusetts rose up in shays rebellion.
although it was put down by state militia there was no national army if it had spread.
f american leaders decided a stronger government was needed.
at annapolis they decided to invite delegates to philadelphia to revise the articles.
g the constitutional convention was held in philadelphia in 1787.
the delegates soon decided to abandon the articles and write a new constitution.
h the delegates agreed that the new government should be based on the principles of republicanism popular sovereignty and limited government.
they also agreed on the need for a stronger national government.
several important issues divided members of the convention.
delegates from larger states wanted representation in congress by size while smaller states wanted each state to be equal.
the great compromise settled the dispute.
a second issue divided the delegates over the issue of how slaves would be counted towards a states representation in congress.
the issue was settled with the three fifths compromise k the new constitution established the principles of federalism popular sovereignty limited government separation of powers and checks and balances to make sure the new central government would not become too strong.
l the preamble of the constitution stated the purposes of the new government.
the delegates also created a process to amend the constitution.
m after the constitution was completed the country debated whether to ratify approve it.
anti federalists believed the new government would be too strong and tyrannical.
federalists believed a stronger government was needed and that the principles of federalism and separation of powers were sufficient safeguards to protect individual liberties.
n the constitution was ratified after its supporters promised a bill of rights.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 117 the first governments of the new united states were actually established at the state not the national level.
after declaring independence each former colony became an independent state.
colonial charters were rewritten as state constitutions.
americans also recognized the need for some form of central or national government.
the continental congress itself was inadequate to serve as a permanent form of national government.
but because of their recent experiences with british rule the former colonists were afraid of creating a central government that would be too powerful.
the constitutional congress drafted the articles of confederation in 1776 and 1777 to solve this problem.
after the articles of confederation were written the document had to be approved by each state before it could become official.
although the articles were sent to the states in november 1777 it took almost four years until march of 1781 for each state to approve them in full.
acting as an amateur historian the thirteen new states finally adopted the articles of confederation in 1781.
here are some of its major provisions ii.
each state retains its sovereignty supreme power freedom and every power jurisdiction and right which is not expressly delegated to the united states.
article iii.
the states hereby enter into a firm league of friendship with each other for their common defense the security of their liberties and their general welfare binding themselves to assist each other against all attacks upon them.
article v in determining questions in the united states in congress assembled each state shall have one vote.
article vi.
no state without the consent of the congress shall enter into any conference alliance or treaty with any king prince or state what were the goals of the new confederation.
identify one advantage and one disadvantage of one of the articles above.
structure 01 members of the continental congress feared that individual freedom might be threatened by the national government if it had too much power.
therefore the articles of confederation deliberately placed more power in the hands of the individual states making the new national government very weak.
it was only a loose association a league of friendship with only one branch of government the congress.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 119 achievements despite its shortcomings the articles of confederation created a national government that had some important achievements.
it successfully concluded the peace treaty with britain ending the american revolution.
it helped develop the concept of limited government a system in which government has only certain powers and cannot act beyond the powers it was specifically given.
the articles of confederation also developed the idea that american citizenship included both privileges and immunities rights to take certain actions without penalty.
state governments could not deny these privileges and immunities to citizens who came from other states.
the confederation congress also passed the land ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance of 1787.
these acts prohibited slavery in the northwest territory encouraged free public education and guaranteed both religious freedom and trial by jury.
procedures were also established for governing the northwest territory which was divided into smaller territories.
the northwest ordinance introduced a method for admitting these territories into the union as new states once a population of60 000 people was achieved within each territory.
the new states were admitted on terms of complete equality with the original thirteen states.
acting as an amateur historian the northwest ordinance of 1787 spurred the westward expansion of the united states.
here is one of the most important provisions of this document article 5.
there shall be formed in the territory not less than three nor more than five states and when any of the said states shall have sixty thousand free inhabitants such state shall be admitted into the congress of the united states on an equal footing with the original states in all respects and shall be at liberty to form a constitution and state government provided the constitution and government shall be republican and in conformity to the principles contained in these articles what requirements did the northwest ordinance have for the admission of a territory into the union as a new state.
fc why was this ordinance such a significant achievement.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 121 the rebels wanted to stop state courts from seizing their property and imprisoning them for unpaid debts.
they also wanted the state to issue paper money.
there was no national army to put down the uprising if it had spread to other states.
although the state militia was able to put it down many property owners across the country now felt the need for a stronger national government.
a meeting of representatives at annapolis in 1786 called for a convention of delegates to revise the articles of confederation.
since only five of the 13 states were represented at annapolis they agreed to assemble again a few months later in philadelphia.
in may 1787 representatives from the states met in philadelphia to revise the articles of confederation.
george washington benjamin franklin and the signing of the u s constitution at independence hall alexander hamilton were among the delegates.
the representatives quickly agreed on discarding the articles of confederation.
instead they decided that a new national constitution was needed.
acting as an amateur historian jims although it was agreed that the discussions of the constitutional convention were to be kept secret james madison wrote down every speech.
madison is known as the father of the u s constitution if not for his notes little of what took place at the constitutional convention would be known.
below is a speech that madison gave at the convention in time of war great powers are given to the executive.
constant fear of war has the same tendency to make the head too large for the body.
a standing military force with an overgrown executive will not be a safe protector of liberty.
the defense against foreign threats has been the instrument of tyranny at home.
among the romans it was a standing truth to stir fear of a war whenever a revolt was threatened.
the armies were kept on under the excuse of defending the people but they enslaved them what did madison mean when he said the head is too large for the body.
what danger was madison warning against in this speech.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 123 these two disagreements were eventually settled by the following compromises ill util ib 181.
saisasia 111 major constitutional compromises issue how should states be represented in the national legislature.
issue how should slaves be counted.
the great compromise larger states felt they should have a greater say in the national government.
smaller states felt each state should have an equal voice.
in this compromise a two house bicameral legislature was created congress.
in the house of representatives states were represented according to their population size.
this allowed states with a larger population to have a greater number of representatives.
in the senate each state no matter what its size would be represented by two senators.
senators were elected indirectly.
all laws needed the approval of both houses of congress.
the three fifths compromise southern states wanted slaves counted as part of their population to have more members in the house of representatives.
the states compromised by agreeing to count every five slaves as three free persons for both taxation and representation.
tti ffttf free persons slaves taxation and representation 5 the commerce compromise.
another dispute involved the taxing of trade.
southern landowners who sold cash crops to england feared taxes on exports of their tobacco and other crops.
in the commerce compromise the delegates agreed to prohibit all taxes on exports goods sold to foreign countries.
only imported goods could be taxed.
the delegates also agreed that congress could not regulate or limit the slave trade for at least the next twenty years until 1808.
fa the delegates to the constitutional convention probably agreed on more aspects of the new government than they disagreed on.
list several of the questions on which the delegates agreed.
create a poster about the constitutional convention.
show what the delegates agreed on where they disagreed and what compromises they made.
hold a mock constitutional convention in your classroom.
have your teacher assign different roles to members of your class.
as a result of the agreements and compromises reached at the constitutional convention the delegates created a new system of government.
the chart on the next page shows the organization of the constitution itself name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 125 because the delegates to the convention did not entirely trust the common people they arranged for the president to be chosen by an indirect election.
voters would first choose members of the electoral college.
once selected these electors would then vote to choose the president.
each state is free to choose its electors as it wishes.
in the late 1700s america was largely rural.
most people were farmers who knew little about politics.
in this environment a direct election of the president would probably have been difficult.
the legislative branch the new national legislature was called congress.
based on the great compromise it consisted of two houses the house of representatives and the senate.
congress had the power to make laws declare war borrow and issue money pay for military forces and regulate commerce trade between different states or with foreign countries.
people vote for ha electors who vote for president s the judicial branch anew national judiciary was created consisting of the supreme court and any lower courts later created by congress.
the supreme court could rule on cases involving either the new constitution or laws passed by congress.
its justices judges were to be appointed for life by the president with the approval of the senate.
life tenure meant that the justices would not have to run for election and could be completely independent.
il isibsiiiiii iihibiihiimi.
branches of the federal government t iggjgj iiollilii bill hill iiilbhii select one of the goals listed in the preamble and explain its importance.
make a chart summarizing the powers and duties of the president congress and the supreme court.
look in the school library or online for more information about each branch of government.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 127 the basic challenge faced by the authors of the constitution was to create a national government that would be strong but not so strong that it might undermine individual liberties identified in the declaration of independence.
to achieve this goal the new constitution adopted a number of important principles limited government one of the most important principles of the u s constitution is the belief that the powers of government should be limited.
a self governing people gives their government leaders only certain specific powers.
these are the just powers of government mentioned in the declaration of independence.
under our system of limited government our national government has no duties or powers other than those powers specifically granted to it in the constitution.
republicanism americans created a republican form of government a democratic government chosen by the people.
a republic describes a government in which decisions are made by elected representatives not handed down by a king.
popular sovereignty another key principle of the u s constitution is that the people are sovereign they hold supreme power.
the just powers of the government come from the consent of the governed.
the people exercise their sovereignty by electing representatives to congress and by indirectly electing the president.
federalism the authors of the u s constitution created a federal republic government powers were divided between the national government and the states.
to accomplish this the writers of the constitution created a system in which power was shared between the national or federal and state governments.
the federal government treats issues facing the entire nation while state governments handle local affairs.
because power was divided between the national and state governments the authors of the constitution believed the national government would not become too strong.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 129 individual rights you will leam about the issues surrounding the protection of individual rights in the next chapter.
provisions for change the amendment process the constitution included provisions for change.
the way the u s constitution keeps pace is through the amendment process which allows changes and additions to the text of the constitution.
to prevent changes for unimportant reasons the amending process was made more difficult than passing an ordinary law.
although over 200 years old our constitution has thus kept up with the changing needs of our nation.
a special elastic clause in the u s constitution further provided congress with the power to enact any laws they deemed necessary to carry out its other powers.
these provisions have made our constitution into a living document the elastic clause has allowed the powers of congress to increase dramatically since the early 1800s due in large part to the decisions of the supreme court.
the amendment process the most common method amendment is proposed by to the states jbs33l ibm 213 vote of both houses of congress many of the principles found in the u s constitution were designed to prevent abuses of power.
select two of the principles discussed in this section and describe how they were attempts to prevent an abuse of power.
acting as an amateur historian the original u s constitution has undergone numerous changes since it was first approved almost 230 years ago.
look online or in your school library for a copy of the main part of the constitution.
use a copy that identifies those parts of the original document that have been crossed out and revised.
explain how one of those revisions brought about a change to the original u s constitution.
then prepare a two minute oral presentation to your class stating whether you agree or disagree with that particular revision to the u s constitution.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 131 the declaration of independence 1776 had listed a series of grievances committed by king george iii of england against the colonists.
a number of those grievances addressed violations by the king of his duties under the english bill of rights.
many of the provisions of the u s constitution were included to prevent a repetition of such abuses impact of colonial grievances on the constitution ucudldiiuii u.
11 lut uciiudluc r the king imposed taxes without the consent of the colonists.
u s constitution provides that all taxes must be approved by the house of representatives.
the king made the military superior to the civil government.
u s constitution provides that the com mander in chief is a civilian the president.
the king kept a large standing army among the colonists.
congress has the right to raise and support an army.
it determines its size through its control of funds.
the king made judges dependent on his will.
all federal judges are appointed for life.
members of the constitutional convention knew they could not adopt their new plan on their own authority.
they decided that before the constitution could become law nine states should ratify approve it.
special conventions were held in each state for this purpose.
federalists and anti federalists opponents of the new constitution were known as anti federalists.
they included such patriots as patrick henry and george mason.
acting as an amateur historian in this address to the virginia legislature in june 1788 patrick henry objects to scrapping the articles of confederation the confederation this same despised government merits in my opinion the highest praise it carried us through a long and dangerous war it rendered us victorious in that bloody conflict with a powerful nation it has secured us a territory greater than any european monarch possesses and should a government which has been that strong and vigorous be accused of imbecility and abandoned for want of energy.
consider what you are about to do before you part with this government before you abandon the present system i hope you will consider not only its defects but likewise those that of which you are about to substitute for it what arguments does henry raise against abandoning the articles of confederation.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 the federalist papers helped to persuade americans to approve the new constitution.
thomas jefferson called them the best explanation ever written about the principles of government.
some have even called these essays the most significant public relations campaign in history.
to obtain the necessary votes for ratification supporters promised to add a bill of rights.
with this assurance by the end of 1788 eleven states had voted to ratify approve the u s constitution.
133 alexander hamilton james madison and john jay authors of the federalist papers.
acting as an amateur historian many americans believed as baron de montesquieu had written that liberty was only safe in small societies governed either by direct democracy or by legislatures with small districts.
james madison in federalist no.
51 argued the opposite.
in a large republic different interests would have to come together to form a coalition alliance in order to govern the nation.
government was created to prevent politicians or small groups from using government for their own unjust purposes in republican government the legislative authority dominates.
the remedy for this is to divide the legislature into different branches and to make them by different methods of election and different principles of action as little connected with each other as their common functions will allow.
in a single republic all the power surrendered by the people is submitted to a single government and misuse of that power is guarded against by dividing the government into separate departments.
in america the power surrendered by the people is first divided between two distinct governments and then the power of each is subdivided among separate departments.
hence a double security arises to protect the rights of the people.
different governments will control each other at the same time that each will be controlled by itself.
if a majority is united by a common interest the rights of the minority might be threatened.
there are two ways of providing against this evil by creating a will in the community independent of the majority of the society the other by comprehending in the society so many separate descriptions of citizens as will render an unjust combination of a majority of the whole improbable if not impractical what arguments does madison make to calm fears of some that the new government could threaten peoples liberties.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 135 government under the articles constitutional convention 1787 articles of confederation.
1777 1778 set up a weak central government.
each state had only one vote in congress.
weaknesses lacked power to regulate trade no national court system lacked power to tax lacked a national army.
strengths passed northwest ordinance creating procedures to admit new states.
critical period.
1781 1787 shays rebellion.
massachusetts farmers rebelled against courts foreclosing their farms.
showed the weakness of the articles of confederation in putting down rebellions.
t convention met in 1787 in philadelphia.
scrapped articles of confederation and agreed to draft a new constitution.
james madison kept notes and is known as the father of us constitution.
t delegates agree to create three government branches.
executive branch president chosen by the electoral college.
legislature branch two house congress.
judicial branch supreme court.
new national government can raise an army collect taxes coin money regulate commerce between states and declare war or peace.
the bundle of compromises ratification of the constitution great compromise.
dealt with the issue of representation in congress large states wanted representation based on population.
small states wanted states to be equal in congress.
compromise established two houses states were equal in the senate the house of representatives was based on population.
three fifths compromise.
issue of how slaves should be counted for purposes of representation.
five slaves would count as three persons for both representation and taxation.
fc anti federalists.
were opposed to approval of the new constitution.
george mason patrick henry feared central government would be too powerful and threaten individual liberties.
fc federalists.
supported approval.
favored a strong central government.
james madison john jay alexander hamilton wrote the federalist papers.
they argued that the constitution had protections to prevent the rise of tyranny.
these included the division of powers between the federal government and the states and the separation of powers between the branches.
principles of the u s constitution u s constitution 1787 fc limited government jit republicanism jit popular sovereignty jit federalism j separation of powers legislative power executive power judicial power checks and balances j amending process u s constitution.
was a written plan of government that spelled out the powers and organization of the new national government.
it is important because it established the institutions of the national government separation of powers.
defined the powers of the national government federalism.
provided a legal basis for the protection of the rights of its citizens.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 examine the question.
this question tests your ability to understand a political cartoon.
recall what you know.
the cartoonist has drawn a large ship representing the articles of confederation.
it is sailing through rough waters.
the waves are high threatening to sink the ship.
these waves symbolize different shortcomings of the arti cles no national army no power to enforce treaties and no power to raise an army.
the caption raises the question whether the government under the articles is in danger of sinking.
apply what you know.
you should realize that choices a c and d do not really define the main idea of the cartoon.
the best answer is choice s5 since the cartoonist implies the articles of confederation had many shortcomings.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
why did some of the founders of the american republic consider the lack of a national executive and judiciary under the articles of confederation as one of the documents great strengths.
f they feared a strong central government.
qiist istbp g they feared the threat of a foreign invasion.
h they were willing to risk tyranny for an effective national government.
j they desired to copy the british monarchy.
the three fifths compromise was included in the u s constitution in order to resolve a conflict over the a number of votes needed to approve a treaty in the senate number of states needed to ratify a proposed amendment reimbursement of plantation owners for runaway slaves b c d counting of enslaved persons for purposes of taxation and representation 4 one accomplishment of the national government under the articles of confederation was the passage of a law establishing f a central banking system hist 6ja 2 g a process for admitting new states into the union h the presidents right to put down rebellions j the ability of congress to tax the states effectively 5 which question at the constitutional convention was resolved by the great compromise.
a how should the president be elected.
hist 4 d b who should control commerce and trade.
c what should be the structure of the federal court system.
d what formula should be used for congressional representation.
name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 139 use the information in the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
he the president shall have power with the advice and consent of the senate to make treaties provided two thirds of the senators present concur and he shall nominate with the advice and consent of the senate ambassadors and other public ministers article ii section 2 clause 2 u s constitution 11 12 13 which principle of the u s constitution is reflected in this passage.
a checks and balances c popular sovereignty b amendment process d federalism hist 15 6 what was a key argument used by the federalists for ratification of the u s constitution.
f it prohibited the power of the federal government to wage war.
g it provided for construction of a new capital in the south.
h it allowed the slave trade to continue for at least twenty more years.
j it had features that prevented the abuse of government power.
which historic document was written in support of ratification of the u s constitution.
a magna carta b mayflower compact c declaration of independence d the federalist papers use the passage below and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the nation deserves and i will select a supreme court justice that americans can be proud of.
the nation also deserves a dignified process of confirmation in the united states senate characterized by fair treatment a fair hearing and a fair vote.
i will choose a nominee in a timely manner so that the hearing and the vote can be completed before the new supreme court term begins president george w bush 2005 14 which constitutional principle is discussed in this quotation.
f federalism h statesrights govt 15 d g checks and balances j due process 15 why did the framers of the constitution create three separate branches of the national government.
a to insure that the legislative branch was bicameral govt 15 d b to make sure all laws were approved by the supreme court c to make sure that the president was superior to the legislature d to prevent any one branch of government from gaining too much power name chapter 8 establishing a new government 1777 to 1788 141 19 what is the purpose of the checks and balances system in the u s constitution.
a to expand the presidents treaty making powers govt i b to divide power between the federal and state governments c to prevent any one branch of the government from becoming too powerful d to allow each branch of the government to veto those laws it objects to use the diagram and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the king is forbidden to introduce most new taxes without the permission of the council of his nobles.
magna carta english bill of rights 1689.
the king is forbidden from imposing taxes on his subjects without the approval of parliament.
20 which statement best replaces the question mark in the diagram.
f the u s congress must pass all taxes.
i govt 15 a i g each year the president must submit a budget to congress.
h elections in the house of representatives occur every two years.
j the congress cannot spend more than is provided in its budget.
use the newspaper headlines and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
21 which best describes the purpose of the amending process shown in these two newspaper headlines.
a the nations needs change requiring revisions to the constitution.
i govt 16 a b the national governments power must be limited or it will become tyrannical.
c the states are the rightful enforcers of the provisions of the constitution.
d the constitution was created by the states to serve the states.
22 between 1787 and 1789 a major controversy between the federalists and the anti federalists focused primarily on f expansion of slavery into the territories govt 17 a g the wisdom of creating a two house legislature h division of power among different levels of government j the issue of ratification of the new u s constitution name lisbiiisiiisaiaiaiibi chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 143 a anti federalists criticized the constitution for the absence of a bill of rights the first congress proposed ten amendments.
these amendments were added to the constitution in 1791 as the bill of rights.
the first amendment guarantees freedom of religion free speech freedom of the press the right to assemble and the right to petition the government.
it also states that the congress shall not establish any religion.
c these first amendment rights are crucial to our democracy.
they allow us to criticize government officials and debate issues without fear of government reprisals.
few of these rights however are absolute.
government can place reasonable limits on these freedoms.
for example we cannot scream fire in a crowded theatre as a joke.
d the second amendment guarantees our right to bear arms this allows citizens to own guns.
the third amendment prohibits government from quartering troops in our homes without consent.
these rights arose out of circumstances that developed during the american revolutionary war.
e the fourth fifth sixth and eighth amendments protect individuals accused of a crime from unjust accusations and government abuse.
f the fourth amendment prevents the police from conducting unreasonable searches and seizures unless a specific exception applies the police need a search warrant before they can conduct a search.
g the fifth amendment states that individuals cannot be tried twice for the same crime or be forced to incriminate themselves.
h the sixth amendment guarantees those accused of a crime a fair and public trial by a jury and the assistance of a lawyer.
the eighth amendment prevents judges from setting bail that is too high or inflicting cruel and unusual punishments.
k the tenth amendment reserves powers not granted to the federal government to the state governments and the people.
l the bill of rights protected individuals from abuse by the federal government.
the fourteenth amendment protects individuals from actions carried out by state governments.
it grants citizens due process and equal protection of the law.
m anyone bom in the united states or with u s citizens as parents is a citizen of the united states.
a foreigner can become a naturalized citizen.
to become naturalized a person must be 18 years old live in the united states for 5 years be of good moral character pass a test on u s history and government and take an oath of allegiance to the u s constitution.
n u s citizens had additional rights and responsibilities beyond those specified in the bill of rights.
they are able to vote to serve on juries and to hold public office.
they should try to remain informed on public issues and to participate actively in public life.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 145 one of the most important amendments in the bill of rights was the first amendment the first amendment actually covers several rights at the same time lets look at each of these rights more closely.
freedom of religion it is no mistake that a guarantee of religious freedom is stated at the start of the first amendment.
from the very beginning many people had migrated to the american colonies for the freedom to practice their own religious beliefs.
the first amendment guarantees individuals the right to freely engage in any religious practices that do not directly harm other individuals.
in many countries in europe at that time there was an established religion supported by the government.
the first amendment states that congress will not establish a religion this is sometimes called the establishment clause.
while the ban on government involvement in religion seems clear there have been instances in which the proper role of government has been debated.
for example it is clear that congress cannot pass a law saying that a particular religion is the established religion of the united states.
nor can congress vote to give money to a particular church or religious group.
but can public schools have prayers in school.
the supreme court which has the role of interpreting these amendments has said no.
some limited government activity concerned with religion has been declared constitutional by the supreme court.
for example the supreme court has said that a state can pay for bus transportation to students who choose to go to a full time religious school.
this is to support the expenses of these students general education.
however because government cannot establish a religion there can be no religious activities such as prayers in public schools.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 147 the right of assembly in some countries people cannot peacefully gather to protest against government policies without fear of punishment.
if they gather or demonstrate they fear they might be beaten arrested imprisoned or even killed.
the first amendment states that congress cannot deny individuals the right to peacefully assemble this means that people have a right to gather peaceably with others without fear that the government will use force against them.
in a democracy many groups and organizations often use the right to peacefully assemble as a way to get the word out.
they gather in parades and demonstrations to show their support for certain ideas and beliefs.
the right to petition congress also cannot deny individuals the right to write to government representatives or officials seeking a change in the law.
this is known as the right to petition.
this right is based on the belief that citizens have a right to complain to their representatives about things that they do not like and would like to see changed.
if there is a law or policy that citizens dislike they gather peoples signatures on petitions.
these petitions are then sent to government officials.
the right to gather signatures on a petition is protected by the first amendment.
rewrite the first amendment in your own words.
which rights in the first amendment do you think are the most important.
explain your reasons.
the second amendment americans recognized the important role played by the militia in winning the revolutionary war.
a militia is a citizens army a force made up of ordinary citizens who take up arms.
the second amendment states that a well regulated militia is necessary for the security of a free state.
for this reason it says people should have the right to keep and bear arms carry weapons.
because of the second amendment americans have the right to own guns.
in other countries citizens do not have this right.
some americans question whether this right is still necessary today and whether it encourages violence.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 149 the fifth amendment a citizen cannot be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law.
this means that certain legal procedures must be carried out according to established rules before a person can be punished.
eminent domain refers to the power of the government over property in its territory.
sometimes the government needs to take over property such as to build a public highway or construct a school.
a persons property cannot be taken away for public use without payment reasonable compensation.
a person cannot be tried for a serious federal crime that could lead to imprisonment or execution without an indictment by a grand jury.
an indictment is a formal accusation by a court before a person is arrested.
a grand jury is a group of citizens that meet to review if there is enough evidence available to hold a trial.
no person can be subject to double jeopardy being tried twice for the same crime.
the government with all its power and resources should not be allowed to make repeated attempts to convict an individual for a suspected offense subjecting him or her to embarrassment and great expense.
it an accused person cannot be forced to say things that will be used against him or herself seif incrimination.
a persons confession of a crime is not valid if he or she was not first informed of the right to have a lawyer.
this amendment guarantees a fair and impartial trial to all persons accused of a crime.
they must be told of the charges against them they have the right to a trial by jury and they have the right to be represented by a lawyer.
the eighth amendment federal courts cannot require unusually high bail.
bail is the money an accused pays to a court as security so that he or she need not remain in jail while awaiting trial.
this amendment also states that no one can be punished in a cruel or unusual way.
on this basis the supreme court has ruled that a state cannot pass a law with a mandatory death sentence.
some critics say that capital punishment itself should be prohibited by the eighth amendment but the supreme court has yet to agree.
the freedoms our citizens enjoy because of the bill of rights are important to the fabric of life in america.
design and create a poster that showcases these freedoms.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 151 other amendments i the seventh amendment this amendment guarantees the right to a trial by a jury in many civil disputes cases where one person sues another for injury or for breaking a contract.
the ninth amendmen this amendment says that just because the constitution lists some specific individual rights this does not mean that citizens do not also hold other rights.
he tenth amendmen the powers not delegated to the united.
stales by the constitution nor prohibited by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people.
the system of federalism divides power between the states and federal government.
this amendment states that all powers not specifically given to the federal government are reserved left for the states or the people.
the federal government has powers only over things specifically given to it in the constitution.
all other powers are given to the states or the people.
declaration of independence and the bill of rights some of the rights in the bill of rights like some provisions in the original constitution were responses to the grievances in the declaration of independence impact of colonial grievances on the constitution grievances listed in the declaration of independence where each was addressed in the bill of rights the king refused colonists permission to petition for a redress of their grievances.
the first amendment guarantees citizens the right to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
the king quartered his troops in the colonists homes without their permission.
the third amendment prohibits the quartering of soldiers in people s homes.
the king deprived some colonists of a trial by jury.
the sixth amendment guarantees a trial by jury to all persons accused of a crime.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 153 the fourteenth amendment after the civil war another series of important amendments was added to the constitution.
these abolished slavery and guaranteed the freed slaves and other citizens certain rights against the actions of state governments.
the fourteenth amendment was especially important.
the original bill of rights had only protected citizens against the actions of the federal government.
the fourteen amendment now applied to actions by state governments.
this amendment was mainly intended to help the freed slaves but actually applied to all citizens.
the supreme court later reached the conclusion that the fourteenth amendment guaranteed all the rights in the bill of rights against the actions of state governments as well as by the federal government.
the fourteenth amendment protects individual citizens from abuses by state governments in two ways due process rights.
according to the fourteenth amendment state governments must follow the same procedures as the federal government when arresting searching or convicting persons suspected of a crime.
everyone is guaranteed rights of due process equal protection rights.
the fourteenth amendment also guarantees each of us the equal protection of the laws.
neither the federal government nor a state government can treat members of different groups unequally unless there is some compelling reason to do so such as to protect national security.
on the basis of this provision the supreme court held in 1954 that states cannot send people to different public schools based on their racial or ethnic backgrounds.
fa using the internet or your school or public library locate a copy of the fourteenth amendment.
in your own words briefly describe what each of the five sections of the amendment are about.
fa the southern state legislatures refused to ratify the fourteenth amendment with the exception of tennessee.
what parts of the amendment do you think the southern state legislatures most objected to.
explain your answer.
fa the fourteenth amendment continues to be the center of a controversy in the debate over the citizenship of children bom in the united states by those who are considered undocumented aliens.
what is your opinion on this issue.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 155 what is a citizen.
a citizen is a participating member of a community.
it is not an accident that the term citizen sounds like city the first citizens were participating members of the city states of greece with rights and responsibilities.
later the roman empire expanded the notion of citizenship.
the empire allowed people in conquered states to become full citizens.
surprisingly the term citizenship was not defined in the original u s constitution.
it was not until 1868 with the passage of the fourteenth amendment that the requirements for american citizenship were stated in the constitution.
there are two paths to american citizenship by birth or naturalization.
the bill of rights and the fourteenth amendment apply to all people living in the united states.
they apply to permanent residents in this country and visitors as well as american citizens.
however there are some special rights that only u s citizens enjoy.
these include the right to vote in elections and to participate in government by holding public office.
birthright citizenship according to the fourteenth amendment persons bom in the united states or who have u s citizens as parents are citizens.
naturalization the second way for individuals to become american citizens is through the process of naturalization.
this is a legal process by which someone from another country is made into a u s citizen.
to become a u s citizen today an individual must meet the following requirements individuals being sworn in to become u s citizens.
requirements for becoming a u s citizen at least 18 years old and be a permanent resident of the united states.
be able to read write speak and understand simple words in english.
have lived lawfully in the united states for 5 years before filing an application.
i be a person of good moral character and have no serious criminal convictions.
understand the fundamentals of u s history and government.
be willing to swear allegiance to the principles of the u s constitution.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 157 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing the requirements for u s citizenship and some of the most important rights and responsibilities of an american citizen.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 159 celebrating freedom week during freedom week students in texas study and celebrate the three founding documents of our system of democracy.
you have learned about these three charters of freedom in the last three chapters the declaration of independence the united states constitution and the bill of rights.
the declaration of independence 1776 you learned that this document was shaped by english traditions and by new traditions established by colonial representative assemblies.
in the opening lines of the declaration thomas jefferson restated john locke s political philosophy that all people have certain unalienable rights that cannot rightfully be taken from them life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
you should memorize the following lines and practice them with a classmate e holdthese truths to he self evident that a men are created equal that they are endowed hy their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
lhat to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers y from the consent of the governed your teacher may want to quiz you on these words.
you should also try to write down what the paragraph means in your own words.
you can check back on pages 95 96 to review the meaning of this passage.
you should recall that the rest of the declaration went on to explain why the colonists felt they had the right to rebel and to establish their own country.
the colonists also listed their many grievances against the british king.
the u s constitution 1787 this document established the basic structure of our government.
it established a i government based on popular sovereignty we the people in which power i rests with the people who elect their representatives.
the authors of the constitution sought to create a national government strong enough to defend the nation s interests and to promote its general welfare.
they gave the new national government many important powers and made federal law supreme over state law.
to ensure that j the new national government was not too strong they divided its powers between.
the federal and state governments.
power was further divided at the national level through a separation of powers.
the idea was to create an effective government but.
one that would respect the rights of its citizens.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 161 k chapter stupy carps first amendment 1791 bill of rights 1791 protections of individual freedoms congress cannot make laws establishing a state religion.
congress cannot stop you from practicing your religion.
congress cannot make laws limiting your right to freedom of speech.
congress cannot make laws limiting freedom of the press.
congress cannot make laws prohibiting people from assembling.
people have a right to petition the government in order to correct wrongs.
other amendments in the bill of rights.
protections of individual freedoms second amend gives citizens the right to bear arms.
third amend no quartering of soldiers in people s homes.
protections of the rights of the accused fourth amend no unreasonable searches.
fifth amend due process protections.
sixth amend fair and impartial trial right to a trial by jury right to a lawyer.
eighth amend no cruel or unusual punishments no excessive bail.
citizenship responsibilities of u s citizens 1 citizen.
a participating member of a com i munity.
j js although not defined in the original consti tution the fourteenth amendment stated.
the requirements for citizenship.
paths to american citizenship i birthright citizenship.
persons who have j been born in the united states or who i have parents that are u s citizens i naturalization.
the legal process by which a person from a foreign country is i made into a u s citizen.
t 9 active responsibilities of u s citizens i fa take an interest in government by learning j about its various activities.
1 stay informed on key public issues i respect other people s point of view.
jk inform your representatives about issues i that are of concern to you.
vote in local state and national elections.
participate in government by joining a polit i ical party or working in a campaign.
1 serve in government if elected or appointed s to a position.
1 responsibilities are those things a good citizen.
i obey the laws of your community state and national government i fc pay taxes to help support the government.
rik serve on a jury if called upon to do so.
rik attend school to receive an education i accept responsibility for your behavior.
j jk testify in court if called upon to give evidence.
1 jk defend the nation by serving in the armed i forces if called upon g 4 our national identity s describes what makes a nation what it is.
it is the character of the nation.
it consists of the 1 various characteristics we share that make us i americans.
our national identity is shaped by i the mixing of people from different lands.
k exercising our religious freedoms.
8 k freedom to enter any field or occupation.
jk traditions of individual rights.
jk having a common culture and history.
i k a lack of an hereditary noble class.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens examine the question.
this question tests your ability to draw a conclusion from three different amendments.
you should read each carefully.
then think about what they all have in common.
recall what you know.
you should realize that each of these amendments establishes rights and protections for individuals accused of a crime.
these rights protect us from false accusations or unfair treatment by government officials.
apply whatyou know.
the best answer is choice a.
all three of these amendments deal with rights for someone accused of a crime.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 the bill of rights was added to the u s constitution primarily to f provide the president with power in times of emergency g establish fair and impartial elections h protect individual liberties against government abuse j guarantee voting privileges to minorities 163 which guarantees freedom of the press freedom of speech and freedom of religion to individuals in the united states.
a the treaty of paris of 1783 b the articles of confederation c the first amendment to the u s constitution d the fifth amendment to the u s constitution 4 which has been an important application of the due process of law clause of the fifth amendment.
f freedoms of speech and the press have been limited.
fcfti 19 b j g the reciting of prayers in public schools has been prohibited.
h individuals accused of committing crimes have been protected from abusive behavior by the police.
j the power of the supreme court in criminal cases has been limited.
5 the adoption of the bill of rights 1791 addressed anti federalist criticism of the new constitution by a allowing the national government to coin money titi 21 q j b establishing a process for impeaching federal officials c providing for an indirect method of electing the president d protecting citizens from abuses of power by the national government name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 165 12 in order to win ratification of the u s constitution federalists like alexander hamilton and james madison promised to f add a later bill of rights govt i7 a j g establish an electoral college h admit new states to the union on equal footing with established states j give the senate the power to ratify treaties use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
it is the right of the subjects to petition the king and all commitments imprisonments and prosecutions for such petitioning are illegal.
that excessive bail ought not to be required nor excessive fines imposed no cruel and unusual punishments inflicted the english bill of rights 1689 13 which historical document later gave similar guarantees to americans.
a declaration of independence fcni i9 b j b articles of confederation c the federalist papers d bill of rights 14 in what way did the magna carta and the english bill of rights have a similar impact on the american system of government.
f both called for the creation of colonial assemblies.
fcovt 15 a g both gave settlers the power to establish colonies.
h both guaranteed specific rights to individuals.
j both granted executive authority to colonial governors.
15 an issue first raised in the declaration of independence that was addressed in the bill of rights was that there needs to be a a federal system of government b limitations on governmental power c a strong chief executive d a system of checks and balances 16 the responsibilities of a u s citizen include all of the following except f serving on a jury h voting cit i9 d j g serving in the military j marrying 17 what has been the impact of the first amendments separation of church and state on the american way of life.
a it has brought about an end to religious differences.
cutt 25 c b it has helped to promote religious freedom.
c it has increased american interest in religion.
d it has fostered inequality between religious groups.
name chapter 9 the rights and responsibilities of american citizens 167 use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution nor prohibited by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people united states constitution 10th amendment 24 this amendment in the bill of rights was intended to f give the people the right to vote on important issues citi i9 b j g reduce the rights of citizens h limit the powers of the federal government j assure federal control over the states 25 the expression due process of law refers to the a procedure followed in congress for a bill to become a law md b power of the police to arrest anyone who looks suspicious c right of the supreme court to examine the constitutionality of laws d protections given to citizens against unfair actions by the government 26 which of the following words are part of the declaration of independence.
f they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights citi 19 a that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness g all persons bom or naturalized in the united states are citizens of the united states h no solider shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without the consent of the owner j congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof based on the following excerpt and your knowledge of social studies answer the following question.
he has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution and unacknowledged by our laws giving his assent to their acts of pretended legislation for quartering large bodies of armed troops among us 27 this excerpt from the declaration of independence listed a specific grievance that led the writers of the bill of rights to include the following language a a well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed b no soldier shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without the consent of the owner nor in time of war but in a manner to be prescribed by law c the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution nor prohib ited by it to the states are reserved to the states or to the people d excessive bail shall not be required nor excessive fines imposed nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted name chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 the french statesman anne robert jacques turgot 1727 1781 had high expectations for a united america this people is the hope of the human race.
the americans should be an example of political religious commercial and industrial liberty.
but to obtain these ends for us america.
must not become.
a mass of divided powers contending for territory and trade.
americas population was still about 90 percent rural despite the ourishing cities.
all but 5 percent of the people lived east of the appalachian mountains.
the trans appalachian overow was concentrated chiey in kentucky tennessee and ohio all of which were welcomed as states within fourteen years.
vermont preceded them becoming the fourteenth state in 1791.
foreign visitors to america looked down their noses at the roughness and crudity resulting from axand rie pioneering life.
people of the western waters in the stumpstudded clearings of kentucky tennessee and ohio were particularly restive and dubiously loyal.
the mouth of the mississippi their life giving outlet lay in the hands of unfriendly spaniards.
smooth talking spanish and british agents jingling gold moved freely among the settlers and held out seductive promises of independence.
many observers wondered whether the emerging united states would ever grow to maturity.
washington for president george washington the esteemed war hero was unanimously drafted as president by the electoral college in 1789 the only presidential nominee ever to be honored by unanimity.
his presence was imposing 6 feet 2 inches 175 pounds broad and sloping shoulders strongly pointed chin and pockmarks from smallpox on nose and cheeks.
much preferring the quiet of mount vernon to the turmoil of politics he was perhaps the only president who did not in some way angle for this exalted ofce.
balanced rather than brilliant he commanded his followers by strength of character rather than by the arts of the politician.
washington honored this idealized portrait symbolizes the reverential awe in which americans held the father of his country washingtons long journey from mount vernon to new york city the temporary capital was a triumphal procession.
he was greeted by roaring cannon pealing bells ower carpeted roads and singing and shouting citizens.
with appropriate ceremony he solemnly and somewhat ner vously took the oath of ofce on april 30 1789 on a crowded balcony overlooking wall street which some have regarded as a bad omen.
washington soon put his stamp on the new government especially by establishing the cabinet.
the constitution does not mention a cabinet see table 10 1 it merely provides that the president may require written opinions of the heads of the executive branch departments see art.
1 in the appendix.
but this system proved so cumbersome and involved so much homework that cabinet meetings gradually evolved in the washington administration.
at rst only three full edged department heads served under the president secretary of state thomas the bill of rights jefferson secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton and secretary of war henry knox.
the bill of rights the new nation faced some un nished business.
many antifederalists had sharply criticized the constitution drafted at philadelphia for its failure to provide guarantees of individual rights such as freedom of religion and trial by jury.
many states had ratied the federal constitution on the understanding that it would soon be amended to include such guarantees.
drawing up a bill of rights headed the list of imperatives facing the new government.
amendments to the constitution could be proposed in either of two ways by a new constitutional convention requested by two thirds of the states or by a two thirds vote of both houses of congress.
fearing that a new convention might unravel the narrow federalist victory in the ratication struggle james madison determined to draft the amendments himself.
he then guided them through congress where his intellectual and political skills were quickly making him the leading gure.
adopted by the necessary number of states in 1791 the rst ten amendments to the constitution popularly known as the bill of rights safeguard some of the most precious american principles.
among these are protections for freedom of religion speech and the press the right to bear arms and to be tried by a jury and the right to assemble and petition the government for redress of grievances.
the bill of rights also prohibits cruel and unusual punishments and arbitrary government seizure of private property.
to guard against the danger that enumerating such rights might lead to the conclusion that they were the only ones protected madison inserted the crucial ninth amendment.
it declares that specifying certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people in a gesture of reassurance to the states righters he included the equally signicant tenth amendment which reserves all rights not explicitly delegated or prohibited by the federal constitution to the states respectively or to the people by preserving a strong central government table 10 1 evolution of the cabinet position date established comments secretary of state secretary of treasury secretary of war attorney general secretary of navy postmaster general secretary of interior secretary of agriculture secretary of commerce and labor secretary of commerce secretary of labor loses cabinet status 1947 loses cabinet status 1970 secretary of defense secretary of health education and welfare secretary of housing and urban development secretary of transportation secretary of energy secretary of health and human ser vices secretary of education secretary of veterans affairs secretary of homeland security subordinate to this secretary without cabinet rank are secretaries of army navy and air force ofce divided 1979 loses cabinet status 1947 not head of justice dept.
until 1870 ofce divided 1913 chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 while specifying protections for minority and individual liberties madisons amendments partially swung the federalist pendulum back in an antifederalist direction.
see amendments i x.
the rst congress also nailed other newly sawed government planks into place.
it created effective federal courts under the judiciary act of 1789.
the act orga nized the supreme court with a chief justice and ve associates as well as federal district and circuit courts and established the ofce of attorney general.
new yorker john jay madisons collaborator on the federalist papers and one of the young republics most seasoned diplomats became the rst chief justice of the united states.
hamilton revives the corpse of public credit the key gure in the new government was still smoothfaced treasury secretary alexander hamilton a native of the british west indies.
hamiltons genius was unquestioned but critics claimed he loved his adopted country more than he loved his countrymen.
doubts about his character and his loyalty to the republican experiment always swirled about his head.
hamilton regarded himself as a kind of prime minister in washingtons cabinet and on occasion thrust his hands into the affairs of other departments including that of his archrival thomas jefferson who served as secretary of state.
a nancial wizard hamilton set out immediately to correct the economic vexations that had crippled the articles of confederation.
his plan was to shape the scal policies of the administration in such a way as to favor the wealthier groups.
they in turn would gratefully lend the government monetary and political support.
the new federal regime would thrive the propertied classes would fatten and prosperity would trickle down to the masses.
the youthful nanciers rst objective was to bolster the national credit.
without public condence in the government hamilton could not secure the funds with which to oat his risky schemes.
he therefore boldly urged congress to fund the entire national debt at par and to assume completely the debts incurred by the states during the recent war.
funding at par meant that the federal government would pay off its debts at face value plus accumulated interest a then enormous total of more than 54 million.
so many people believed the infant treasury in alexander hamilton 1755 1804 by john trumbull 1792 he was one of the youngest and most brilliant of the founding fathers who might have been president but for his ultraconservatism a scandalous adultery and a duelists bullet.
hamilton favored a strong central government with a weak legislature to unify the infant nation and encourage industry.
his chief rival thomas jefferson who extolled states rights as a bulwark of liberty and thought the united states should remain an agricultural society regarded hamilton as a monarchist plotter and never forgave him for insisting that the british govt.
was the best in the world and that he doubted much whether any thing short of it would do in america capable of meeting those obligations that government bonds had depreciated to ten or fteen cents on the dollar.
yet speculators held stfuls of them and when congress passed hamiltons mea sure in 1790 they grabbed for more.
some of them galloped into rural areas ahead of the news buying for a song the depreciated paper holdings of farmers war veterans and widows.
hamilton was willing even eager to have the new government shoulder additional obligations.
while hamilton s financial politics push ing the funding scheme he urged congress to assume the debts of the states totaling some 21 5 million.
the secretary made a convincing case for assumption.
the state debts could be regarded as a proper national obligation for they had been incurred in the war for independence.
but foremost in hamiltons thinking was the belief that assumption would chain the states more tightly to the federal chariot thus the secretarys maneuver would shift the attachment of wealthy creditors from the states to the federal government.
the support of the rich for the national administration was a crucial link in hamiltons political strategy of strengthening the central government.
states burdened with heavy debts like massachusetts were delighted by hamiltons proposal.
states with small debts like virginia were less charmed.
the stage was set for some old fashioned horse trading.
virginia did not want the state debts assumed but it did want the forthcoming federal district now the district of columbia to be located on the potomac river.
it would thus gain in commerce and prestige.
hamilton persuaded a reluctant jefferson who had recently come home from france to line up enough votes in congress for assumption.
in return virginia would have the federal district on the potomac.
the bargain was carried through in 1790.
customs duties and excise taxes the new ship of state thus set sail dangerously overloaded.
the national debt had swelled to 75 million owing to hamiltons insistence on honoring the outstanding federal and state obligations alike.
anyone less determined to establish such a healthy public credit could have sidestepped 13 million in back interest and could have avoided the state debts entirely.
but hamilton father of the national debt was not greatly worried.
his objectives were as much political as economic.
he believed that within limits a national debt was a national blessing a kind of union adhesive.
the more creditors to whom the government owed money the more people there would be with a personal stake in the success of his ambitious enterprise.
his unique contribution was to make a debt ordinarily a liability an asset for vitalizing the authorized by the constitution art.
debt owed foreigners 11 710 000 federal domestic debt 42 414 000 state debt 21 500 000 miscellaneous revenue excise revenue on whiskey etc.
customs duties tariffs figure 10 1 hamiltons financial structure supported by revenues nancial system as well as the government itself see figure 10 1.
where was the money to come from to pay interest on this huge debt and run the government.
hamiltons rst answer was customs duties derived from a tariff.
tariff revenues in turn depended on a vigorous foreign trade another crucial link in hamiltons overall economic strategy for the new republic.
the rst tariff law imposing a low tariff of about 8 percent on the value of dutiable imports was speedily passed by the rst congress in 1789 even before hamilton was sworn in.
revenue was by far the main goal but the mea sure was also designed to erect a low protective wall around infant industries which bawled noisily for more shelter than they received.
hamilton had the vision to see that the industrial revolution would soon reach america and he argued strongly in favor of more protection for the well to do manufacturing groups another vital element in his economic program.
but congress was still dominated by the agricultural and commercial interests and it voted only two slight increases in the tariff during washingtons presidency.
hamilton with characteristic vigor sought additional internal revenue and in 1791 secured from congress an excise tax on a few domestic items notably whiskey.
the new levy of seven cents a gallon was borne chiey by the distillers who lived in the backcountry where the wretched roads forced the farmer to reduce and liquefy bulky bushels of grain to horseback proportions.
whiskey owed so freely on the frontier in the form of distilled liquor that it was used for money.
chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 one of the most eloquent tributes to hamiltons apparent miracle working came from daniel webster 1782 1852 in the senate 1831 he smote the rock of the national resources and abundant streams of revenue gushed forth.
he touched the dead corpse of public credit and it sprung upon its feet.
hamilton battles jefferson for a bank as the capstone for his nancial system hamilton proposed a bank of the united states.
an enthusiastic admirer of most things eng lish he took as his model the bank of eng land.
specically he proposed a powerful private institution of which the government would be the major stockholder and in which the federal treasury would deposit its surplus monies.
the central government not only would have a convenient strongbox but federal funds would stimulate business by remaining in circulation.
the bank would also print urgently needed paper money and thus provide a sound and stable national currency badly needed since the days when the continental dollar was not worth a continental the proposed bank would indeed be useful.
but was it constitutional.
jefferson whose written opinion on this question washington requested argued vehemently against the bank.
there was he insisted no specic authorization in the constitution for such a nancial octopus.
he was convinced that all powers not specically granted to the central government were reserved to the states as provided in the about to be ratied bill of rights see amendment x.
he therefore concluded that the states not congress had the power to charter banks.
believing that the constitution should be interpreted literally or strictly jefferson and his states rights disciples zealously embraced the theory of strict construction hamilton also at washingtons request prepared a brilliantly reasoned reply to jeffersons arguments.
hamilton in general believed that what the constitution did not forbid it permitted jefferson in contrast generally believed that what it did not permit it forbade.
hamilton boldly invoked the clause of the constitution that stipulates that congress may pass any laws necessary and proper to carry out the powers vested in the various government agencies see art.
the government was explicitly empowered to collect taxes and regulate trade.
in carrying out these basic functions hamilton argued a national bank would be not only proper but necessary by inference or implication that is by virtue of implied powers congress would be fully justied in establishing the bank of the united states.
in short hamilton contended for a loose or broad interpretation of the constitution.
he and his federalist followers thus evolved the theory of loose construction by invoking the elastic clause of the constitution a precedent for enormous federal powers.
hamiltons nancial views prevailed.
his eloquent and realistic arguments were accepted by washington who reluctantly signed the bank mea sure into law.
this explosive issue had been debated with much heat in congress where the old north south cleavage still lurked ominously.
the most enthusiastic support for the bank naturally came from the commercial and nancial centers of the north whereas the strongest opposition arose from the agricultural south.
the bank of the united states as created by congress in 1791 was chartered for twenty years.
located in philadelphia it was to have a capital of 10 million one fth of it owned by the federal government.
stock was thrown open to public sale.
to the agreeable surprise of hamilton a milling crowd oversubscribed in less than two hours pushing aside many would be purchasers.
mutinous moonshiners in pennsylvania the whiskey rebellion which ared up in southwestern pennsylvania in 1794 sharply challenged the new national government.
hamiltons high excise tax bore harshly on these homespun pioneer folk.
they regarded it not as a tax on a frivolous luxury but as a burden on an economic necessity and a medium of exchange.
even preachers of the gospel were paid in old monongahela rye rye and corn crops distilled into alcohol were more cheaply transported to eastern markets than bales of grain.
deant distillers nally erected whiskey poles similar to the liberty poles of anti stamp tax days in 1765 and raised the cry liberty and no excise boldly tarring and feathering revenue ofcers they brought collections to a halt.
president washington once a revolutionary was alarmed by what he called these self created societ the whiskey rebellion the whiskey boys the cartoonist clearly favored the pennsylvania rebels who resisted hamiltons imposition of an excise tax on whiskey.
ies with the hearty encouragement of hamilton he summoned the militias of several states.
anxious moments followed the call for there was much doubt as to whether men in other states would muster to crush a rebellion in a fellow state.
despite some opposition an army of about thirteen thousand rallied to the colors and two widely separated columns marched briskly forth in a gorgeous leaf tinted indian summer until knee deep mud slowed their progress.
attorney hugh henry brackenridge 1748 1816 mediated between the whiskey rebels and the town of pittsburgh.
he later wrote of the hated excise tax i saw the operation to be unequal in this country.
it is true that the excise paid by the country would be that only on spirits consumed in it.
but even in the case of exports the excise must be advanced in the rst instance by the distiller and this would prevent effectually all the poorer part from carrying on the business.
would have preferred a direct tax with a view to reach unsettled lands which all around us have been purchased by speculating men.
when the troops reached the hills of western pennsylvania they found no insurrection.
the whiskey boys were overawed dispersed or captured.
washington with an eye to healing old sores pardoned the two small fry convicted culprits.
the whiskey rebellion was minuscule some three rebels were killed but its consequences were mighty.
george washingtons government now substantially strengthened commanded a new respect.
yet the foes of the administration condemned its brutal display of force for having used a sledgehammer to crush a gnat.
the emergence of political parties almost overnight hamiltons scal feats had established the governments sound credit rating.
the treasury could now borrow needed funds in the netherlands on favorable terms.
but hamiltons nancial successes funding assumption the excise tax the bank the suppression of the whiskey rebellion created some political liabilities.
all these schemes encroached sharply upon states rights.
many americans dubious about the new constitution in the rst place might never have approved it if they had foreseen how the states were going to be chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 overshadowed by the federal colossus.
now out of resentment against hamiltons revenue raising and centralizing policies an orga nized opposition began to build.
what once was a personal feud between hamilton and jefferson developed into a full blown and frequently bitter political rivalry.
national political parties in the modern sense were unknown in america when george washington took his inaugural oath.
there had been whigs and tories federalists and antifederalists but these groups were factions rather than parties.
they had sprung into existence over hotly contested special issues they had faded away when their cause had triumphed or zzled.
the founders at philadelphia had not envisioned the existence of permanent political parties.
organized opposition to the government especially a democratic government based on popular consent seemed tainted by disloyalty.
opposition to the government affronted the spirit of national unity that the glorious cause of the revolution had inspired.
the notion of a formal party apparatus was thus a novelty in the 1790s and when jefferson and madison rst orga nized their opposition to the hamiltonian program they con ned their activities to congress and did not anticipate creating a long lived and popular party.
but as their antagonism to hamilton stiffened and as the amazingly boisterous and widely read newspapers of the day spread their political message and hamiltons among the people primitive semblances of political parties began to emerge.
the two party system has existed in the united states since that time see table 10 2.
ironically in light of early suspicions about the very legitimacy of parties their competition for power has actually proved to be among the indispensable ingredients of a sound democracy.
the party out of power the loyal opposition traditionally plays the invaluable role of the balance wheel on the machinery of government ensuring that politics never drifts too far out of kilter with the wishes of the people.
the impact of the french revolution when washingtons rst administration ended in early 1793 hamiltons domestic policies had already stimulated the formation of two political camps jeffersonian democratic republicans and hamiltonian federalists.
as washingtons second term began foreign policy issues brought the differences between them to a fever pitch.
only a few weeks after washingtons inauguration in 1789 the curtain had risen on the rst act of the french revolution.
see thinking globally two revolutions pp.
twenty six years were to pass before the seething continent of europe collapsed into table 10 2 evolution of major parties year hamiltonians jeffersonians ca.
1792 federalists ca.
1816 death of federalists ca.
1820 democratic republicans republicans one party era of good feelings ca.
1825 national republicans whigs republicans to present see the appendix presidential elections for third parties.
democratic republicans jacksonian democrats democrats to present the french revolution a peace of exhaustion.
few non american events have left a deeper scar on american political and social life.
in a sense the french revolution was misnamed it was a historic global revolution that sent tremors through much of the western world and beyond.
in its early stages the upheaval was surprisingly peaceful involving as it did a successful attempt to impose constitutional shackles on louis xvi.
the american people loving liberty and deploring despotism cheered.
they were attered to think that the outburst in france was but the second chapter of their own glorious revolution as to some extent it was.
only a few ultraconser vative federalists fearing change reform and leveling principles were from the outset dubious or outspokenly hostile to the despicable mobocracy the more ardent jeffersonians were overjoyed.
the french revolution entered a more ominous phase in 1792 when france declared war on hostile austria.
powerful ideals and powerful armies alike were on the march.
late in that year the electrifying news reached america that french citizen armies had hurled back the invading foreigners and that france had proclaimed itself a republic.
americans enthusiastically sang the marseillaise and other rousing french revolutionary songs and they renamed thor british political observer william cobbett 1763 1835 wrote of the frenzied reaction in america to the death of louis xvi never was the memory of a man so cruelly insulted as that of this mild and humane monarch.
he was guillotined in efgy in the capital of the union philadelphia twenty or thirty times every day during one whole winter and part of the summer.
men women and children ocked to the tragical exhibition and not a single paragraph appeared in the papers to shame them from it.
oughfares with democratic are.
king street in new york for example became liberty street and in boston royal exchange alley became equality lane.
but centuries of pent up poison could not be purged without baleful results.
the guillotine was set up the king was beheaded in 1793 the church was attacked and the head rolling reign of terror was begun.
back in america god fearing federalist aristocrats ner vously the execution of queen marie antoinette 1793 the bloody excesses of the notorious guillotine disgusted many americans and soured them on the promises of the french revolution.
thinking globally two revolutions o n july 14 1789 a howling mob stormed the bastille a dank parisian prison described by the marquis de lafayette as frances fortress of despotism killed half a dozen soldiers and paraded the severed heads of its commanding ofcer and the mayor of paris throughout the city.
the french revolution was thus bloodily launched.
bastille day is still celebrated as frances national birthday just as americans celebrate the fourth of july.
the roots of the two revolutions were thickly intertwined.
to defray the cost of the war that had ousted france from north america in 1763 britain had levied new taxes on its colonists provoking them to revolt in 1776.
in turn aiding the rebellious americans forced the french government to seek new revenues lighting the fuse that led to the political explosion in paris in 1789.
even more notable was the intellectual commonality between the two upheavals.
the ideas that inspired the american and french revolutionaries grew from the common heritage of radical eighteenth century enlightenment thinking about equality freedom and the sovereignty of the people.
the french declaration of the rights of man 1789 deliberately echoed thomas jeffersons declaration of independence 1776 when it said that men are born and remain free and equal in rights among which were liberty property security and resistance to oppression many french thinkers openly credited the american revolution as the inspiration for their own.
as the american revolutionary thomas paine remarked to george washington the principles of america opened the bastille indeed in many ways the french were even more radical than the americans their revolution abolished slavery temporarily something the americans failed to do for almost one hundred years more.
and yet the two revolutions unfolded in dramatically different ways and left vastly different legacies.
the americans largely disarmed after winning their independence allowed some eighty thousand hard core loyalists to depart without suffering grievous retribution see makers of america the loyalists pp.
154 155 peacefully resumed their habits of worship toil and governance and pro storming the bastille 1789 this event signaled the outbreak of the french revolution.
ceeded to draft the u s constitution under which they have lived with amendments for more than two centuries.
the american revolutionaries in short secured the fruits of their revolution fairly easily while the french struggled through ghastly bloodshed to ultimate failure an outcome that haunted european politics for at least a century thereafter.
revolutionaries in france had to grapple with the constant threats of counterrevolution at home and armed intervention from abroad.
as a result they soon descended into grisly violence including the execution of some forty thousand frenchmen in the notorious reign of terror of 1793 1794 the guillotining of the king and queen and preemptive attacks on neighboring countries.
they stripped the catholic church of its property and privileges briey experimented with a new state religion called the cult of reason and eventually conceded supreme power to a brash young general napoleon bonaparte who convulsed all of europe in the name of liberty equality and fraternity napoleon was nally defeated at the battle of waterloo in 1815 after which the bourbon monarchy was restored to the throne.
why did these two great eruptions sprung from a shared chain of events and espousing almost identical political philosophies fare so differently.
many scholars have found the answer in the two countries markedly different pre revolutionary histories.
frances revolution confronted implacably entrenched adversaries in the landed nobility and the clergy.
those two estates as they were called clung tenaciously to their ancient privileges as did the princes and potentates who ruled in all the countries on frances borders.
to succeed the french revolution had to concentrate power in the hands of a state powerful enough to extinguish its internal enemies and to forestall foreign intervention as well.
those stark necessities help account for the fact that down to the present day central governments are stronger in almost all european societies than in the united states.
the americans faced no such obstacles.
they had no aristocracy worthy of the name no church with the kind of inuence that the catholic church commanded in france and no menacing neighbors to fear.
they had the luxury of being able to focus on limiting the power of the state not enlarging it.
theirs was largely a colonial conict whereas france had to endure a class conict.
not until reconstruction following the civil war would americans confront a comparable task of mustering sufcient power to uproot and permanently extinguish an entire social order.
it has been said that to mount a revolution is to murder and create what was exceptional about the american revolutionaries was that they were spared the necessity to murder.
the american revolution grew not from abstract ideas but from the preceding two centuries of american experience.
it was less a revolution in the usual sense than a consolidation of already well established norms values and behaviors.
alexander hamilton understood that crucial point when he wrote to the marquis de lafayette in 1789 i dread the reveries of your philosophic politicians the key to the bastille mount vernon virginia the marquis de lafayette instructed thomas paine his american revolutionary war comrade to deliver the key to the liberated bastille to george washington.
it hangs to this day in the entry hall of washingtons home at mount vernon virginia a lasting symbol of the deep afnity between the french and american revolutions.
chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 ngered their tender white necks and eyed the jeffersonian masses apprehensively.
lukewarm federalist approval of the early revolution turned almost overnight to heated talk of blood drinking cannibals sober minded jeffersonians regretted the bloodshed.
but they felt with jefferson that one could not expect to be carried from despotism to liberty in a feather bed and that a few thousand aristocratic heads were a cheap price to pay for human freedom.
such approbation was shortsighted for dire peril loomed ahead.
the earlier battles of the french revolution had not hurt america directly but now britain was sucked into the contagious con ict.
the conagration speedily spread to the new world where it vividly affected the expanding young american republic.
thus was repeated the familiar story of every major european war beginning with 1688 that involved a watery duel for control of the atlantic ocean.
see table 6 2 on p.
washingtons neutrality proclamation ominously the franco american alliance of 1778 was still on the books.
by its own terms it was to last forever it bound the united states to help the french defend their west indies against future foes and the booming british eets were certain to attack these strategic islands.
many jeffersonian democratic republicans favored honoring the alliance.
aame with the liberal ideals of the french revolution red blooded jeffersonians were eager to enter the con ict against britain the recent foe at the side of france the recent friend.
america owed france its freedom they argued and now was the time to pay the debt of gratitude.
but president george washington levelheaded as usual was not swayed by the clamor of the crowd.
backed by hamilton he believed that war had to be avoided at all costs.
washington was coolly playing for enormous stakes.
the nation in 1793 was militarily feeble economically wobbly and politically disunited.
but solid foundations were being laid and american cradles were continuing to rock a bumper crop of babies.
washington wisely reasoned that if america could avoid the broils of europe for a generation or so it would then be populous enough and powerful enough to assert its maritime rights with strength and success.
otherwise it might invite catastrophe.
the strategy of delay of playing for time while the birthrate fought americas battles was a cardinal policy of the founding fathers.
it was based on a shrewd assessment of american strengths and weaknesses at this critical moment in the young republics history.
hamilton and jefferson often poles apart on other issues were in agreement here.
accordingly washington boldly issued his neutrality proclamation in 1793 shortly after the outbreak of war between britain and france.
this epochal document not only proclaimed the governments ofcial neutrality in the widening con ict but sternly warned american citizens to be impartial toward both armed camps.
as americas rst formal declaration of aloofness from old world quarrels washingtons neutrality proclamation proved to be a major prop of the spreading isolationist tradition.
it also proved to be enormously controversial.
the pro french jeffersonians were enraged by the neutrality proclamation especially by washingtons method of announcing it unilaterally without consulting congress.
the pro british federalists were heartened.
debate soon intensied.
an impetuous thirtyyear old representative of the french republic citizen edmond gent had landed at charleston south carolina.
with unrestrained zeal he undertook to t out privateers and otherwise take advantage of the existing franco american alliance.
the giddy headed envoy all sail and no anchor was soon swept away by his enthusiastic reception by the jeffersonian republicans.
he foolishly came to believe that the neutrality proclamation did not reect the true wishes of the american people and he consequently embarked upon unneutral activity not authorized by the french alliance including the recruitment of armies to invade spanish florida and louisiana as well as british canada.
even madison and jefferson were soon disillusioned by his conduct.
after he threatened to appeal over the head of old washington to the sovereign voters the president demanded gents withdrawal and the frenchman was replaced by a less impulsive emissary.
washingtons neutrality proclamation clearly illustrates the truism that self interest is the basic cement of alliances.
in 1778 both france and america stood to gain in 1793 only france.
technically the americans did not out their obligation because france never ofcially called upon them to honor it.
american neutrality in fact favored france.
the french west indies urgently needed yankee foodstuffs.
if the americans had entered the war at frances side the british eets would have blockaded the american coast and cut off those essential supplies.
america was thus much the french revolution la k supere ior 100 km.
80w er w da lo na ca british north america 100 mi.
n hu l m ke ich la ron p up fort point au fer er n ca lak ad a a e ont rio fort dutchmans point fort oswegatchie vt fort oswego new york original 13 states fort detroit waynes victory fallen timbers la ke e territory ceded to the united states 1783 rie treaty line indian battle british fort on american soil fort miami 40n pennsylvania md.
io r of line treaty 1795 le il v green oh st clairs defeat r fort niagara northwest territory harmars defeat 1790 ce l aw re ft michilimackinac st n ig a n del.
virginia map 10 1 american posts held by the british and british american clashes after 1783 interactive map more useful to france as a reliable neutral provider than as a blockaded partner in arms.
embroilments with britain president washingtons far visioned policy of neutrality was sorely tried by the british.
for ten long years they had been retaining the chain of northern frontier posts on u s soil all in deance of the peace treaty of 1783 see map 10 1.
the london government was reluctant to abandon the lucrative fur trade in the great lakes region and also hoped to build up an indian buffer state to contain the ambitious americans.
british agents openly sold rearms and rewater to the indians of the miami confederacy an alliance of eight indian nations who terrorized americans invading their lands.
little turtle war chief of the miamis gave notice that the confederacy regarded the ohio river as the united states northwestern and their own southeastern border.
in 1790 and 1791 little turtles braves defeated armies led by generals josiah harmar and arthur st clair kill ing hundreds of soldiers and handing the united states what remains one of its worst defeats in the history of the frontier.
but in 1794 when a new army under general mad anthony wayne routed the miamis at the battle of fallen timbers the british refused to shelter indians eeing from the battle.
abandoned when it counted by their red coated friends the indians soon offered wayne the peace pipe.
in the treaty of greenville signed in august 1795 the confederacy gave up vast tracts of the old northwest including most of presentday indiana and ohio.
in exchange the indians received a lump sum payment of 20 000 an annual annuity of 9 000 the right to hunt the lands they had ceded and chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 signing the treaty of greenville 1795 following general waynes victory at the battle of fallen timbers in 1794 the miami indians surrendered their claims to much of the old northwest.
most important what they hoped was recognition of their sovereign status.
although the treaty codied an unequal relationship the indians felt that it put some limits on the ability of the united states to decide the fate of indian peoples.
thomas paine 1737 1809 then in france and resenting george washingtons anti french policies addressed the president in an open letter 1796 that reveals his bitterness and as to you sir treacherous in private friendship for so you have been to me and that in the day of danger and a hypocrite in public life the world will be puzzled to decide whether you are an apostate or an imposter whether you have abandoned good principles or whether you ever had any.
on the sea frontier the british were eager to starve out the french west indies and naturally expected the united states to defend them under the francoamerican alliance.
hard boiled commanders of the royal navy ignoring americas rights as a neutral struck savagely.
they seized about three hundred american merchant ships in the west indies impressed scores of seamen into ser vice on british vessels and threw hundreds of others into foul dungeons.
these actions especially impressment incensed patriotic americans.
a mighty outcry arose chiey from jeffersonians that america should once again ght george iii in defense of its liberties.
at the very least it should cut off all supplies to its oppressor through a nationwide embargo.
but the federalists stoutly resisted all demands for drastic action.
hamiltons high hopes for economic development depended on trade with britain.
war with the worlds mightiest commercial empire would pierce the heart of the hamiltonian nancial system.
washington s farewell jays treaty and washingtons farewell president washington in a last desperate gamble to avert war decided to send chief justice john jay to london in 1794.
the jeffersonians were acutely unhappy over the choice partly because they feared that so notorious a federalist and anglophile would sell out his country.
arriving in london jay gave the jeffersonians further cause for alarm when at the presentation ceremony he routinely kissed the queens hand.
unhappily jay entered the negotiations with weak cards which were further sabotaged by hamilton.
the latter fearful of war with britain secretly supplied the british with the details of americas bargaining strategy.
not surprisingly jay won few concessions.
the british did promise to evacuate the chain of posts on u s soil a pledge that inspired little condence since it had been made before in paris to the same john jay.
in addition britain consented to pay damages for the recent seizures of american ships.
but the british stopped short of pledging anything about future maritime seizures and impressments or about supplying arms to indians.
and they forced jay to give ground by binding the united states to pay the debts still owed to british merchants on pre revolutionary accounts.
jays unpopular pact more than any other issue vitalized the newborn democratic republican party of thomas jefferson.
when the jeffersonians learned of jays concessions their rage was fearful to behold.
the treaty seemed like an abject surrender to britain as well as a betrayal of the jeffersonian south.
southern planters would have to pay the major share of the prerevolutionary debts while rich federalist shippers were collecting damages for recent british seizures.
jeffersonian mobs hanged burned and guillotined in efgy that damnd archtraitor sir john jay even george washingtons huge popularity was compromised by the controversy over the treaty.
jays treaty had other unforeseen consequences.
fearing that the treaty foreshadowed an angloamerican alliance spain moved hastily to strike a deal with the united states.
pinckneys treaty of 1795 with spain granted the americans virtually every thing they demanded including free navigation of the mississippi the right of deposit warehouse rights at new orleans and the large disputed territory of western florida.
see map 9 3 on p.
exhausted after the diplomatic and partisan battles of his second term president washington decided to retire.
his choice contributed powerfully to establishing a two term tradition for american presidents.
in his farewell address to the nation in 1796 never delivered orally but printed in the newspapers washington strongly advised the avoidance of permanent alliances like the still vexatious franco american treaty of 1778.
contrary to general misunderstanding washington did not oppose all alliances but favored only temporary alliances for extraordinary emergencies this was admirable advice for a weak and divided nation in 1796.
but what is sound counsel for a young stripling may not apply later to a mature and muscular giant.
washingtons contributions as president were enormous even though the sparkling hamilton at times seemed to outshine him.
the central government its scal feet now under it was solidly established.
the west was expanding.
the merchant marine was plowing the seas.
above all washington had kept the nation out of both overseas entanglements and foreign wars.
the experimental stage had passed and the presidential chair could now be turned over to a less impressive gure.
but republics are notoriously ungrateful.
when washington left ofce in 1797 he was showered with the brickbats of partisan abuse quite in contrast with the bouquets that had greeted his arrival.
john adams becomes president who should succeed the exalted father of his country.
alexander hamilton was the best known member of the federalist party now that washington had bowed out.
but his nancial policies some of which had fattened the speculators had made him so unpopular that he could not hope to be elected president.
the federalists were forced to turn to washingtons vice president the experienced but ungracious john adams a rugged chip off old plymouth rock.
the democraticrepublicans naturally rallied behind their master organizer and leader thomas jefferson.
political passions ran feverishly high in the presidential campaign of 1796.
the lofty presence of not broken until 1940 by franklin d roosevelt and made a part of the constitution in 1951 by the twenty second amendment.
see the appendix.
chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 although thomas jefferson 1743 1826 and john adams hardly saw eye to eye jefferson displayed grudging respect for adams in a piece of private correspondence in 1787 he is vain irritable and a bad calculator of the force and probable effect of the motives which govern men.
this is all the ill which can possibly be said of him.
he is as disinterested as the being who made him.
john adams by john singleton copley 1783 when he entered harvard college in 1751 adams intended to prepare for the ministry but four absorbing years of study excited him about other intellectual and career possibilities i was a mighty metaphysician at least i thought myself such adams also tried his hand at being a mighty scientist doctor and orator.
upon graduation he became a schoolmaster but soon decided to take up the law.
washington had hitherto imposed some restraints now the lid was off.
cultured federalists like fisher ames referred to the jeffersonians as re eating salamanders poison sucking toads federalists and democratic republicans even drank their ale in separate taverns.
the issues of the campaign as it turned out focused heavily on personalities.
but the jeffersonians again assailed the too forceful crushing of the whiskey rebellion and above all the negotiation of jays hated treaty.
john adams with most of his support in new england squeezed through by the narrow margin of 71 votes to 68 in the electoral college.
jefferson as runnerup became vice president.
one of the ablest statesmen of his day adams at sixty two was a stuffy gure.
sharp featured bald relatively short ve feet seven inches and thickset his rotundity he impressed observers as a man of stern principles who did his duty with stubborn devotion.
although learned and upright he was a tactless and prickly intellectual aristocrat with no appeal to the masses and with no desire to cultivate any.
many citizens regarded him with respectful irritation the crusty new eng lander suffered from other handicaps.
he had stepped into washingtons shoes which no successor could hope to ll.
in addition adams was hated by hamilton who had resigned from the treasury in 1795 and who now headed the war faction of the federalist party known as the high federalists the famed nancier even secretly plotted with cer tain members of the cabinet against the president who had a conspiracy rather than a cabinet on his hands.
adams regarded hamilton as the most ruthless impatient artful indefatigable and unprincipled intriguer in the united states if not in the world most ominous of all adams inherited a violent quarrel with france a quarrel whose gunpowder lacked only a spark.
the possibility of such an inharmonious two party combination in the future was removed by the twelfth amendment to the constitution in 1804.
see the appendix.
the french crisis the xyz affair when president adamss envoys to paris were asked to pay a huge bribe as the price of doing diplomatic business humiliated americans rose up in wrath against france.
here an innocent young america is being plundered by frenchmen as john bull looks on in amusement from across the english channel.
unofcial fighting with france the french were infuriated by jays treaty.
they condemned it as the initial step toward an alliance with britain their perpetual foe.
they further assailed the pact as a agrant violation of the franco american treaty of 1778.
french warships in retaliation began to seize defenseless american merchant vessels altogether about three hundred by mid 1797.
adding insult to outrage the paris regime haughtily refused to receive americas newly appointed envoy and even threatened him with arrest.
president adams kept his head temporarily even though the nation was mightily aroused.
true to washingtons policy of steering clear of war at all costs he tried again to reach an agreement with the french and appointed a diplomatic commission of three men including john marshall the future chief justice.
adamss envoys reaching paris in 1797 hoped to meet with charles maurice de talleyrand the crafty french foreign minister.
they were secretly approached by three go betweens later referred to as x y and z in the published dispatches.
the french spokesmen among other concessions demanded an unneutral loan of 32 million orins plus what amounted to a bribe of 250 000 for the privilege of merely talking with talleyrand.
these terms were intolerable.
the american trio knew that bribes were standard diplomatic devices in europe but they gagged at paying a quarter of a million dollars for mere talk without any assurances of a settlement.
negotiations quickly broke down and john marshall on reaching new york in 1798 was hailed as a conquering hero for his steadfastness.
the xyz affair sent a wave of war hysteria sweeping through the united states catching up even president adams.
the slogan of the hour became millions for defense but not one cent for tribute the federalists were delighted at this unexpected turn of affairs whereas all except the most rabid jeffersonians hung their heads in shame over the misbehavior of their french friends.
war preparations in the united states were pushed along at a feverish pace despite considerable jeffersonian opposition in congress.
the navy department chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 preparation for war to defend commerce the building of the frigate philadelphia in 1803 this frigate ran onto the rocks near tripoli harbor and about three hundred ofcers and men were imprisoned by the tripolitans see map 11 2 on p 233.
the ship was reoated for service against the americans but stephen decatur led a party of men that set it are.
was created the three ship navy was expanded the united states marine corps was reestablished originally created in 1775 the marine corps had been disbanded at the end of the revolutionary war.
a new army of ten thousand men was authorized but not fully raised.
bloodshed was con ned to the sea and principally to the west indies.
in two and a half years of undeclared hostilities 1798 1800 american privateers and menof war of the new navy captured over eighty armed vessels ying the french colors though several hundred yankee merchant ships were lost to the enemy.
only a slight push it seemed might plunge both nations into a full dress war.
americans would send a new minister he would be received with proper respect.
this french furor brought to adams a degree of personal acclaim that he had never known before and was never to know again.
he doubtless perceived that a full edged war crowned by the conquest of the floridas and louisiana would bring new plaudits to the federalist party and perhaps a second term to himself.
but the heady wine of popularity did not sway his nal judgment.
he like other founding fathers realized full well that war must be avoided while the country was relatively weak.
adams unexpectedly exploded a bombshell when early in 1799 he submitted to the senate the name of a new minister to france.
hamilton and his war hawk adams puts patriotism above party embattled france its hands full in europe wanted no war.
an outwitted talleyrand realized that to ght the united states would merely add one more foe to his enemy roster.
the british who were lending the americans cannon and other war supplies were actually driven closer to their wayward cousins than they were to be again for many years.
talleyrand therefore let it be known through roundabout channels that if the the rmness of president john adams 1735 1826 was revealed in his message to congress june 1798 i will never send another minister to france without assurances that he will be received respected and honored as the representative of a great free powerful and independent nation.
the alien and sedition hysteria faction were enraged.
but public opinion jeffersonian and reasonable federalist alike was favorable to one last try for peace.
americas envoys now three found the political skies brightening when they reached paris early in 1800.
the ambitious little corporal the corsican napoleon bonaparte had recently seized dictatorial power.
he was eager to free his hands of the american squabble so that he might continue to redraw the map of europe and perhaps create a new world empire in louisiana.
the af ictions and ambitions of the old world were again working to americas advantage.
after a great deal of haggling a memorable treaty known as the convention of 1800 was signed in paris.
france agreed to annul the twenty two year old marriage of in convenience but as a kind of alimony the united states agreed to pay the damage claims of american shippers.
so ended the nations only peacetime military alliance for a century and a half.
its troubled history does much to explain the traditional antipathy of the american people to foreign entanglements.
john adams inty to the end deserves immense credit for his belated push for peace even though he was moved in part by jealousy of hamilton.
adams not only avoided the hazards of war but also unwittingly smoothed the path for the peaceful purchase of louisiana three years later.
he should indeed rank high among the forgotten purchasers of this vast domain.
if america had drifted into a full blown war with france in 1800 napoleon would not have sold louisiana to jefferson on any terms in 1803.
president adams the bubble of his popularity pricked by peace was aware of his signal contribution to the nation.
he later suggested as the epitaph for his tombstone not used here lies john adams who took upon himself the responsibility of peace with france in the year 1800 the federalist witch hunt exulting federalists had meanwhile capitalized on the anti french frenzy to drive through congress in 1798 a sheaf of laws designed to mufe or minimize their jeffersonian foes.
the rst of these oppressive laws was aimed at supposedly pro jeffersonian aliens most european immigrants lacking wealth were scorned by the aristocratic federalist party.
but they were welcomed as voters by the less prosperous and more democratic jeffersonians.
the federalist congress hoping to dis courage the dregs of europe erected a disheartening barrier.
they raised the residence requirements for aliens who desired to become citizens from a tolerable ve years to an intolerable fourteen.
this drastic new law violated the traditional american policy of opendoor hospitality and speedy assimilation.
two additional alien laws struck heavily at undesirable immigrants.
the president was empowered to deport dangerous foreigners in time of peace and to deport or imprison them in time of hostilities.
though defensible as a war mea sure and an ofcially declared war with france seemed imminent this was an arbitrary grant of executive power contrary to american tradition and to the spirit of the constitution even though the stringent alien laws were never enforced.
the lockjaw sedition act the last mea sure of the federalist clampdown was a direct slap at two priceless freedoms guaranteed in the constitution by the bill of rights freedom of speech and freedom of the press first amendment.
this law provided that anyone who impeded the policies of the government or falsely defamed its ofcials including the president would be liable to a heavy ne and imprisonment.
severe though the mea sure was the federalists believed that it was justied.
the verbal violence of the day was unrestrained and foul penned editors some of them exiled aliens vilied adamss anti french policy in vicious terms.
many outspoken jeffersonian editors were indicted under the sedition act and ten were brought to trial.
all of them were convicted often by packed juries swayed by prejudiced federalist judges.
some of the victims were harmless partisans who should have been spared the notoriety of martyrdom.
among them was congressman matthew lyon the spitting lion who had earlier gained fame by spitting in the face of a federalist.
he was sentenced to four months in jail for writing of president adamss unbounded thirst for ridiculous pomp foolish adulation and selsh avarice another culprit was lucky to get off with a ne of 100 after he had expressed the wish that the wad of a cannon red in honor of adams had landed in the seat of the presidents breeches.
the sedition act seemed to be in direct con ict with the constitution.
but the supreme court dominated by federalists was of no mind to declare this federalist law unconstitutional.
the federalists intentionally wrote the law to expire in 1801 so that it could not be used against them if they lost the next election.
this attempt by the federalists to crush free speech and silence the opposition party high handed chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 congressional pugilists satirical representation of matthew lyons ght in congress with the federalist representative roger griswold.
as it was undoubtedly made many converts for the jeffersonians.
yet the alien and sedition acts despite pained outcries from the jeffersonians they muzzled commanded widespread popular support.
anti french hysteria played directly into the hands of witch hunting conser in 1800 james callender 1758 1803 published a pamphlet that assailed the president in strong language.
for blasts like the following tirade callender was prosecuted under the sedition act ned 250 and sentenced to prison for nine months the reign of mr adams has hitherto been one continued tempest of malignant passions.
as president he has never opened his lips or lifted his pen without threatening and scolding.
the grand object of his administration has been to exasperate the rage of contending parties to calumniate and destroy every man who differs from his opinions.
every person holding an ofce must either quit it or think and vote exactly with mr adams.
in the congressional elections of 1798 1799 the federalists riding a wave of popularity scored the most sweeping victory of their entire history.
the virginia madison and kentucky jefferson resolutions resentful jeffersonians naturally refused to take the alien and sedition acts lying down.
jefferson himself feared that if the federalists managed to choke free speech and free press they would then wipe out other precious constitutional guarantees.
his own edgling political party might even be stamped out of existence.
if this had happened the country might have slid into a dangerous one party dictatorship.
fearing prosecution for sedition jefferson secretly penned a series of resolutions which the kentucky legislature approved in 1798 and 1799.
his friend and fellow virginian james madison drafted a similar but less extreme statement which was adopted by the legislature of virginia in 1798.
both jefferson and madison stressed the compact theory a theory popular among eng lish political philosophers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
as applied to america by the jeffersonians this concept meant that the thirteen sovereign states in creat federalists versus republicans ing the federal government had entered into a compact or contract regarding its jurisdiction.
the national government was consequently the agent or creation of the states.
since water can rise no higher than its source the individual states were the nal judges of whether their agent had broken the compact by overstepping the authority originally granted.
invoking this logic jeffersons kentucky resolutions concluded that the federal regime had exceeded its constitutional powers and that with regard to the alien and sedition acts nullication a refusal to accept them was the rightful remedy no other state legislatures despite jeffersons hopes fell into line.
some of them atly refused to endorse the virginia and kentucky resolutions.
others chiey in federalist states added ringing condemnations.
many federalists argued that the people not the states had made the original compact and that it was up to the supreme court not the states to nullify unconstitutional legislation passed by congress.
this practice though not specically authorized by the constitution was nally adopted by the supreme court in 1803 see pp.
the virginia and kentucky resolutions were a brilliant formulation of the extreme states rights view regarding the union indeed more sweeping in their implications than their authors had intended.
they were later used by southerners to support nullication and ultimately secession.
yet neither jefferson nor madison as founding fathers of the union had any intention of breaking it up they were groping for ways to preserve it.
their resolutions were basically campaign documents designed to crystallize opposition to the federalist party and to unseat it in the upcoming presidential election of 1800.
the only real nullication that jefferson had in view was the nullication of federalist abuses.
federalists versus democratic republicans as the presidential contest of 1800 approached the differences between federalists and democraticrepublicans were sharply etched see table 10 3.
as might be expected most federalists of the preconstitution period 1787 1789 became federalists in the 1790s.
largely welded by hamilton into an effective group by 1793 they openly advocated rule by the best people those who own the country remarked federalist john jay ought to govern it with their intellectual arrogance and tory tastes hamiltonians distrusted full blown democracy as the fountain of all mischiefs and feared the swayability of the untutored common folk.
hamiltonian federalists also advocated a strong central government with the power to crush democratic excesses like shayss rebellion protect the lives and estates of the wealthy subordinate the sovereigntyloving states and promote foreign trade.
they believed table 10 3 the two political parties 1793 1800 federalist features democratic republican jeffersonian features rule by the best people hostility to extension of democracy a powerful central government at the expense of states rights loose interpretation of constitution government to foster business concentration of wealth in interests of capitalistic enterprise a protective tariff pro british conser vative tory tradition national debt a blessing if properly funded an expanding bureaucracy a powerful central bank restrictions on free speech and press concentration in seacoast area rule by the informed masses friendliness toward extension of democracy a weak central government so as to preserve states rights strict interpretation of constitution no special favors for business agriculture preferred no special favors for manufacturers pro french radical revolutionary tradition national debt a bane rigid economy reduction of federal ofceholders encouragement to state banks relatively free speech and press concentration in south and southwest in agricultural areas and backcountry a minimal navy for coastal defense a strong navy to protect shippers chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 thomas jefferson at natural bridge by caleb boyle ca.
1801 a great statesman jefferson wrote his own epitaph here was buried thomas jefferson author of the declaration of independence of the statute of virginia for religious freedom and father of the university of virginia that government should support private enterprise but not interfere with it.
this attitude came naturally to the merchants manufacturers and shippers along the atlantic seaboard who made up the majority of federalist support.
farther inland few hamiltonians dwelled.
the hinterland was largely anti federalist territory.
leading the anti federalists who came eventually to be known as democratic republicans or sometimes simply republicans was thomas jefferson.
his rivalry with hamilton de ned the archetypal con ict in american political history.
the two leaders appealed to dif ferent constituencies and expressed different theories of society politics and diplomacy.
lanky and relaxed in appearance lacking personal aggressiveness weak voiced and unable to deliver a rabble rousing speech jefferson became a master political organizer through his ability to lead people rather than drive them.
his strongest appeal was to the middle class and to the underprivileged the dirt farmers the laborers the artisans and the small shopkeepers.
liberal thinking jefferson with his aristocratic head set on a farmers frame was a bundle of inconsistencies.
by one set of tests he should have been a federalist for he was a virginia aristocrat and slaveowner who lived in an imposing hilltop mansion at monticello.
a so called traitor to his own upper class jefferson cherished uncommon sympathy for the common people especially the downtrodden the oppressed and the persecuted.
as he wrote in 1800 i have sworn upon the altar of god eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man jeffersonian republicans demanded a weak central regime.
they believed that the best government was the one that governed least.
the bulk of the power jefferson argued should be retained by the states.
there the people in intimate contact with local affairs could keep a more vigilant eye on their public servants.
otherwise a dictatorship might develop.
central authority a kind of necessary evil was to be kept at a minimum through a strict interpretation of the constitution.
the national debt which he saw as a curse illegitimately bequeathed to later generations was to be paid off.
jeffersonian republicans themselves primarily agrarians insisted that there should be no special privileges for special classes particularly manufacturers.
agriculture to jefferson was the favored branch of the economy and formed the foundation of his political thought.
those who labor in the earth are the chosen people of god he said.
most of his followers naturally came from the agricultural south and southwest.
above all jefferson advocated the rule of the people.
but he did not propose thrusting the ballot into the hands of every adult white male.
he favored government for the people but not by all the people only by those white men who were literate enough to inform themselves and wear the mantle of american citizenship worthily.
universal education would have to precede universal suffrage.
the ignorant he argued were incapable of self government.
but he had profound jefferson s republic thomas jeffersons vision of a republican america was peopled with virtuous farmers not factory hands.
as early as 1784 he wrote while we have land to labor then let us never wish to see our citizens occupied at a work bench or twirling a distaff.
for the general operations of manufacture let our workshops remain in europe.
the mobs of great cities add just so much to the support of pure government as sores do to the strength of the human body.
faith in the reasonableness and teachableness of the masses and in their collective wisdom when taught.
landlessness among american citizens threatened popular democracy as much as illiteracy in jeffersons eyes.
he feared that propertyless dependents would be political pawns in the hands of their landowning superiors.
how could the emergence of a landless class of voters be avoided.
the answer in part was by slavery.
a system of black slave labor in the south ensured that white yeoman farmers could remain independent landowners.
without slavery poor whites would have to provide the cheap labor so necessary for the cultivation of tobacco and rice and their low wages would preclude their ever owning property.
jefferson thus tortuously reconciled slaveholding his own included with his more democratic impulses.
yet for his time jeffersons condence that white free men could become responsible and knowledgeable citizens was open minded.
he championed their freedom of speech for without free speech the misdeeds of tyranny could not be exposed.
jefferson even dared to say that given the choice of a government without newspapers and newspapers without a gov ernment he would opt for the latter.
yet no other american leader except perhaps abraham lincoln ever suffered more foul abuse from editorial pens jefferson might well have prayed for freedom from the federalist press.
differences over foreign policy dened another sharp distinction between hamilton and jefferson.
hamilton looked outward and eastward.
he sought to build a strong national state that would assert and expand americas commercial interests.
no government could give us tranquility and happiness at home he declared which did not possess sufcient stability and strength to make us respectable abroad foreign trade especially with britain was a key cog in hamiltons scal machinery and friendship with britain was thus indispensable.
jeffersonian republicans unlike the federalist british boot lickers were basically profrench.
they earnestly believed that it was to americas advantage to support the liberal ideals of the french revolution rather than applaud the reaction of the british tories.
jefferson in effect faced inward and westward.
his priorities were to protect and strengthen democracy at home especially in the frontier regions beyond the appalachians rather than ex americas muscles abroad.
so as the young republics rst full decade of nationhood came to a close the founders hopes seemed already imperiled.
con icts over domestic politics and foreign policy undermined the unity of the revolutionary era and called into question the very viability of the american experiment in democracy.
as the presidential election of 1800 approached the danger loomed that the fragile and battered american ship of state like many another before it and after it would founder on the rocks of controversy.
the shores of history are littered with the wreckage of nascent nations torn asunder before they could grow to a stable maturity.
why should the united states expect to enjoy a happier fate.
chapter 10 launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 chronology constitution formally put into effect judiciary act of 1789 washington elected president french revolution begins declaration of the rights of man france first ofcial census bill of rights adopted vermont becomes fourteenth state bank of the united states created excise tax passed washington reelected president 1792 federalist and democratic republican parties formed louis xvi beheaded radical phase of french revolution france declares war on britain and spain washingtons neutrality proclamation citizen gent affair key terms bill of rights 201 judiciary act of 1789 202 funding at par 202 assumption 203 tariff 203 excise tax 203 bank of the united states 204 whiskey rebellion 204 reign of terror 207 neutrality proclamation 210 whiskey rebellion battle of fallen timbers jays treaty with britain treaty of greenville indians cede ohio pinckneys treaty with spain washingtons farewell address adams becomes president xyz affair alien and sedition acts 1798 virginia and kentucky resolutions 1798 undeclared war with france convention of 1800 peace with france people to know fallen timbers battle of 211 greenville treaty of 211 jays treaty 213 pinckneys treaty 213 farewell address 213 xyz affair 215 convention of 1800 217 alien laws 217 sedition act 217 virginia and kentucky resolutions 219 george washington alexander hamilton louis xvi edmond gent little turtle mad anthony wayne john jay john adams charles maurice de talleyrand to learn more to learn more joanne freeman affairs of honor national politics in the new republic 2001 frank lambert the barbary wars american independence in the atlantic world 2005 michael merrill and sean wilentz eds the key of liberty the life and democratic writings of william manning a laborer 1747 1814 1992 jeffrey l pasley the tyranny of printers newspaper politics in the early american republic 2001 jeffrey l pasley andrew w robertson and david waldstreicher eds beyond the founders new approaches to the political history of the early american republic 2004 bernard schwartz the great rights of mankind a history of the american bill of rights 1991 james roger sharp american politics in the early republic the new nation in crisis 1993 thomas p slaughter the whiskey rebellion frontier epilogue to the american revolution 1986 robert w smith keeping the republic ideology and early american diplomacy 2004 alan taylor william coopers town power and persuasion on the frontier of the early american republic 1995 robert e wright hamilton unbound finance and the creation of the american republic 2002 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 timid men.
prefer the calm of despotism to the boisterous sea of liberty.
i n the critical presidential contest of 1800 the rst in which federalists and democratic republicans functioned as two national political parties john adams and thomas jefferson again squared off against each other.
the choice seemed clear and dramatic adamss federalists waged a defensive struggle for strong central government and public order.
their jeffersonian opponents presented themselves as the guardians of agrarian purity liberty and states rights.
the next dozen years however would turn what seemed like a clear cut choice in 1800 into a messier reality as the jeffersonians in power were confronted with a series of opportunities and crises requiring the assertion of federal authority.
as the rst challengers to rout a reigning party the republicans were the rst to learn that it is far easier to condemn from the stump than to govern consistently.
federalist and republican mudslingers in ghting for survival the federalists labored under heavy handicaps.
their alien and sedition acts had aroused a host of enemies although most of these critics were dyed in the wool jeffersonians anyhow.
the hamiltonian wing of the federalist party robbed of its glorious war with france split openly with president adams.
hamilton a victim of arrogance was so indiscreet as to attack the president in a privately printed pamphlet.
jeffersonians soon got hold of the pamphlet and gleefully published it.
the most damaging blow to the federalists was the refusal of adams to give them a rousing ght with france.
their feverish war preparations had swelled this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website federalists versus republicans the reverend timothy dwight 1752 1817 president of yale college predicted that in the event of jeffersons election the bible would be cast into a bonre our holy worship changed into a dance of french jacobin phrensy our wives and daughters dishonored and our sons converted into the disciples of voltaire and the dragoons of marat.
the public debt and had required disagreeable new taxes including a stamp tax.
after all these unpopular mea sures the war scare had petered out and the country was left with an all dressed up but no place to go feeling.
the military preparations now seemed not only unnecessary but extravagant as seamen for the new navy were called john adamss jackasses adams himself was known somewhat ironically as the father of the american navy thrown on the defensive the federalists concentrated their re on jefferson himself who became the victim of one of americas earliest whispering campaigns he was accused of having robbed a widow and her children of a trust fund and of having fathered numerous mulatto children by his own slave women.
jeffersons long rumored intimacy with one of his slaves sally hemings has been con rmed through dna testing.
see examining the evidence p.
as a liberal in religion jefferson had earlier incurred the wrath of the orthodox clergy largely through his successful struggle to separate church and state in his native virginia.
although jefferson did believe in god preachers throughout new eng land stronghold of federalism and congregationalism thundered against his alleged atheism.
old ladies of federalist families fearing jeffersons election even buried their bibles or hung them in wells.
washington and jefferson compared 1807 this pro federalist anti jefferson cartoon accuses jefferson of sympathizing with french revolutionary despotism.
chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 trying to elbow their way into the american carrying trade.
thereafter all commerce owing to and from the colonies could be transported only in british including colonial vessels.
subsequent laws required that european goods destined for america rst had to be landed in britain where tariff duties could be collected and british middlemen could take a slice of the prots.
other laws stipulated that american merchants must ship certain enumerated products notably tobacco exclusively to britain even though prices might be better elsewhere.
british policy also in icted a currency shortage on the colonies.
since the colonists regularly bought more from britain than they sold there the difference had to be made up in hard cash.
every year gold and silver coins mostly earned in illicit trade with the spanish and french west indies drained out of the colonies creating an acute money shortage.
to facilitate everyday purchases the colonists resorted to butter nails pitch and feathers for purposes of exchange.
currency issues came to a boil when dire nancial need forced many of the colonies to issue paper money which swiftly depreciated.
british merchants and creditors squawked so loudly that parliament prohibited the colonial legislatures from printing paper currency and from passing indulgent bankruptcy laws practices that might harm british merchants.
the americans grumbled that their welfare was being sacriced for the well being of british commercial interests.
the british crown also reserved the right to nullify any legislation passed by the colonial assemblies if such laws worked mischief with the mercantilist system.
this royal veto was used rather sparingly just 469 times in connection with 8 563 laws.
but the colonists ercely resented its very existence another example of how principle could weigh more heavily than practice in fueling colonial grievances.
the merits and menace of mercantilism in theory the british mercantile system seemed thoroughly selsh and deliberately oppressive.
but the truth is that until 1763 the various navigation laws imposed no intolerable burden mainly because they were only loosely enforced.
enterprising colonial merchants learned early to disregard or evade troublesome restrictions.
some of the rst american fortunes like that of john hancock were amassed by wholesale smuggling.
paul revere by john singleton copley ca.
1768 this painting of the famed silversmith horseman challenged convention but reected the new democratic spirit of the age by portraying an artisan in working clothes.
note how copley depicted the serene condence of the master craftsman and reveres quiet pride in his work.
americans also reaped direct benets from the mercantile system.
if the colonies existed for the benet of the mother country it was hardly less true that britain existed for the benet of the colonies.
london paid liberal bounties to colonial producers of ship parts over the protests of british competitors.
virginia tobacco planters enjoyed a monopoly in the british market snuf ng out the tiny british tobacco industry.
the colonists also beneted from the protection of the worlds mightiest navy and a strong seasoned army of redcoats all without a penny of cost.
but even when painted in its rosiest colors the mercantile system burdened the colonists with annoying liabilities.
mercantilism stied economic initiative and imposed a rankling dependency on british agents and creditors.
most grievously many americans simply found the mercantilist system debasing.
they felt used kept in a state of perpetual economic adolescence and the stamp act adam smith 1723 1790 the scottish father of modern economics frontally attacked mercantilism in 1776 to prohibit a great people however from making all that they can of every part of their own produce or from employing their stock and industry in the way that they judge most advantageous to themselves is a manifest violation of the most sacred rights of mankind.
never allowed to come of age.
as benjamin franklin wrote in 1775 we have an old mother that peevish is grown she snubs us like children that scarce walk alone she forgets were grown up and have sense of our own.
revolution broke out as theodore roosevelt later remarked because britain failed to recognize an emerging nation when it saw one.
the stamp tax uproar victory ushed britain emerged from the seven years war holding one of the biggest empires in the world and also less happily the biggest debt some 140 million about half of which had been incurred defending the american colonies.
to justify and ser vice that debt british ofcials now moved to rede ne their relationship with their north american colonies.
prime minister george grenville rst aroused the resentment of the colonists in 1763 by ordering the british navy to begin strictly enforcing the navigation laws.
he also secured from parliament the so called sugar act of 1764 the rst law ever passed by that body for raising tax revenue in the colonies for the crown.
among various provisions it increased the duty on foreign sugar imported from the west indies.
after bitter protests from the colonists the duties were lowered substantially and the agitation died down.
but resentment was kept burning by the quartering act of 1765.
this mea sure required certain colonies to provide food and quarters for british troops.
then in the same year 1765 grenville imposed the most odious mea sure of all a stamp tax to raise revenues to support the new military force.
the stamp act mandated the use of stamped paper or the af xing of stamps certifying payment of tax.
stamps were required on bills of sale for about fty trade items as well as on certain types of commercial and legal documents including playing cards pamphlets newspapers diplomas bills of lading and marriage licenses.
grenville regarded all of these mea sures as reasonable and just.
he was simply asking the americans to pay a fair share of the costs for their own defense through taxes that were already familiar in britain.
in fact the british people for two generations had endured a stamp tax far heavier than that passed for the colonies.
yet the americans were angrily aroused at what they regarded as grenvilles scal aggression.
the new laws did not merely pinch their pocketbooks.
far more ominously grenville also seemed to be striking at the local liberties they had come to assume as a matter of right.
thus some colonial assemblies deantly refused to comply with the quartering act or voted only a fraction of the supplies that it called for.
worst of all grenvilles noxious legislation seemed to jeopardize the basic rights of the colonists as englishmen.
both the sugar act and the stamp act provided for trying offenders in the hated admiralty courts where juries were not allowed.
the burden of proof was on the defendants who were assumed to be guilty unless they could prove themselves innocent.
trial by jury and the precept of innocent until proved guilty were ancient privileges that british people every where including the american colonists held most dear.
and why was a british army needed at all in the colonies now that the french were expelled from the continent and pontiacs warriors crushed.
could its real purpose be to whip rebellious colonists into line.
the boston gazette declared in 1765 a colonist cannot make a button a horseshoe nor a hobnail but some snooty ironmonger or respectable buttonmaker of britain shall bawl and squall that his honors worship is most egregiously maltreated injured cheated and robbed by the rascally american republicans.
chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 a royal stamp the hated stamp act of 1765 required stamps certifying payment of tax on all sorts of legal and commercial documents.
this stamp was to be afxed to insurance policies and probated wills.
many americans weaned on radical whig suspicion of all authority began to sniff the strong scent of a conspiracy to strip them of their historic liberties.
they lashed back violently and the stamp act became the target that drew their most ferocious re.
angry throats raised the cry no taxation without representation there was some irony in the slogan because the seaports and tidewater towns that were most wrathful against the stamp act had long denied full representation to their own backcountry pioneers.
but now the aggravated colonists took the high ground of principle.
the americans made a distinction between legislation and taxation they conceded the right of english statesman edmund burke 1729 1797 warned in 1775 young man there is america which at this day serves for little more than to amuse you with stories of savage men and uncouth manners yet shall before you taste of death show itself equal to the whole of that commerce which now attracts the envy of the world.
parliament to legislate about matters that affected the entire empire including the regulation of trade.
but they steadfastly denied the right of parliament in which no americans were seated to impose taxes on americans.
only their own elected colonial legislatures the americans insisted could legally tax them.
taxes levied by the distant british parliament amounted to robbery a piratical assault on the sacred rights of property.
grenville dismissed these american protests as hairsplitting absurdities.
the power of parliament was supreme and undivided he asserted and in any case the americans were represented in parliament.
elaborating the theory of virtual representation grenville claimed that every member of parliament represented all british subjects even those americans in boston or charleston who had never voted for a member of parliament.
the americans scoffed at the notion of virtual representation.
and truthfully they did not really want direct representation in parliament which might have seemed like a sensible compromise.
if they had obtained it any gouty member of the house of commons could have proposed an oppressive tax bill for the colonies and the outvoted american representatives few in number would have stood bereft of a principle with which to resist.
thus the principle of no taxation without representation was supremely important and the colonists clung to it with tenacious consistency.
when the british replied that the sovereign power of government could not be divided between legislative authority in london and taxing authority in the colonies they forced the americans to deny the authority of parliament altogether and to begin to consider their own political independence.
this chain of logic eventually led link by link to revolutionary consequences.
forced repeal of the stamp act colonial outcries against the hated stamp tax took various forms.
the most conspicuous assemblage was the stamp act congress of 1765 which brought together in new york city twenty seven distinguished delegates from nine colonies.
after dignied debate the members drew up a statement of their rights and grievances and beseeched the king and parliament to repeal the repugnant legislation.
conict over taxes the stamp act congress which was largely ignored in eng land made little splash at the time in america.
its ripples however began to erode sectional suspicions for it brought together around the same table leaders from the different and rival colonies.
it was one more halting but signicant step toward intercolonial unity.
more effective than the congress was the widespread adoption of nonimportation agreements against british goods.
woolen garments of homespun became fashionable and the eating of lamb chops was discouraged so that the wool bearing sheep would be allowed to mature.
nonimportation agreements were in fact a promising stride toward union they spontaneously united the american people for the rst time in common action.
mobilizing in support of nonimportation gave ordinary american men and women new opportunities to participate in colonial protests.
many people who had previously stood on the sidelines now signed petitions swearing to uphold the terms of the consumer boycotts.
groups of women assembled in public to hold spinning bees and make homespun cloth as a replacement for shunned british textiles.
such public deance helped spread angry resistance throughout american colonial society.
sometimes violence accompanied colonial protests.
groups of ardent spirits known as sons of liberty and daughters of liberty took the law into their own hands.
crying liberty property and no stamps they enforced the nonimportation agreements against john dickinson 1732 1808 a lawyer and popular essayist advocated a middle of the road response to the new british revenue acts of the 1760s that appealed to most colonists at the time the constitutional modes of obtaining relief are those which i wish to see pursued on the present occasion.
we have an excellent prince in whose good disposition we may conde.
let us behave like dutiful children who have received unmerited blows from a beloved parent.
let us complain to our parent but let our complaint speak at the same time the language of afiction and veneration.
protesting the stamp act even common household wares in the 1760s testied to the colonists mounting rage against the stamp act.
many people in britain sympathized with the americans and sought to prot from their anger as this english made teapot demonstrates.
violators often with a generous coat of tar and feathers.
patriotic mobs ransacked the houses of unpopular ofcials conscated their money and hanged efgies of stamp agents on liberty poles.
shaken by colonial commotion the machinery for collecting the tax broke down.
on that dismal day in 1765 when the new act was to go into effect the stamp agents had all been forced to resign and there was no one to sell the stamps.
while ags apped at half mast the law was openly and agrantly deed or rather nullied.
eng land was hard hit.
america then bought about one quarter of all british exports and about one half of british shipping was devoted to the american trade.
merchants manufacturers and shippers suffered from the colonial nonimportation agreements and hundreds of laborers were thrown out of work.
loud demands converged on parliament for repeal of the stamp act.
but many of the members could not understand why 7 5 million britons had to pay heavy taxes to protect the colonies whereas some 2 million colonists refused to pay for only one third of the cost of their own defense.
after a stormy debate parliament in 1766 grudgingly repealed the stamp act.
grateful residents of new york erected a leaden statue to king george iii.
but american rejoicing was premature.
having withdrawn chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 the townshend tea tax and the boston massacre public punishment for the excise man 1774 this popular rendering of the punishment of commissioner of customs john malcomb shows him tarred and feathered and forcibly paid with great quantities of tea.
from the liberty tree in the background dangles the threat of hanging all for attempting to collect duties in boston.
the stamp act parliament in virtually the same breath provocatively passed the declaratory act reaf rming parliaments right to bind the colonies in all cases whatsoever the british government thereby drew its line in the sand.
it de ned the constitutional principle it would not yield absolute and unqualied sovereignty over its north american colonies.
the colonists had already drawn their own battle line by making it clear that they wanted a mea sure of sovereignty of their own and would undertake drastic action to secure it.
the stage was set for a continuing confrontation.
within a few years that statue of king george would be melted into thousands of bullets to be red at his troops.
control of the british ministry was now seized by the gifted but erratic charles champagne charley townshend a man who could deliver brilliant speeches in parliament even while drunk.
rashly promising to pluck feathers from the colonial goose with a minimum of squawking he persuaded parliament in 1767 to pass the townshend acts.
the most important of these new regulations was a light import duty on glass white lead paper paint and tea.
townshend seizing on a dubious distinction between internal and external taxes made this tax unlike the stamp tax an indirect customs duty payable at american ports.
but to the increasingly restless colonists this was a phantom distinction.
for them the real difculty remained taxes in any form without representation.
flushed with their recent victory over the stamp tax the colonists were in a rebellious mood.
the impost on tea was especially irksome for an estimated 1 million people drank the refreshing brew twice a day.
the new townshend revenues worse yet were to be earmarked to pay the salaries of the royal governors and judges in america.
from the standpoint of efcient administration by london this was a reform long overdue.
but the ultrasuspicious americans who had beaten the royal governors into line by controlling the purse regarded townshends tax as another attempt to enchain them.
their worst fears took on greater reality when the london government after passing the townshend taxes suspended the legislature of new york in 1767 for failure to comply with the quartering act.
nonimportation agreements previously potent were quickly revived against the townshend acts.
but they proved less effective than those devised against giving new meaning to the proverbial tempest in a teapot a group of 126 boston women signed an agreement or subscription list that announced we the daughters of those patriots who have and now do appear for the public interest.
do with pleasure engage with them in denying ourselves the drinking of foreign tea in hopes to frustrate a plan that tends to deprive the whole community of.
all that is valuable in life.
the boston massacre two views of the boston massacre 1770 and 1856 both of these prints of the boston massacre were art as well as propaganda.
paul reveres engraving left began circulating within three weeks of the event in march 1770 depicting not a clash of brawlers but armed soldiers taking aim at peaceful citizens.
absent also was any evidence of the mulatto ringleader crispus attucks.
revere wanted his print to convince viewers of the indisputable justice of the colonists cause.
by the mid 1850s when the chromolithograph right circulated it served a new political purpose.
in the era of the abolitionist movement freedman crispus attucks held center place in the print which portrayed his death as an american martyr in the revolutionary struggle for freedom.
the stamp act.
the colonists again enjoying prosperity took the new tax less seriously than might have been expected largely because it was light and indirect.
they found moreover that they could secure smuggled tea at a cheap price and consequently smugglers increased their activities especially in massachusetts.
british ofcials faced with a breakdown of law and order landed two regiments of troops in boston in 1768.
many of the soldiers were drunken and profane characters.
liberty loving colonists resenting the presence of the red coated rufans taunted the bloody backs unmercifully.
a clash was inevitable.
on the evening of march 5 1770 a crowd of some sixty townspeople began taunting and throwing snowballs at a squad of ten redcoats.
the bostonians were still angry over the death of an eleven year old boy shot ten days earlier during a protest against a merchant who had deed the colonial boycott of british goods.
acting apparently without orders but ner vous and provoked by the jeering crowd the troops opened re and killed or wounded eleven citizens an event that became known as the boston massacre.
one of the rst to die was crispus attucks described by contemporaries as a powerfully built runaway mulatto and a leader of the mob.
both sides were in some degree to blame and in the subsequent trial in which future president john adams served as defense attorney for the soldiers only two of the redcoats were found guilty of manslaughter.
the soldiers were released after being branded on the hand.
the seditious committees of correspondence by 1770 king george iii then only thirty two years old was strenuously attempting to assert the power of the british monarchy.
he was a good man in his private morals but he proved to be a bad ruler.
earnest industrious stubborn and lustful for power he surrounded himself with cooperative yes men notably his corpulent prime minister lord north.
chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 samuel adams 1722 1803 a second cousin of john adams he contributed a potent pen and tongue to the american revolution as a political agitator and organizer of rebellion.
he was the leading spirit in hosting the boston tea party.
a failure in the brewing business he was sent by massachusetts to the first continental congress of 1774.
he signed the declaration of independence and served in congress until 1781.
the ill timed townshend acts had failed to produce revenue though they did produce near rebellion.
net proceeds from the tax in one year were a paltry 295 while in that same year britains military costs in the colonies had mounted to 170 000.
nonimportation agreements though feebly enforced were pinching british manufacturers.
the government of lord north bowing to various pressures nally persuaded parliament to repeal the townshend revenue duties.
but the three pence toll on tea the tax the colonists found most offensive was retained to keep alive the principle of parliaments right to tax the colonies.
flames of discontent in america continued to be fanned by numerous incidents including the redoubled efforts of the british ofcials to enforce the nav igation laws.
resistance was further kindled by a master propagandist and engineer of rebellion samuel portrait traditionally said to be that of abigail adams 1744 1818 the wife of revolutionary war leader and future president john adams she was a prominent patriot in her own right.
she was also among the rst americans to see however faintly the implications of revolutionary ideas for changing the status of women.
adams of boston a cousin of john adams.
unimpressive in appearance his hands trembled he lived and breathed only for politics.
his friends had to buy him a presentable suit of clothes when he left massachusetts on intercolonial business.
zealous tenacious and courageous he was ultrasensitive to infractions of colonial rights.
cherishing a deep faith in the common people he appealed effectively to what was called his trained mob samuel adamss signal contribution was to organize in massachusetts the local committees of correspondence.
after he had formed the rst one in boston during 1772 some eighty towns in the colony speedily set up similar orga ni zations.
their chief function was to spread the spirit of resistance by exchanging letters and thus keep alive opposition to british policy.
one critic referred to the committees as the foulest subtlest and most venomous serpent ever issued from the egg of sedition uniting for rebellion intercolonial committees of correspondence were the next logical step.
virginia led the way in 1773 by creating such a body as a standing committee of the house of burgesses.
within a short time every colony had established a central committee through which it could exchange ideas and information with other colonies.
these intercolonial groups were supremely signicant in stimulating and disseminating sentiment in favor of united action.
they evolved directly into the rst american congresses.
tea brewing in boston thus far that is by 1773 nothing had happened to make rebellion inevitable.
nonimportation was weakening.
increasing numbers of colonists were reluctantly paying the tea tax because the legal tea was now cheaper than the smuggled tea even cheaper than tea in eng land.
a new ogre entered the picture in 1773.
the powerful british east india company overburdened with 17 million pounds of unsold tea was facing bankruptcy.
if it collapsed the london government would lose heavily in tax revenue.
the ministry therefore decided to assist the company by awarding it a complete monopoly of the american tea business.
the giant corporation would now be able to sell the coveted leaves more cheaply than ever before even with the three pence tax tacked on.
but many american tea drinkers rather than rejoicing at the lower prices cried foul.
they saw this british move as a shabby attempt to trick the americans with the bait of cheaper tea into swallowing the principle of the detested tax.
for the determined americans principle remained far more important than price.
if the british ofcials insisted on the letter of the law violence would certainly result.
fatefully the british colonial authorities decided to enforce the law.
once more the colonists rose up in wrath to defy it.
not a single one of the several thousand chests of tea shipped by the east india company ever reached the hands of the consignees.
in philadelphia and new york mass demonstrations forced the tea bearing ships to return to eng land with their cargo holds still full.
at annapolis marylanders burned both cargo and vessel while proclaiming liberty and independence or death in pursuit of it in charleston south carolina ofcials seized the tea for nonpayment of duties after intimidated local merchants refused to accept delivery.
ironically the conscated charleston tea was later auctioned to raise money for the revolutionary army.
only in boston did a british ofcial stubbornly refuse to be cowed.
massachusetts governor thomas hutchinson had already felt the fury of the mob when stamp act protesters had destroyed his home in 1765.
this time he was determined not to budge.
ironically hutchinson agreed that the tea tax was unjust but he believed even more strongly that the colonists had no right to out the law.
hutchinson infuriated bostons radicals when he ordered the tea ships not to clear boston harbor until they had unloaded their cargoes.
sentiment against him was further inamed when hutchinsons enemies published one of his private letters in which he declared that an abridgement of what are called eng lish liberties was necessary for the preservation of law and order in the colonies apparently con rming the darkest conspiracy theories of the american radicals.
on december 16 1773 roughly a hundred bostonians loosely disguised as indians boarded the docked ships smashed open 342 chests of tea and dumped their contents into the atlantic an action that came to be known as the boston tea party.
a crowd of several hundred watched approvingly from the shore as boston harbor became a vast teapot.
donning indian disguise provided protesters with a threatening image and a convenient way of avoiding detection.
tea was the perfect symbol to rally around as almost every colonist rich or poor consumed this imported caffeinated beverage.
ann hulton d.
a loyalist described colonial political divisions and her hopes and fears for her own future in a letter she sent to a friend in england in 1774 those who are well disposed towards government are termed tories.
they daily increase have made some efforts to take the power out of the hands of the patriots but they are intimidated overpowered by numbers.
however i dont despair of seeing peace tranquility in america tho they talk very high furious at present.
they are all preparing their arms ammunition say if any of the leaders are seized they will make reprisals on the friends of government.
chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 the boston tea party december 16 1773 crying boston harbor a teapot this night sons of liberty disguised as indians hurled chests of tea into the sea to protest the tax on tea and to make sure that its cheap price did not prove an invincible temptation to the people.
reactions varied.
all up and down the eastern seaboard sympathetic colonists applauded.
referring to tea as a badge of slavery they burned the hated leaves in solidarity with boston.
but conser vatives complained that the destruction of private property violated the law and threatened anarchy and the breakdown of civil decorum.
hutchinson chastened and disgusted with the colonies retreated to britain never to return.
the british authorities meanwhile saw little alternative to whipping the upstart colonists into shape.
the granting of some mea sure of home rule to the americans might at this stage still have prevented rebellion but few british politicians were willing to swallow their pride and take the high road.
the perilous path they chose instead led only to reprisals bitterness and escalating con ict.
parliament passes the intolerable acts an irate parliament responded speedily to the boston tea party with mea sures that brewed a revolution.
by huge majorities in 1774 it passed a series of acts designed to chastise boston in particular massachusetts in general.
they were branded in america as the massacre of american liberty most drastic of all was the boston port act.
it closed the tea stained harbor until damages were paid and order could be ensured.
by other intolerable acts as they were called in america many of the chartered rights of colonial massachusetts were swept away.
re strictions were likewise placed on the precious town meetings.
contrary to previous practice enforcing ofcials who killed colonists in the line of duty could now be sent to britain for trial.
there suspicious americans assumed they would be likely to get off scotfree.
particularly intolerable to bostonians was a new quartering act which gave local authorities the power to lodge british soldiers anywhere even in private homes.
by a fateful coincidence the intolerable acts were accompanied in 1774 by the quebec act.
passed at the same time it was erroneously regarded in eng lishspeaking america as part of the british reaction to the turbulence in boston.
actually the quebec act was a good law in bad company.
for many years the british government had debated how it should administer the sixty thousand or so conquered french subjects in canada and it had nally framed this farsighted and statesmanlike mea sure.
the french were guaranteed their catholic religion.
they were also permitted to retain many of their old customs and institutions which did not include a representative assembly or trial by jury in civil cases.
in addition the old boundaries of the province of qubec were now extended southward all the way to the ohio river.
the quebec act from the viewpoint of the french canadians was a shrewd and conciliatory mea sure.
if britain had only shown as much foresight in dealing with its eng lish speaking colonies it might not have lost them.
but from the viewpoint of the american colonists as a whole the quebec act was especially noxious.
all the eve of rebellion 100w 90w 80w 70w 60w 60n 50w hu d s o n bay n n hudsons bay company nova scotia qubec me.
montral m iss n y ip iss pi m penn.
n j r ouri iss r va r.
map 7 1 qubec before and after 1774 young alexander hamilton voiced the fears of many colonists when he warned that the quebec act of 1774 would introduce priestly tyranny into canada making that country another spain or portugal.
does not your blood run cold he asked to think that an english parliament should pass an act for the establishment of arbitrary power and popery in such a country louisiana n h mass.
io oh r i conn n atlantic ocean del.
qubec before 1774 n c qubec after 1774 as envisioned by the quebec act s c ga west florida proclamation line of 1763 30n britains thirteen colonies indian reserve gu l f o f m e x i c o east florida other british territory spanish territory interactive map the other intolerable acts slapped directly at massachusetts but this one had a much wider range.
by sustaining unrepresentative assemblies and denials of jury trials it seemed to set a dangerous precedent in america.
it alarmed land speculators who were distressed to see the huge trans allegheny area snatched from their grasp see map 7 1.
it aroused anti catholics who were shocked by the extension of roman catholic jurisdiction southward into a huge region that had once been earmarked for protestantism a region about as large as the thirteen original colonies.
one angry protestant cried that there ought to be a jubilee in hell over this enormous gain for popery bloodshed american dissenters responded sympathetically to the plight of massachusetts.
it had put itself in the wrong by the violent destruction of the tea cargoes now britain had put itself in the wrong by brutal punishment that seemed far too cruel for the crime.
flags were own at half mast throughout the colonies on the day that the boston port act went into effect and sister colonies rallied to send food to the stricken city.
rice was shipped even from faraway south carolina.
most memorable of the responses to the intolerable acts was the summoning of the first continental congress in 1774.
it was to meet in philadelphia to consider ways of redressing colonial grievances.
twelve of the thirteen colonies with georgia alone missing sent fty ve well respected men among them samuel adams john adams george washington and patrick henry.
intercolonial frictions were partially melted away by social activity after working hours in fty four days george washington dined at his own lodgings only nine times.
the first continental congress deliberated for seven weeks from september 5 to october 26 1774.
it was not a legislative but a consultative body a convention rather than a congress.
john adams played a stellar role.
eloquently swaying his colleagues to a chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 a view of the town of concord ca.
1775 redcoats here drill on the concord green near where colonial militiamen would soon repel their advance on stores of rebel gunpowder.
revolutionary course he helped defeat by the narrowest of margins a proposal by the moderates for a species of american home rule under british direction.
after prolonged argument the congress drew up several dignied papers.
these included a ringing declaration of rights as well as solemn appeals to other british american colonies to the king and to the british people.
the most signicant action of the congress was the creation of the association.
unlike previous nonimportation agreements the association called for a complete boycott of british goods nonimportation nonexportation and nonconsumption.
yet it is important to note that the delegates were not yet calling for independence.
they sought merely to repeal the offensive legislation and return to the happy days before parliamentary taxation.
if colonial grievances were redressed well and good if not the congress was to meet again in may 1775.
resistance had not yet ripened into open rebellion.
but the fatal drift toward war continued.
parliament rejected the congresss petitions.
in america chickens squawked and tar kettles bubbled as violators of the association were tarred and feathered.
muskets were gathered men began to drill openly and a clash seemed imminent.
in april 1775 the british commander in boston sent a detachment of troops to nearby lexington and concord.
they were to seize stores of colonial gunpowder and also to bag the rebel ringleaders samuel adams and john hancock.
at lexington the colonial minute men refused to disperse rapidly enough and shots were red that killed eight americans and wounded several more.
the affair was more the lexington massacre than a battle.
the redcoats pushed on to concord whence they were forced to retreat by the rough and ready americans whom emerson immortalized by the rude bridge that arched the ood their ag to aprils breeze unfurled here once the embattled farmers stood and red the shot heard round the world.
the bewildered british ghting off murderous re from militiamen crouched behind thick stone walls ralph waldo emerson concord hymn copyright 2010 cengage learning inc all rights reserved.
may not be copied scanned or duplicated in whole or in part.
the military balance sheet nally regained the sanctuary of boston.
licking their wounds they could count about three hundred casualties including some seventy killed.
britain now had a war on its hands.
imperial strength and weakness aroused americans had brashly rebelled against a mighty empire see thinking globally imperial rivalry and colonial revolt pp.
the population odds were about three to one against the rebels some 7 5 million britons to 2 5 million colonists.
the odds in monetary wealth and naval power overwhelmingly favored the mother country.
britain then boasted a professional army of some fty thousand men as compared with the numerous but wretchedly trained american militia.
george iii in addition had the treasury to hire foreign soldiers and some thirty thousand germans so called hessians were ultimately employed.
the british enrolled about fty thousand american loyalists and enlisted the services of many indians who though unreliable fairweather ghters inamed long stretches of the frontier.
one british ofcer boasted that the war would offer no problems that could not be solved by an experienced sheep herder the great conservative political theorist and champion of the american cause edmund burke made a stirring speech in britains house of commons in 1775 pleading in vain for reconciliation with the colonies as long as you have the wisdom to keep the sovereign authority of this country as the sanctuary of liberty.
they will turn their faces towards you.
slavery they can have anywhere freedom they can have from none but you.
this is the commodity of price of which you have the monopoly.
this is the true act of navigation which binds to you the commerce of the colonies and through them secures to you the wealth of the world.
deny them this participation of freedom and you break that sole bond which originally made and must still preserve the unity of the empire.
yet britain was weaker than it seemed at rst glance.
oppressed ireland was a smoking volcano and british troops had to be detached to watch it.
france bitter from its recent defeat was awaiting an opportunity to stab britain in the back.
the london government was confused and inept.
there was no william pitt organizer of victory only the stubborn george iii and his pliant tory prime minister lord north.
many earnest and god fearing britons had no desire whatever to kill their american cousins.
william pitt withdrew a son from the army rather than see him thrust his sword into fellow anglo saxons struggling for liberty.
the eng lish whig factions opposed to lord norths tory wing openly cheered american victories at least at the outset.
aside from trying to embarrass the tories politically many whigs believed that the battle for british freedom was being fought in america.
if george iii triumphed his rule at home might become tyrannical.
this outspoken sympathy in britain though plainly a minority voice greatly encouraged the americans.
if they continued their resistance long enough the whigs might come into power and deal generously with them.
britains army in america had to operate under endless difculties.
the generals were second rate the soldiers though on the whole capable were brutally treated.
there was one extreme case of eight hundred lashes on the bare back for striking an ofcer.
provisions were often scarce rancid and wormy.
on one occasion a supply of biscuits captured some fteen years earlier from the french was softened by dropping cannonballs on them.
other handicaps loomed.
the redcoats had to conquer the americans restoring the pre 1763 status quo would be a victory for the colonists.
britain was operating some 3 000 miles from its home base and distance added greatly to the delays and uncertainties arising from storms and other mishaps.
military orders were issued in london that when received months later would not t the changing situation.
americas geographical expanse was enormous roughly 1 000 by 600 miles.
the united colonies had no urban nerve center like frances paris whose capture would cripple the country as a whole.
british armies took every city of any size yet like a boxer punching a feather pillow they made little more than a dent in the entire country.
the americans wisely traded space for time.
benjamin franklin calculated that during the prolonged campaign in which the redcoats captured bunker hill and killed some 150 patriots about 60 000 american babies were born.
thinking globally imperial rivalry and colonial revolt i n 1765 tax revolts exploded almost simultaneously in both britains and spains new world empires.
in boston the hated stamp act sparked riots and inspired a campaign to boycott british goods.
at virtually the same moment in quito in present day ecuador a two mile high spanish colonial city nearly twice the size of boston surging crowds ransacked the local tax collectors ofce.
among other demands they insisted that pure spaniards leave quito unless they had married into the native creole new world born white or indigenous indian communities.
spanish ofcials restored order by force of arms but antitax agitation continued to smolder every where in spanish america.
there is no american a quito lawyer remarked who does not reject any novelty whatsoever in the management of taxation a sentiment that resonated as strongly in philadelphia as in mexico city.
things soon got worse.
madrids new world imperial authority was shaken to the core in 1781 when another tax revolt erupted in new granada present day colombia.
by that time the british colonials war of independence in north america was in its fth year.
intensifying imperial rivalry fueled events on both the american continents.
until the mid seventeenth century the three great old world powers england france and spain had largely conned their competition to struggles over boundaries and religious afliation on the european continent.
but after the treaty of westphalia in 1648 brought a truce to the wars of religion that had racked europe for decades the thirty years war great power competition began to shift overseas.
the faraway new world imperial outposts of britain spain and france now became pawns in a global struggle for mastery in europe.
the seven years war 1756 1763 ushered in a still more ferocious cycle of imperial conict.
britain succeeded in expelling france from north america but victory brought the burdens of managing vast new territories as well as the prospect of fresh confrontations with native americans threatened by westward expansion.
spain frances erstwhile ally grew increasingly wary of the newly invigorated and ambitious british empire which threatened spanish interests at sea and along the sketchy borderlands that separated the two powers imperial domains.
as the risks and costs of imperial competition soared london and madrid adopted the same strategy pressure the colonies to pay their share.
new taxes and customs duties followed along with more energetic efforts to collect them.
to imperial ofcials like britains prime minister george grenville or madrids visitor general to new spain jos glvez such tupac amaru ii a peruvian national hero tupac amaru ii is memorialized to this day with his portrait on the nations currency.
couple with child by miguel cabera this eighteenthcentury portrait of a mexican family illustrates the common intermarriage of europeans and indians in the spanish new world.
the ethnic complexity of spanish america kept colonists there from uniting against imperial authorities as successfully as their northern neighbors.
reforms seemed not only reasonable but in tune with enlightenment ideas about efcient administration.
to colonial subjects these new policies were an anathema a agrant offense to their fundamental rights as colonial subjects.
but why did revolts against these new imperial policies kindle a full edged war for independence in the british colonies but not in spanish america at least not until na poleons invasion of spain in 1808 hurled the spanish empire into tumult.
the role of rich and powerful allies provides part of the answer.
the north american rebels could count on britains french and spanish enemies to tender nancial as well as military support.
spanish american anticolonial rebels had no such allies in london or paris which saw little prospect of unraveling the spanish empire and were already fully engaged on opposite sides of the american war of independence.
the demographic composition of the two empires furnishes another part of the answer.
spanish america was badly riven by sharp ethnic and racial divisions.
the spanish court had long encouraged the relatively few spaniards who settled in the new world to intermarry with the local inhabitants.
by the eighteenth century the spanish colonies had become a complex tension ridden mosaic of european creole mestizo and indian peoples and cultures.
when in 1780 the self proclaimed incan royal descendant tupac amaru ii rebelled against spanish rule he at rst attracted creoles but they bolted as the movement radicalized and his rebellion was soon cruelly crushed.
to be sure the british north american colonists had their ethnic differences too but many fewer.
they had nurtured a culture of exclusion rejecting intermarriage with indians and blacks and banishing indians to the wilderness.
and they faced no indian threat on the scale of tupac amaru iis uprising.
inherited political traditions also played different roles.
british settlers enjoyed long standing institutions of political representation.
they had brought with them from the mother country devotion to individual rights and the privilege of legal assembly that when revolution came gave their cause the kind of legitimacy that comes from timehonored habits.
it was precisely the violation of those rights and privileges that taxation without representation seemed to threaten.
spanish colonists had representative institutions too but in spains much more autocratic imperial scheme local assemblies lacked the authority autonomy and legitimacy they had come to enjoy in the british domains.
north american colonists asserted their right to self government on the basis of their historic rights as british subjects a claim that was much more difcult to make in the absolutist monarchy of the spanish empire.
chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 american pluses and minuses the revolutionaries were blessed with outstanding leadership.
george washington was a giant among men benjamin franklin was a master among diplomats.
open foreign aid theoretically possible from the start eventually came from france.
numerous european ofcers many of them unemployed and impoverished volunteered their swords for pay.
in a class by himself was a wealthy young french nobleman the marquis de lafayette.
fleeing from boredom loving glory and ultimately liberty the french gamecock was made a major general in the colonial army at age nineteen.
his commission was largely a recognition of his family inuence and political connections but the ser vices of this teenage general in securing further aid from france were invaluable.
other conditions aided the americans.
they were ghting defensively with the odds all things considered favoring the defender.
in agriculture the colonies were mainly self sustaining like a kind of robinson crusoes island.
the americans also enjoyed the moral advantage that came from belief in a just cause.
the historical odds were not impossible.
other peoples had triumphed in the face of greater obstacles greeks against persians swiss against austrians dutch against spaniards.
yet the american rebels were badly orga nized for war.
from the earliest days they had been almost fatally lacking in unity and the new nation lurched forward uncertainly like an uncoordinated centipede.
even the continental congress which directed the con ict was hardly more than a debating society and it grew feebler as the struggle dragged on.
their congress now is quite disjointd gibed an eng lish satirist since gibbits gallows are for them appointed the disorga nized colonists fought almost the entire war before adopting a written constitution the articles of confederation in 1781.
general washingtons 1732 1799 disgust with his countrymen is reected in a diary entry for 1776 chimney corner patriots abound venality corruption prostitution of ofce for selsh ends abuse of trust perversion of funds from a national to a private use and speculations upon the necessities of the times pervade all interests.
gilbert du motier marquis de lafayette 1757 1834 by joseph boze 1790 this youthful french ofcer gave to america not only military service but some 200 000 of his private funds.
he returned to france after the american revolution to play a conspicuous role in the french revolution.
jealousy every where raised its hideous head.
individual states proudly regarding themselves as sovereign resented the attempts of congress to exercise its imsy powers.
sectional jealousy boiled up over the appointment of military leaders some distrustful new eng landers almost preferred british ofcers to americans from other sections.
economic difculties were nearly insuperable.
metallic money had already been heavily drained away.
a cautious continental congress unwilling to raise anew the explosive issue of taxation was forced to print continental paper money in great amounts.
as this currency poured from the presses it depreciated until the expression not worth a continental became current.
one barber contemptuously papered his shop with the near worthless dollars.
the confusion proliferated when the individual states were compelled to issue depreciated paper money of their own.
the rebel army ination of the currency inevitably skyrocketed prices.
families of the soldiers at the ghting front were hard hit and hundreds of anxious husbands and fathers deserted.
debtors easily acquired handfuls of the quasi worthless money and gleefully paid their debts without mercy sometimes with the bayonets of the authorities to back them up.
a thin line of heroes basic military supplies in the colonies were dangerously scanty.
while many families and towns did own rearms widespread militia ser vice meant men needed weapons for training the colonists had long relied heavily on britain for troops armaments and military subsidies during expensive wars against indians france and spain.
the rebels were caught in an unavoidable trap at the very moment that the supply of british funds and war materiel evaporated the cost of home defense mounted.
sufcient stores of gunpowder cannon and other armaments let alone ships to transport them could not be found.
among the reasons for the eventual alliance with france was the need for a reliable source of essential military supplies.
other shortages bedeviled the rebels.
at valley forge pennsylvania shivering american soldiers went without bread for three successive days in the cruel winter of 1777 1778.
in one southern campaign some men fainted for lack of food.
manufactured goods also were generally in short supply in agricultural america and clothing and shoes were appallingly scarce.
the path of the patriot ghting men was often marked by bloody snow.
at frigid valley forge during one anxious period twenty eight hundred men were barefooted or nearly naked.
woolens were desperately needed against the wintry blasts and in general the only real uniform of the colonial army was uniform raggedness.
during a grand parade at valley forge some of the ofcers appeared wrapped in woolen bedcovers.
one rhode island unit was known as the ragged lousy naked regiment american militiamen were numerous but also highly unreliable.
able bodied american males perhaps several hundred thousand of them had received rudimentary training and many of these recruits served for short terms in the rebel armies.
but poorly trained plowboys could not stand up in the open eld against professional british troops advancing with bare bayonets.
many of these undisciplined warriors would in the words of washington y from their own shadows the flutist by brazilla lew this portrait is believed to be that of an african american fer in the revolutionary war.
lew was a veteran of the seven years war who had marched to ticonderoga and served in the army a full seven years as frontline soldier fer and drummer.
in 1775 at the age of thirtytwo he fought at bunker hill as an enlistee in the 27th massachusetts regiment.
a resident of chelmsford massachusetts he was said to have taught all twelve of his children to play musical instruments.
a few thousand regulars perhaps seven or eight thousand at the wars end were nally whipped into shape by stern drillmasters.
notable among them was an orga ni zational genius the salty german baron von steuben.
he spoke no eng lish when he reached america but he soon taught his men that bayonets were not for broiling beefsteaks over open res.
as they gained experience these soldiers of the continental line more than held their own against crack british troops.
blacks also fought and died for the american cause.
although many states initially barred them from militia ser vice by wars end more than ve thousand blacks chapter 7 the road to revolution 1763 1775 enslaved blacks hoped that the revolutionary crisis would make it possible for them to secure their own liberty.
on the eve of the war in south carolina merchant josiah smith jr noted such a rumor among the slaves freedom is their common talk throughout the province and has occasioned impertinent behavior in many of them insomuch that our provincial congress now sitting hath voted the immediate raising of two thousand men horse and food to keep those mistaken creatures in awe.
despite such repressive measures slave uprisings continued to plague the southern colonies through 1775 and 1776 had enlisted in the american armed forces.
the largest contingents came from the northern states with substantial numbers of free blacks.
blacks fought at trenton brandywine saratoga and other important battles.
some including prince whipple later immortalized in emanuel leutzes famous painting washington crossing the delaware see p 158 became military heroes.
others served as cooks guides spies drivers and road builders.
african americans also served on the british side.
in november 1775 lord dunmore royal governor of virginia issued a proclamation promising freedom for any enslaved black in virginia who joined the british army.
news of dunmores decree traveled swiftly.
virginia and maryland tightened slave patrols but within one month three hundred slaves had joined what came to be called lord dunmores ethiopian regiment in time thousands of blacks ed plantations for british promises of emancipation.
when one of james madisons slaves was caught trying to escape to the british lines madison refused to punish him for coveting that liberty that white americans proclaimed the right worthy pursuit of every human being at wars end the british kept their word to some at least and evacuated as many as fourteen thousand black loyalists to nova scotia jamaica and eng land.
morale in the revolutionary army was badly undermined by american proteers.
putting prots before patriotism they sold to the british because the invader could pay in gold.
speculators forced prices sky high and some bostonians made prots of 50 to 200 percent on army garb while the american army was freezing at valley forge.
washington never had as many as twenty thousand effective troops in one place at one time despite bounties of land and other inducements.
yet if the rebels had thrown themselves into the struggle with zeal they could easily have raised many times that number.
the brutal truth is that only a select minority of the american colonists attached themselves to the cause of independence with a spirit of seless devotion.
these were the dedicated souls who bore the burden of battle and the risks of defeat.
seldom have so few done so much for so many.
chronology first navigation laws to control colonial commerce board of trade assumes governance of colonies british troops occupy boston boston massacre all townshend acts except tea tax repealed seven years war french and indian war ends committees of correspondence formed sugar act quartering act stamp act stamp act congress british east india company granted tea monopoly governor hutchinsons actions provoke boston tea party intolerable acts quebec act first continental congress the association boycotts british goods battles of lexington and concord declaratory act townshend acts new york legislature suspended by parliament to learn more key terms republicanism 126 radical whigs 127 mercantilism 127 sugar act 129 quartering act 129 stamp tax 129 admiralty courts 129 stamp act congress 130 nonimportation agreements 131 sons of liberty 131 daughters of liberty 131 declaratory act 132 people to know townshend acts 132 boston massacre 133 committees of correspondence 134 boston tea party 135 intolerable acts 136 quebec act 136 first continental congress 137 the association 138 lexington and concord battles of 138 valley forge 140 john hancock george grenville charles champagne charley townshend crispus attucks george iii lord north samuel adams thomas hutchinson marquis de lafayette baron von steuben lord dunmore to learn more r b bernstein thomas jefferson 2003 timothy h breen the marketplace of revolution how consumer politics shaped american independence 2004 david hackett fischer paul reveres ride 1994 sylvia r frey water from the rock black resistance in a revolutionary age 1991 pauline maier from resistance to revolution colonial radicals and the development of american opposition to britain 1765 1776 1972 david mccullough john adams 2001 robert middlekauff the glorious cause the american revolution 1763 1789 1982 edmund s morgan and helen m morgan the stamp act crisis 1953 joseph c morton the american revolution 2003 ray raphael a peoples history of the american revolution 2001 richard ryerson the revolution is now begun the radical committees of philadelphia 1765 1776 1978 walter stahr john jay founding father 2005 alfred f young the shoemaker and the tea party 1999 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 these are the times that try mens souls.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the ser vice of their country but he that stands it now deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.
thomas paine december 1776 b loodshed at lexington and concord in april of 1775 was a clarion call to arms.
about twenty thousand musket bearing minute men swarmed around boston there to coop up the outnumbered british.
the second continental congress met in philadelphia the next month on may 10 1775 and this time the full slate of thirteen colonies was represented.
the conser vative element in congress was still strong despite the shooting in massachusetts.
there was still no wellde ned sentiment for independence merely a desire to continue ghting in the hope that the king and parliament would consent to a redress of grievances.
congress hopefully drafted new appeals to the british people and king appeals that were spurned.
anticipating a possible rebuff the delegates also adopted mea sures to raise money and to create an army and a navy.
the british and the americans now teetered on the brink of all out warfare.
congress drafts george washington perhaps the most important single action of the congress was to select george washington one of its members already in an ofcers uniform to head the hastily improvised army besieging boston.
this choice was made with considerable misgivings.
the tall powerfully built dignied virginia planter then forty three had never risen above the rank of a colonel in the militia.
his largest command had numbered only twelve hundred men and that had been some twenty years earlier.
falling short of true military genius washington would actually lose more pitched battles than he won.
but the distinguished virginian was gifted with outstanding powers of leadership and immense strength of character.
he radiated patience courage self discipline this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website early battles and a sense of justice.
he was a great moral force rather than a great military mind a symbol and a rallying point.
people instinctively trusted him they sensed that when he put himself at the head of a cause he was prepared if necessary to go down with the ship.
he insisted on serving without pay though he kept a careful expense account amounting to more than 100 000.
later he sternly reprimanded his steward at mount vernon for providing the enemy under duress with supplies.
he would have preferred instead to see the enemy put the torch to his mansion.
the continental congress though dimly perceiving washingtons qualities of leadership chose more wisely than it knew.
his selection in truth was largely political.
americans in other sections already jealous were beginning to distrust the large new eng land army being collected around boston.
prudence suggested a commander from virginia the largest and most populous of the colonies.
as a man of wealth both by inheritance and by marriage washington could not be accused of being a fortune seeker.
as an aristocrat he could be counted on by his peers to check the excesses of the masses bunker hill and hessian hirelings the clash of arms continued on a strangely contradictory basis.
on the one hand the americans were emphatically af rming their loyalty to the king and earnestly voicing their desire to patch up difculties.
on the other hand they were raising armies and shooting down his majestys soldiers.
this curious war of inconsistency was fought for fourteen long months from april 1775 to july 1776 before the fateful plunge into independence was taken.
gradually the tempo of warfare increased.
in may 1775 a tiny american force under ethan allen and benedict arnold surprised and captured the british garrisons at ticonderoga and crown point on the scenic lakes of upper new york.
a priceless store of gunpowder and artillery for the siege of boston was thus secured.
in june 1775 the colonists seized a hill now known as bunker hill actually breeds hill from which they menaced the enemy in boston.
the british instead of cutting off the retreat of their foes by anking them blundered bloodily when they launched a frontal attack with three thousand men.
sharpshooting americans numbering fteen hundred and strongly entrenched mowed down the advancing redcoats with frightful washington at verplancks point new york 1782 reviewing the french troops after the victory at yorktown by john trumbull 1790 this noted american artist accentuated washingtons already imposing height six feet two inches by showing him towering over his horse.
washington so appreciated this portrait of himself that he hung it in the dining room of his home at mount vernon virginia.
but the colonists scanty store of gunpowder nally gave out and they were forced to abandon the hill in disorder.
with two more such victories remarked the french foreign minister the british would have no army left in america.
even at this late date in july 1775 the continental congress adopted the olive branch petition professing american loyalty to the crown and begging the king to prevent further hostilities.
but following bunker hill king george iii slammed the door on all hope of reconciliation.
in august 1775 he formally proclaimed the colonies in rebellion the skirmishes were now outand out treason a hanging crime.
the next month he widened the chasm when he sealed arrangements for chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 battle of bunker hill june 17 1775 this british engraving conveys the vulnerability of the british regulars to attacks by the american militiamen.
although a defeat for the colonists the battle quickly proved a moral victory for the patriots.
outnumbered and outgunned they held their own against the british and suffered many fewer casualties.
hiring thousands of german troops to help crush his rebellious subjects.
six german princes involved in the transaction needed the money one reputedly had seventy four children george iii needed the men.
because most of these soldiers for hire came from the german principality of hesse the americans called all the european mercenaries hessians.
news of the hessian deal shocked the colonists.
the quarrel they felt was within the family.
why bring in outside mercenaries especially foreigners who had an exaggerated reputation for butchery.
hessian hirelings proved to be good soldiers in a mechanical sense but many of them were more interested in booty than in duty.
for good reason they were dubbed hessian ies seduced by american promises of land hundreds of them nally deserted and remained in america to become respected citizens.
the abortive conquest of canada the unsheathed sword continued to take its toll.
in october 1775 on the eve of a cruel winter the british burned falmouth portland maine.
in that same autumn the rebels daringly undertook a two pronged invasion of canada.
american leaders believed erroneously that the conquered french were explosively restive under the british yoke.
a successful assault on canada would add a fourteenth colony while depriving britain of a valuable base for striking at the colonies in revolt.
but this large scale attack involving some two thousand american troops contradicted the claim of the colonists that they were merely ghting defensively for a redress of grievances.
invasion northward was undisguised offensive warfare.
this bold stroke for canada narrowly missed success see map 8 1.
one invading column under the irish born general richard montgomery formerly of the british army pushed up the lake champlain route and captured montral.
he was joined at qubec by the bedraggled army of general benedict arnold whose men had been reduced to eating dogs and shoe leather during their grueling march through the maine woods.
an assault on qubec launched on the last day of 1775 was beaten off.
the able montgomery was killed the dashing arnold was wounded in one leg.
scattered remnants under his command retreated up the st lawrence river reversing the way montgomery had come.
french canadian leaders who had been generously treated by the british in the quebec act of 1774 showed no real desire to welcome the plundering anti catholic invaders.
bitter ghting persisted in the colonies though most americans continued to disclaim a desire for independence.
in january 1776 the british set re to the toward independence 200 km.
british victory st l l e r ge fort oswego bu mo l champlain arnolds naval battle oct 11 1776 n h manchester albany mass.
lexington april 19 1775 hudson r pennsylvania falmouth saratoga burgoyne surrenders oct 17 1777.
concord april 19 1775 new york conn fort washington nov 16 1776 washington dec 1776 cornwallis dec 1776 princeton jan 3 1777 trenton dec 26 1776 germantown oct 4 1777 newburyport bunker hill june 17 1775 boston siege 1775 1776 r i washingtons retreat 1776 long island aug 27 1776 40n valley forge brandywine sept 11 1777 monmouth court house june 28 1778 philadelphia wilmington md.
ph ia n j l ad el virginia at l a n t i c o c e a n n we to phi del.
70w ho map 8 1 revolution in the north 1775 1776 benedict arnolds troops were described as pretty young men when they sailed from massachusetts.
they were considerably less pretty on their arrival in qubec after eight weeks of struggling through wet and frigid forests often without food.
no one can imagine one of them wrote the sweetness of a roasted shot pouch ammunition bag to the famished appetite maine mass.
er oriskany aug 6 1777 fort stanwix aug 23 1777 montral crown point fort ticonderoga l george lake ontario r aw y1 nn st american victory nc er co fort re g om british forces nt e british north america canada yn ld american forces go no r qubec dec 1776 ar icut ect chesapeake bay interactive map virginia town of norfolk.
in march they were nally forced to evacuate boston taking with them the leading friends of the king.
evacuation day is still celebrated annually in boston.
in the south the rebellious colonists won two victories in 1776 one in february against some fteen hundred loyalists at moores creek bridge in north carolina and the other in june against an invading british eet at charleston harbor.
thomas paine preaches common sense why did americans continue to deny any intention of independence.
loyalty to the empire was deeply ingrained many americans continued to consider themselves part of a transatlantic community in which the chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 mother country of britain played a leading role colonial unity was poor and open rebellion was dangerous especially against a formidable britain.
irish rebels of that day were customarily hanged drawn and quartered.
american rebels might have fared no better.
as late as january 1776 ve months before independence was declared the kings health was being toasted by the ofcers of washingtons mess near boston.
god save the king had not yet been replaced by god save the congress gradually the americans were shocked into recognizing the necessity of separating from the crown.
their eyes were jolted open by harsh british acts like the burning of falmouth and norfolk and especially by the hiring of the hessians.
then in 1776 came the publication of common sense one of the most inuential pamphlets ever written.
its author was the radical thomas paine once an impoverished corset makers apprentice who had come over from britain a year earlier.
he began his incendiary tract with a treatise on the nature of government and eloquently anticipated thomas jeffersons declaration that the only lawful states were those that derive their just powers from the consent of the governed as for the king whom the americans professed to revere he was nothing but the royal brute of great britain common sense became a whirlwind best seller.
within a few months the astonishing total of 120 000 copies were sold.
in common sense thomas paine 1737 1809 argued for the superiority of a republic over a monarchy the nearer any government approaches to a republic the less business there is for a king.
it is somewhat difcult to nd a proper name for the government of england.
sir william meredith calls it a republic but in its present state it is unworthy of the name because the corrupt inuence of the crown by having all the places in its disposal hath so effectively swallowed up the power and eaten out the virtue of the house of commons the republican part of the constitution that the government of england is nearly as monarchical as that of france or spain.
thomas paine by auguste millire paine atly branded the shilly shallying of the colonists as contrary to common sense nowhere in the physical universe did the smaller heavenly body control the larger one.
so why should the tiny island of britain control the vast continent of america.
paines pen went a long way toward convincing the american colonists that their true cause was independence rather than reconciliation with britain not least because without independence they could not hope for foreign assistance.
paine could thus be said to have drafted the foundational document not only of american independence but of american foreign policy as well.
paine and the idea of republicanism paines passionate protest was as compelling as it was eloquent and radical even doubly radical.
it called not simply for independence but for the creation of a new kind of political society a republic where power owed from the people themselves not from a corrupt and jefferson s declaration despotic monarch.
in language laced with biblical imagery familiar to common folk he argued that all government ofcials governors senators and judges not just representatives in a house of commons should derive their authority from popular consent.
paine was hardly the rst person to champion a republican form of government.
political philosophers had advanced the idea since the days of classical greece and rome.
revived in the renaissance and in seventeenth century eng land republican ideals had uneasily survived within the british mixed government with its delicate balance of king nobility and commons.
republicanism particularly appealed to british politicians critical of excessive power in the hands of the king and his advisers.
their writings found a responsive audience among the american colonists who interpreted the vengeful royal acts of the previous decade as part of a monarchical conspiracy to strip them of their liberties as british subjects.
paines radical prescription for the colonies to reject monarchy and empire and embrace an independent republic fell on receptive ears.
the colonists experience with governance had prepared them well for paines summons to create a republic.
many settlers particularly new eng landers had practiced a kind of republicanism in their democratic town meetings and annual elections while the popularly elected committees of correspondence during 1774 and 1775 had demonstrated the feasibility of republican government.
the absence of a hereditary aristocracy and the relative equality of condition enjoyed by landowning farmers meshed well with the republican repudiation of a xed hierarchy of power.
most americans considered citizen virtue fundamental to any successful republican government.
because political power no longer rested with the central all powerful authority of the king individuals in a republic needed to sacrice their personal self interest to the public good.
the collective good of the people the french philosophe abb raynal 1713 1796 wrote in 1770 if any fortunate revolution should take place in the world it will begin in america.
it will become the asylum of our people who have been oppressed by political establishments or driven away by war.
mattered more than the private rights and interests of individuals.
paine inspired his contemporaries to view america as fertile ground for the cultivation of such civic virtue.
yet not all patriots agreed with paines ultrademocratic approach to republicanism.
some favored a republic ruled by a natural aristocracy of talent.
republicanism for them meant an end to hereditary aristocracy but not an end to all social hierarchy.
these more conser vative republicans feared that the fervor for liberty would overwhelm the stability of the social order.
they watched with trepidation as the lower orders of society poorer farmers tenants and laboring classes in towns and cities seemed to embrace a kind of runaway republicanism that amounted to radical leveling the contest to de ne the nature of american republicanism would noisily continue for at least the next hundred years.
jeffersons explanation of independence members of the philadelphia congress instructed by their respective colonies gradually edged toward a clean break.
on june 7 1776 ery richard henry lee of virginia moved that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states after considerable debate the motion was adopted nearly a month later on july 2 1776.
the passing of lees resolution was the formal declaration of independence by the american colonies and technically this was all that was needed to cut the british tie.
john adams wrote condently that ever thereafter july 2 would be celebrated annually with reworks.
but something more was required.
an epochal rupture of this kind called for some formal explanation.
an inspirational appeal was also needed to enlist other british colonies in the americas to invite assistance from foreign nations and to rally resistance at home.
shortly after lee made his memorable motion on june 7 congress appointed a committee to prepare a more formal statement of separation.
the task of drafting it fell to thomas jefferson a tall freckled sandyhaired virginia lawyer of thirty three.
despite his youth he was already recognized as a brilliant writer and he measured up splendidly to the awesome assignment.
after some debate and amendment the declaration of independence was formally approved by the congress on july 4 1776.
it might better have been chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 the american signers of the declaration of independence had reason to fear for their necks.
in 1802 twenty six years later george iii 1738 1820 approved this death sentence for seven irish rebels.
you are to be hanged by the neck but not until you are dead for while you are still living your bodies are to be taken down your bowels torn out and burned before your faces your heads then cut off and your bodies divided each into four quarters and your heads and quarters to be then at the kings disposal and may the almighty god have mercy on your souls.
george iii 1738 1820 studio of alan ramsay ca.
1767 americas last king he was a good man unlike some of his scandal tainted brothers and sons but a bad king.
doggedly determined to regain arbitrary power for the crown he antagonized and then lost the thirteen american colonies.
during much of his sixty year reign he seemed to be insane but recently medical science has found that he was suffering from a rare metabolic and hereditary disease called porphyria.
called the explanation of independence or as one contemporary described it mr.
jeffersons advertisement of mr lees resolution jeffersons pronouncement couched in a lofty style was magnicent.
he gave his appeal universality by invoking the natural rights of humankind not just british rights.
he argued persuasively that because the king had outed these rights the colonists were justied in cutting their connection.
he then set forth a long list of the presumably tyrannous misdeeds of george iii.
the overdrawn bill of indictment included imposing taxes without consent dispensing with trial by jury abolishing valued laws establishing a military dictatorship maintaining standing armies in peacetime cutting off trade burning towns hiring mercenaries and inciting hostility among the indians.
jeffersons withering blast was admittedly onesided.
he acted in effect as a prosecuting attorney and he took certain liberties with historical truth.
he was not writing history he was making it through what has been called the worlds greatest editorial he owned many slaves and his af rmation that all men are created equal was to haunt him and his fellow citizens for generations.
the formal declaration of independence cleared the air as a thundershower does on a muggy day.
as paine had predicted and as events were to prove foreign assistance could now be solicited with greater hope of success.
those patriots who deed the king were now rebels not loving subjects shooting their way into reconciliation.
they must all hang together franklin is said to have grimly remarked or they would all hang separately.
or in the eloquent language of the great declaration we mutually pledge to each other our lives our fortunes and our sacred honor jeffersons deant declaration of independence had a universal impact unmatched by any other american document.
this shout heard round the world has been a source of inspiration to countless revolutionary movements against arbitrary authority.
lafayette hung a copy on a wall in his home leaving beside it room for a future french declaration of the rights of man a declaration that was ofcially born thirteen years later.
for an annotated text of the declaration of independence see the appendix.
a revolution for women.
abigail adams chides her husband 1776 n the midst of the revolutionary fervor of 1776 at least one woman abigail adams wife of noted massachusetts patriot and future president john adams raised her voice on behalf of women.
yet she apparently raised it only in private in this personal letter to her husband.
private documents like the correspondence and diaries of individuals both prominent and ordinary offer invaluable sources for the historian seeking to discover sentiments opinions and perspectives that are often difcult to discern in the ofcial public record.
what might it suggest about the historical circumstances of the 1770s that abigail adams con ned her claim for womens equality to this condential exchange with her spouse.
what might have inspired the arguments she employed.
despite her privileged position and persuasive power and despite her threat to foment a rebellion abigail adamss plea went largely unheeded in the revolutionary era as did comparable pleadings to extend the revolutionary principle of equality to blacks.
what might have accounted for this limited application of the ideas of liberty and equality in the midst of a supposedly democratic revolution.
i makers of america the loyalists the great africanamerican migration i n late 1776 catherine van cortlandt wrote to her husband a new jersey merchant ghting in a loyalist brigade about the patriot troops who had quartered themselves in her house.
they were the most disorderly of species she complained and their ofcers were from the dregs of the people like the van cortlandts many loyalists thought of themselves as the better sort of people they viewed their adversaries as lawless mobs and brutes conservative wealthy and well educated loyalists of this breed thought a break with britain would invite anarchy.
loyalism made sense to them too for practical tough times for loyalists under the shadow of the tar bucket and bag of feathers shown in the upper right background these virginia loyalists were roughly handled by a club wielding crowd of patriots.
viewing colonial militias as no match for his majestys army loyalist pamphleteer daniel leonard warned his patriot enemies in 1775 that nothing short of a miracle could gain you one battle but loyalism was hardly con ned to the well todo.
it also appealed to many people of modest means who identied strongly with britain or who had reason to fear a patriot victory.
thousands of british veterans of the seven years war for example had settled in the colonies after 1763.
many of them took up farming on two hundred acre land grants in new york.
they were loath to turn their backs on the crown.
so too were recent immigrants from non eng lish regions of the british isles especially from scotland and ireland who had settled in georgia or the backcountry of north and south carolina.
many of these newcomers resenting the plantation elite who ran these colonies lled the ranks of tory brigades such as the volunteers of ireland and the north carolina highlanders orga nized by the british army to galvanize loyalist support.
other ethnic minorities found their own reasons to support the british.
some members of dutch german and french religious sects believed that religious tolerance would be greater under the british than under the americans whose prejudices they had already encountered.
above all thousands of african americans joined loyalist ranks in the hope that ser vice to the british might offer an escape from bondage.
british ofcials encouraged that belief.
throughout the war and in every colony some african americans ed to british lines where they served as soldiers servants laborers and spies.
many of them joined black regiments that specialized in making small sorties against patriot militias.
in monmouth new jersey the black loyalist colonel tye and his band of raiders became legendary for capturing patriots and their supplies.
as the war drew to an end in 1783 the fate of black loyalists varied enormously.
many thousands who came to loyalism as fugitive slaves managed to nd a way to freedom most notably the large group who won british passage from the port of new york to nova scotia.
other african american loyalists suffered betrayal.
british general lord charles cornwallis abandoned over four thousand former slaves in virginia and many black loyalists who boarded ships from loyalists through british eyes this british cartoon depicts the loyalists as doubly victimized by americans caricatured as savage indians and by the british prime minister the earl of shelburne for offering little protection to britains defenders.
british controlled ports expecting to embark for freedom instead found themselves sold back into slavery in the west indies.
white loyalists faced no threat of enslavement but they did suffer travails beyond mere disgrace arrest exile conscation of property and loss of legal rights.
faced with such retribution some eighty thousand loyalists ed abroad mostly to britain and the maritime provinces of canada where they became known as the united empire loyalists.
some settled contentedly as exiles but many especially those who went to britain where they had difculty becoming accepted lived diminished and lonely lives cut off as loyalist thomas danforth put it from every hope of importance in life.
and in a station much inferior to that of a menial servant but most loyalists remained in america where they faced the special burdens of reestablishing themselves in a society that viewed them as traitors.
some succeeded remarkably despite the odds such as hugh gaine a printer in new york city who eventually reopened a business and even won contracts from the new government.
ironically this former loyalist soldier published the new national army regulations authored by the revolutionary hero baron von steuben.
like many former loyalists gaine reintegrated himself into public life by siding with the federalist call for a strong central government and powerful executive.
when new york ratied the constitution in 1788 gaine rode the oat at the head of the citys celebration parade.
he had like many other former loyalists become an american.
chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 patriots and loyalists the war of independence strictly speaking was a war within a war.
colonials loyal to the king loyalists fought the american rebels patriots while the rebels also fought the british redcoats see makers of america the loyalists pp.
loyalists were derisively called tories after the dominant political factions in britain whereas patriots were called whigs after the opposition factions in britain.
a popular de nition of a tory among the patriots betrayed bitterness a tory is a thing whose head is in eng land and its body in america and its neck ought to be stretched like many revolutions the american revolution was a minority movement.
many colonists were apathetic or neutral including the byrds of virginia who sat on the fence.
the opposing forces contended not only against each other but also for the allegiance and support of the civilian population.
in this struggle for the hearts and minds of the people the british proved fatally inept and the patriot militias played a crucial role.
the british military proved able to control only those areas where it could maintain a massive military presence.
elsewhere as soon as the redcoats had marched on the rebel militiamen appeared and took up the task of political education sometimes by coercive means.
often lacking bayonets but always loaded with political zeal the ragtag militia units served as remarkably effective agents of revolutionary ideas.
they convinced many colonists even those indifferent to independence that the british army was an unreliable friend and that they had better throw in their lot with the patriot cause.
they also mercilessly harassed small british detachments and occupation forces.
one british ofcer ruefully observed that the americans would be less dangerous if they had a regular army loyalists numbering perhaps 16 percent of the american people remained true to their king.
families often split over the issue of independence benjamin franklin supported the patriot side whereas his handsome illegitimate son william franklin the last royal governor of new jersey upheld the loyalist cause.
the loyalists were tragic gures.
for generations the british in the new world had been taught delity to the crown.
loyalty is ordinarily regarded as a major virtue loyalty to ones family ones friends ones country.
if the king had triumphed as he seemed likely to do the loyalists would have been acclaimed patriots and defeated rebels like washington would have been disgraced severely punished and probably forgotten.
many people of education and wealth of culture and caution remained loyal.
these wary souls were satised with their lot and believed that any violent change would only be for the worse.
loyalists were also more numerous among the older generation.
young people make revolutions and from the outset energetic purposeful and militant young people surged forward gures like the sleeplessly scheming samuel adams and the impassioned patrick henry.
his aming outcry before the virginia assembly give me liberty or give me death still quickens patriotic pulses.
loyalists also included the kings ofcers and other beneciaries of the crown people who knew which side their daily bread came from.
the same was generally true of the anglican clergy and a large portion of their congregations all of whom had long been taught submission to the king.
usually the loyalists were most numerous where the anglican church was strongest.
a notable exception was virginia where the debt burdened anglican aristocrats ocked into the rebel camp.
the kings followers were well entrenched in aristocratic new york city and charleston and also in quaker pennsylvania and new jersey where general washington felt that he was ghting in the enemys country while his men were starving at valley forge nearby pennsylvania farmers were selling their produce to the british for the kings gold.
loyalists were least numerous in new eng land where self government was especially strong and mercantilism was especially weak.
rebels were the most numerous where presbyterianism and congregationalism ourished notably in new eng land.
invading british armies vented their contempt and anger by using yankee churches for pigsties.
the loyalist exodus before the declaration of independence in 1776 persecution of the loyalists was relatively mild.
yet they were subjected to some brutality including tarring and feathering and riding astride fence rails.
after the declaration of independence which sharply separated loyalists from patriots harsher methods prevailed.
the rebels naturally desired a united front.
putting loyalty to the colonies rst they regarded their opponents not themselves as traitors.
loyalists were roughly handled hundreds were imprisoned and a few noncombatants were hanged.
but there was no wholesale reign of terror comparable to washington in retreat new york patriots pull down the statue of king george iii erected after the repeal of the stamp act in 1766 this statue was melted down by the revolutionaries into bullets to be used against the kings troops.
that which later bloodied both france and russia during their revolutions.
for one thing the colonists reected anglo saxon regard for order for another the leading loyalists were prudent enough to ee to the british lines.
about eighty thousand loyal supporters of george iii were driven out or ed but several hundred thousand or so of the mild loyalists were permitted to stay.
the estates of many of the fugitives were conscated and sold a relatively painless way to help nance the war.
conscation often worked great hardship as for example when two aristocratic women were forced to live in their former chicken house for leaning toryward.
some fty thousand loyalist volunteers at one time or another bore arms for the british.
they also helped the kings cause by serving as spies by inciting the indians and by keeping patriot soldiers at home to protect their families.
ardent loyalists had their hearts in their cause and a major blunder of the haughty british was not to make full use of them in the ghting.
general washington at bay with boston evacuated in march 1776 the british concentrated on new york as a base of operations.
here was a splendid seaport centrally located where the king could count on cooperation from the numerous loyalists.
an awe inspiring british eet appeared off new york in july 1776.
it consisted of some ve hundred ships and thirty ve thousand men the largest armed force to be seen in america until the civil war.
general washington dangerously outnumbered could muster only eighteen thousand ill trained troops with which to meet the crack army of the invader.
disaster befell the americans in the summer and fall of 1776.
outgeneraled and outmaneuvered they were routed at the battle of long island where panic seized the raw recruits.
by the narrowest of margins and thanks to a favoring wind and fog washington escaped to manhattan island.
retreating northward he crossed the hudson river to new jersey and nally reached the delaware river with the british close at his heels.
tauntingly enemy buglers sounded the foxhunting call so familiar to virginians of washingtons day.
the patriot cause was at low ebb when the rebel remnants ed across the river after collecting all available boats to forestall pursuit.
the wonder is that washingtons adversary general william howe did not speedily crush the demoralized american forces.
but he was no military genius and he well remembered the horrible slaughter at bunker hill where he had commanded.
the country was rough supplies were slow in coming and as a professional soldier howe did not relish the rigors of winter campaigning.
he evidently found more agreeable the bedtime company of his mistress the wife of one of his subordinates a scandal with which american satirists had a good deal of ribald fun.
chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 washington crossing the delaware by emanuel gottlieb leutze 1851 on christmas day 1776 george washington set out from pennsylvania with twenty four hundred men to surprise the british forces chiey hessians in their quarters across the river in new jersey.
the subsequent british defeat proved to be a turning point in the revolution as it checked the british advance toward philadelphia and restored american morale.
seventy ve years later leutze a german american immigrant who had returned to germany mythologized the heroic campaign in this painting.
imbued with the liberal democratic principles of the american revolution leutze intended his painting to inspire europeans in their revolutions of 1848.
to that end he ignored the fact that the stars and stripes held by lieutenant james monroe was not adopted until 1777 that washington could not possibly have stood so long on one leg that the colonists crossed the delaware at night not during the day and that no african american would have been present.
what leutze did capture was the importance of ordinary men in the revolutionary struggle and the tremendous urgency they felt at this particular moment in 1776 when victory seemed so elusive.
washington who was now almost counted out stealthily recrossed the ice clogged delaware river.
at trenton on december 26 1776 he surprised and captured a thousand hessians who were sleeping off the effects of their christmas celebration.
a week later leaving his camp res burning as a ruse he slipped away and inicted a sharp defeat on a smaller british detachment at princeton.
this brilliant new jersey campaign crowned by these two lifesaving victories revealed old fox washington at his military best.
burgoynes blundering invasion london ofcials adopted an intricate scheme for capturing the vital hudson river valley in 1777.
if successful the british would sever new eng land from the rest of the states and paralyze the american cause.
the main invading force under an actor playwright soldier general john gentleman johnny burgoyne would bagging burgoyne in this sermon published in the pennsylvania gazette on april 18 1778 a minister decried the brutality of the british army the waste and ravage produced by this unhappy war are every where felt.
whereever our foes pervade ruin and devastation follow after them or rather they march in their front and on their right and on their left and in their rear they rage without controul.
no house is sacred no person secure.
age or sex from blooming youth to decrepit age they regard or spare not.
and in the eld how many of our countrymen and friends have fallen.
push down the lake champlain route from canada.
general howes troops in new york if needed could advance up the hudson river to meet burgoyne near albany.
a third and much smaller british force commanded by colonel barry st leger would come in from the west by way of lake ontario and the mohawk valley.
british planners did not reckon with general benedict arnold.
after his repulse at qubec in 1775 he had retreated slowly along the st lawrence river back to the lake champlain area by heroic efforts keeping an army in the eld.
the british had pursued his tattered force to lake champlain in 1776.
but they could not move farther south until they had won control of the lake which in the absence of roads was indispensable for carrying their supplies.
while the british stopped to construct a sizable eet the tireless arnold assembled and tted out every oatable vessel.
his tiny otilla was nally destroyed after desperate ghting but time if not the battle had been won.
winter was descending and the british were forced to retire to canada.
general burgoyne had to start anew from this base the following year.
if arnold had not contributed his daring and skill the british invaders of 1776 almost certainly would have recaptured fort ticonderoga.
if burgoyne had started from this springboard in 1777 instead of from montral he almost certainly would have succeeded in his venture.
at last the apparently futile american invasion of canada in 1775 was beginning to pay rich dividends.
revolutionary standard of the light horse of the city of philadelphia by john folwell and james claypoole 1775 silk ags like this were used to identify military units.
in an exercise known as trooping the colors such ags were regularly paraded before the troops so that soldiers could recognize their own units in the confusion of battle.
general burgoyne began his fateful invasion with seven thousand regular troops.
he was encumbered by a heavy baggage train and a considerable number of women many of whom were wives of his ofcers.
progress was painfully slow for sweaty axmen had to chop a path through the forest while american militiamen began to gather like hornets on burgoynes anks.
general howe meanwhile was causing astonished eyebrows to rise.
at a time when it seemed obvious that he should be starting up the hudson river from new york to join his slowly advancing colleague he deliberately embarked with the main british army for an attack on philadelphia the rebel capital.
as scholars now know he wanted to force a general engagement with washingtons army destroy it and leave the path wideopen for burgoynes thrust.
howe apparently assumed that he had ample time to assist burgoyne directly should he be needed.
general washington keeping a wary eye on the british in new york hastily transferred his army to the vicinity of philadelphia.
there late in 1777 he was defeated in two pitched battles at brandywine creek and chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 germantown.
pleasure loving general howe then settled down comfortably in the lively capital leaving burgoyne to ounder through the wilds of upper new york.
benjamin franklin recently sent to paris as an envoy truthfully jested that howe had not captured philadelphia but that philadelphia had captured howe.
washington nally retired to winter quarters at valley forge a strong hilly position some twenty miles northwest of philadelphia.
there his frostbitten and hungry men were short of about every thing except misery.
this rabble was nevertheless whipped into a professional army by the recently arrived prussian drillmaster the profane but patient baron von steuben.
burgoyne meanwhile had begun to bog down north of albany while a host of american militiamen scenting the kill swarmed about him.
in a series of sharp engagements in which general arnold was again shot in the leg at qubec the british army was trapped.
meanwhile the americans had driven back st legers force at oriskany.
unable to advance or retreat burgoyne was forced to surrender his entire command at saratoga on october 17 1777 to the american general horatio gates.
saratoga ranks high among the decisive battles of both american and world history.
the victory immensely revived the faltering colonial cause.
even more important it made possible the urgently needed foreign aid from france which in turn helped ensure american independence.
revolution in diplomacy.
france thirsting for revenge against britain was eager to iname the quarrel that had broken out in america.
stripped of its north american colonies britain would presumably cease to be a front rank power.
france might then regain its former position and prestige the loss of which in the recent seven years war rankled deeply.
for their part the american revolutionaries badly needed help in the struggle to throw off the british yoke.
the stage seemed set for the embattled new nation to make its diplomatic debut by sealing an alliance with france against the common british foe.
yet just as they stood for revolutionary political ideas at home the rebellious americans also harbored revolutionary ideas about international affairs.
they wanted an end to colonialism and mercantilism.
they strongly supported free trade and freedom of the seas.
they hoped to substitute the rule of law for the ancient after concluding the alliance france sent a minister to america to the delight of one patriot journalist who would have thought that the american colonies imperfectly known in europe a few years ago and claimed by every pettifogging lawyer in the house of commons every cobbler in the beer houses of london as a part of their property should to day receive an ambassador from the most powerful monarchy in europe.
reliance on raw power to arbitrate the affairs of nations.
when the new republics great seal proclaimed a new order for the ages novus ordo seculorum in latin the sentiment was meant to apply to international as well as domestic affairs.
the continental congress in the summer of 1776 had accordingly drafted a model treaty to guide the american commissioners it was about to dispatch to the french court.
one of the treatys chief authors john adams described its basic principles 1.
no political connection.
no military connection.
only a commercial connection for a nascent nation struggling to secure its very existence these were remarkably self denying restrictions.
yet they represented an emerging school of thought popular among enlightened gures in both europe and america that deemed history to have reached a momentous turning point when military con ict would be abandoned and the bonds of mutual commercial interest would guarantee peaceful relations among states.
many critics then and later have derided this dream of an imminent golden age as hopelessly naive and impractically utopian yet it infused an element of idealism into american attitudes toward international affairs that has proved stubbornly persistent.
when wily old benjamin franklin arrived in paris to negotiate the treaty with france he was determined that his very appearance should herald the diplomatic revolution the americans hoped to achieve.
in his clothing and demeanor he affected a persona that deliberately violated every norm of diplomatic behavior.
instead of the customary ceremonial sword he toted only a plain white walking stick.
forsaking ermined robes and fancy wigs he sported homespun garments and a simple cap of marten fur.
figure me he wrote the french alliance benjamin franklin in his fabled cap he left school at age ten and became a wealthy businessman a journalist an inventor a scientist a legislator and preeminently a statesman diplomat.
he was sent to france in 1776 as the american envoy at age seventy and he remained there until 1785 negotiating the alliance with the french and helping to negotiate the treaty of peace.
his fame had preceded him and when he discarded his wig for the fur cap of a simple american agriculturist he took french society by storm.
french aristocratic women with whom he was a great favorite honored him by adopting the high coiffure la franklin in imitation of his cap.
to a friend very plainly dressd wearing my thin grey strait hair that peeps out under my only coiffure a ne fur cap which comes down my forehead almost to my spectacles.
think how this must appear among the powderd heads of paris he shocked the royal court besotted as it was with pomp and protocol.
but ordinary parisians adored him as a specimen of a new democratic social order devoid of pretense and ornament.
when franklin embraced and kissed the famed french philosopher voltaire in a paris theater the spectators applauded wildly.
meanwhile the diplomatic game intensied.
after the humiliation at saratoga in 1777 the british parliament belatedly passed a mea sure that in ef fect offered the americans home rule within the empire.
this was essentially all that the colonials had ever asked for except independence.
if the french were going to break up the british empire they would have to bestir themselves.
franklin now played skillfully on french fears of anglo american reconciliation.
on february 6 1778 france offered the americans a treaty of alliance.
it did not conform exactly to the terms of the model treaty franklin had brought with him an early example of practical self interest trumping abstract idealism in americas conduct of foreign affairs.
against its better judgment the young republic concluded its rst entangling military alliance and would soon regret it.
but the treaty with france also constituted an ofcial recognition of americas independence and lent powerful military heft to the patriot cause.
both allies bound themselves to wage war until the united states had fully secured its freedom and until both agreed to terms with the common enemy.
with those pledges the american revolutionary war now became a world war.
the colonial war becomes a wider war eng land and france thus came to blows in 1778 and the shot red at lexington rapidly widened into a global conagration.
spain entered the fray against britain in 1779 as did holland.
combined spanish and french eets outnumbered those of britain and on two occasions the british isles seemed to be at the mercy of hostile warships.
the weak maritime neutrals of europe who had suffered from britains dominance over the seas now began to demand more respect for their rights see table 8 1.
in 1780 the imperious catherine the great of russia took the lead in organizing the armed neutrality which she later sneeringly called the armed nullity it lined up almost all the remaining european neutrals in an attitude of passive hostility toward britain.
the war was now being fought not only in europe and north america but also in south america the caribbean and asia.
to say that america with some french aid defeated britain is like saying daddy and i killed the bear to britain struggling for its very life the scufe in the new world became secondary.
the americans deserve credit for having kept the war going until 1778 with secret french aid.
but they did not achieve their chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 table 8 1 britain against the world britain and allies enemy or unfriendly powers great britain some loyalists and indians 30 000 hired hessians total population on britains side ca.
8 million belligerents total population ca.
39 5 million united states 1775 1783 france 1778 1783 spain 1779 1783 holland 1779 1783 ireland restive members of the armed neutrality with dates of joining russia 1780 denmark norway 1780 sweden 1780 holy roman empire 1781 prussia 1782 portugal 1782 two sicilies 1783 after peace signed independence until the con ict erupted into a multipower world war that was too big for britain to handle.
from 1778 to 1783 france provided the rebels with guns money immense amounts of equipment about one half of americas regular armed forces and practically all of the new nations naval strength.
frances entrance into the con ict forced the british to change their basic strategy in america.
hitherto they could count on blockading the colonial coast and commanding the seas.
now the french had powerful eets in american waters chiey to protect their own valuable west indies islands but in a position to jeopardize britains blockade and lines of supply.
the british therefore decided to evacuate philadelphia and concentrate their strength in new york city.
in june 1778 the withdrawing redcoats were attacked by general washington at monmouth new jersey on a blisteringly hot day.
scores of men collapsed or died from sunstroke.
but the battle was indecisive and the british escaped to new york although about one third of their hessians deserted.
henceforth except for the yorktown interlude of 1781 washington remained in the new york area hemming in the british.
blow and counterblow in the summer of 1780 a powerful french army of six thousand regular troops commanded by the comte de rochambeau arrived in newport rhode island.
the americans were somewhat suspicious of their former enemies in fact several ugly are ups involving minor bloodshed had already occurred between the new allies.
but french gold and goodwill melted hard hearts.
dancing parties were arranged with the prim puritan maidens one french ofcer related doubtless with exaggeration the simple innocence of the garden of eden prevailed no real military advantage came immediately from this french reinforcement although preparations were made for a franco american attack on new york.
improving american morale was staggered later in 1780 when general benedict arnold turned traitor.
a leader of undoubted dash and brilliance he was ambitious greedy unscrupulous and suffering from a wellgrounded but petulant feeling that his valuable ser vices were not fully appreciated.
he plotted with the british to sell out the key stronghold of west point which commanded the hudson river for 6 300 and an ofcers commission.
by the sheerest accident the plot was detected in the nick of time and arnold ed to the british.
whom can we trust now cried general washington in anguish.
the british meanwhile had devised a plan to roll up the colonies beginning with the south where the loyalists were numerous see map 8 2.
the colony of georgia was ruthlessly overrun in 1778 1779 charleston south carolina fell in 1780.
the surrender of the city to the british involved the capture of ve thousand men and four hundred cannon and was a heavier loss war on the frontier g 1 new york new york washing american movements british movements american victory b 40n philadelphia new jersey delaware virginia british victory charlottesville la fa elk hill richmond petersburg norfolk portsmouth e een hillsboro cornwallis salisbury may salem tte charlotte yorktown aug 30 oct.
19 1781 surrender of cornwallis north carolina 35n lis 1 cheraw elizabethtown al fort charlotte co rn orangeburg wilmington nw r south wa carolina llis cl georgetown in to n an d co charleston may 12 1780 georgia savannah oct 9 1779 battle of the capes sept 5 1781 gr kings mountain oct 7 1780 ye atlantic ocean fort moultrie beaufort 100 km.
fort sunbury 80w 100 mi.
de grasse fr.
from wes t indies 1 fort cowpens jan 17 1781 r am t on maryland h oc an d ea u au pennsylvania n 75w map 8 2 war in the south 1780 1781 interactive map to the americans in relation to existing strength than that of burgoyne was to the british.
warfare now intensied in the carolinas where patriots bitterly fought their loyalist neighbors.
it was not uncommon for prisoners on both sides to be butch ered in cold blood after they had thrown down their arms.
the tide turned later in 1780 and early in 1781 when american riemen wiped out a british detachment at kings mountain and then defeated a smaller force at cowpens.
in the carolina campaign of 1781 chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 general nathanael greene a quaker reared tactician distinguished himself by his strategy of delay.
standing and then retreating he exhausted his foe general charles cornwallis in vain pursuit.
by losing battles but winning campaigns the fighting quaker nally succeeded in clearing most of georgia and south carolina of british troops.
the land frontier and the sea frontier la k e m i c h i g a n the west was ablaze during much of the war.
indian allies of george iii hoping to protect their land were busy with torch and tomahawk they were egged on by british agents branded as hair buyers because they allegedly paid bounties for american scalps.
fateful 1777 was known as the bloody year on the frontier.
although two nations of the iroquois confederacy the oneidas and the tuscaroras sided with the americans the senecas mohawks cayugas and onondagas joined the british.
they were urged on by mohawk chief joseph brant a convert to anglicanism who believed not without reason that a victorious britain would restrain american expansion into the west.
brant and the british ravaged large areas of backcountry pennsylvania and new york until checked by an american force in 1779.
in 1784 the pro british iroquois were forced to sign the treaty of fort stanwix the rst treaty between the united states and an indian nation.
under its terms the indians ceded most of their land.
yet even in wartime the human tide of westwardmoving pioneers did not halt its ow.
eloquent testimony is provided by place names in kentucky such as lexington named after the battle and louisville named after americas new ally louis xvi.
in the wild illinois country the british were especially vulnerable to attack for they held only scattered posts that they had captured from the french.
an audacious frontiersman george rogers clark conceived the idea of seizing these forts by surprise.
in 1778 1779 he oated down the ohio river with about 175 men and captured in quick succession the forts kaskaskia cahokia and vincennes see map 8 3.
clarks admirers have argued without positive proof 80w 200 km.
detroit la ke eri e fort pitt m is 90w so n joseph brant by gilbert stuart 1786 siding with the british this mohawk chief led indian frontier raids so ferocious that he was dubbed monster brant when he later met king george iii he declined to kiss the kings hand but asked instead to kiss the hand of the queen.
uri r cahokia kaskaskia vincennes oh 40n io r clarks route 1778 1779 map 8 3 george rogers clarks campaign 1778 1779 interactive map setting the stage for victory baron von steuben 1730 1794 a prussian general who helped train the continental army found the americans to be very different from other soldiers he had known.
as von steuben explained to a fellow european the genius of this nation is not in the least to be compared with that of the prussians austrians or french.
you say to your soldier do this and he doeth it but i am obliged to say this is the reason why you ought to do that and then he does it.
that his success forced the british to cede the region north of the ohio river to the united states at the peace table in paris.
americas infant navy had meanwhile been laying the foundations of a brilliant tradition.
the naval establishment consisted of only a handful of nondescript ships commanded by daring ofcers the most famous of whom was a hard ghting young scotsman john paul jones.
as events turned out this tiny naval force never made a real dent in britains thunderous eets.
its chief contribution was in destroying british merchant shipping and thus carrying the war into the waters around the british isles.
more numerous and damaging than ships of the regular american navy were swift privateers.
these craft were privately owned armed ships legalized pirates in a sense specically authorized by congress to prey on enemy shipping.
altogether over a thousand american privateers responding to the call of patriotism and prot sallied forth with about seventy thousand men sailors of fortune.
they captured some six hundred british prizes while british warships captured about as many american merchantmen and privateers.
privateering was not an unalloyed asset.
it had the unfortunate effect of diverting manpower from the main war effort and involving americans including benedict arnold in speculation and graft.
but the privateers brought in urgently needed gold harassed the enemy and raised american morale by providing victories at a time when victories were few.
british shipping was so badly riddled by privateers and by the regular american navy that insurance rates skyrocketed.
merchant ships were compelled to sail in convoy and british shippers and manufacturers brought increasing pressure on parliament to end the war on honorable terms.
yorktown and the final curtain one of the darkest periods of the war was 1780 1781 before the last decisive victory.
ination of the currency continued at full gallop.
the government virtually bankrupt declared that it would repay many of its debts at the rate of only 2 5 cents on the dollar.
despair prevailed the sense of unity withered and mutinous sentiments infected the army.
meanwhile the british general cornwallis was blundering into a trap.
after futile operations in virginia he had fallen back to chesapeake bay at yorktown to await seaborne supplies and reinforcements.
he assumed britain would continue to control the sea.
but these few fateful weeks happened to be one of the brief periods during the war when british naval superiority slipped away.
the french were now prepared to cooperate energetically in a brilliant stroke.
admiral de grasse operating with a powerful eet in the west indies advised the americans that he was free to join with them in an assault on cornwallis at yorktown.
quick to seize this opportunity general washington made a swift march of more than three hundred miles to the chesapeake from the new york area.
accompanied by rochambeaus french army washington beset the british by land while de grasse blockaded them by sea after beating off the british eet.
completely cornered cornwallis surrendered his entire force of seven thousand men on october 19 1781 as his band appropriately played the world turnd upside down the triumph was no less french than american the french provided essentially all the sea power and about half of the regular troops in the besieging army of some sixteen thousand men.
stunned by news of the disaster prime minister lord north cried oh god.
its all over.
its all over but it was not.
george iii stubbornly planned to continue the struggle for britain was far from being crushed.
it still had fty four thousand troops in north america including thirty two thousand in the united states.
washington returned with his army to new york there to continue keeping a vigilant eye on the british force of ten thousand men.
chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 battle of the chesapeake capes 1781 a young french naval ofcer pierre joseph jennot sketched what is probably the only depiction of the epochal sea battle by a participant.
the british and french eets rst engaged on september 5 and for two days chased each other while drifting one hundred miles south.
on september 8 the french turned back northward and occupied chesapeake bay cutting off general cornwallis ashore in yorktown from support and escape by sea.
when general washington with more french help blocked any british retreat by land a doomed cornwallis surrendered.
fighting actually continued for more than a year after yorktown with patriot loyalist warfare in the south especially savage.
no quarter for tories was the common battle cry.
one of washingtons most valuable contributions was to keep the languishing cause alive the army in the eld and the states together during these critical months.
otherwise a satisfactory peace treaty might never have been signed.
personal rule of george iii.
a whig ministry rather favorable to the americans replaced the tory regime of lord north.
three american peace negotiators had meanwhile gathered at paris the aging but astute benjamin franklin the inty john adams vigilant for new eng land interests and the impulsive john jay of new york deeply peace at paris after yorktown despite george iiis obstinate eagerness to continue ghting many britons were weary of war and increasingly ready to come to terms.
they had suffered heavy reverses in india and in the west indies.
the island of minorca in the mediterranean had fallen the rock of gibraltar was tottering.
lord norths ministry collapsed in march 1782 temporarily ending the blundering george iii a poor loser wrote this of america knavery seems to be so much the striking feature of its inhabitants that it may not in the end be an evil that they become aliens to this kingdom.
setting the stage for victory in 1800 the prussian statesman friedrich von gentz 1764 1832 published an essay titled origins and principles of the american revolution compared with the french in it he argued that the americans escaped the most dangerous of all the rocks which in our times threatens the founders of any revolution the deadly passion for making political experiments with abstract theories and untried systems.
john quincy adams 1767 1848 translated von gentzs work into english because he said it rescues the american revolution from the disgraceful imputation of having proceeded from the same principles as the french.
suspicious of old world intrigue.
the three envoys had explicit instructions from congress to make no separate peace and to consult with their french allies at all stages of the negotiations.
but the american representatives chafed under this directive.
they well knew that it had been written by a subservient congress with the french foreign ofce indirectly guiding the pen.
france was in a painful position.
it had induced spain to enter the war on its side in part by promising to deliver british held gibraltar.
yet the towering rock was defying frantic joint assaults by french and spanish troops.
spain also coveted the immense transallegheny area on which restless american pioneers were already settling.
france ever eager to smash britains empire desired an independent united states but one independent in the abstract not in action.
it therefore schemed to keep the new republic cooped up east of the allegheny mountains.
a weak america like a horse sturdy enough to plow but not vigorous enough to kick would be easier to manage in promoting french interests and policy.
france was paying a heavy price in men and trea sure to win americas independence and it wanted to get its moneys worth.
but john jay was unwilling to play frances game.
suspiciously alert he perceived that the french could not satisfy the con icting ambitions of both ameri cans and spaniards.
he saw signs or thought he did indicating that the paris foreign ofce was about to betray americas trans appalachian interests to satisfy those of spain.
he therefore secretly made separate overtures to london contrary to his instructions from congress.
the hard pressed british eager to entice one of their enemies from the alliance speedily came to terms with the americans.
a preliminary treaty of peace was signed in 1782 the nal peace the next year.
by the treaty of paris of 1783 the british formally recognized the independence of the united states.
in addition they granted generous boundaries stretching majestically to the mississippi on the west to the great lakes on the north and to spanish florida on the south.
spain had recently captured florida from britain.
the yankees though now divorced from the empire were to retain a share in the priceless sheries of newfoundland.
the canadians of course were profoundly displeased.
the americans on their part had to yield important concessions.
loyalists were not to be further persecuted and congress was to recommend to the state legislatures that conscated loyalist property be restored.
as for the debts long owed to british creditors the states vowed to put no lawful obstacles in the way of their collection.
unhappily for future harmony the assurances regarding both loyalists and debts were not carried out in the manner hoped for by london.
as for britain its acceptance of defeat in north america eventually paid enormous strategic dividends.
persisting in the colonial conict might well have bled britain dry.
but shutting down the war against the americans enabled london to rebuild its army and navy and eventually prevail in its titanic struggle with napoleon and to become the preeminent world power in the nineteenth century.
a new nation legitimized britains terms were liberal almost beyond belief.
the enormous trans appalachian area was thrown in as a virtual gift for george rogers clark had captured only a small segment of it.
why the generosity.
had the united states beaten britain to its knees.
the key to the riddle may be found in the old world.
at the time the peace terms were drafted britain was trying to seduce america from its french alliance so it made the terms as alluring as possible.
the shaky whig ministry hanging on by its ngernails for only a few chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 the reconciliation between britannia and her daughter america detail america represented by an indian is invited to buss kiss her mother.
compare this cartoon with the one on p 127 months was more friendly to the americans than were the tories.
it was determined by a policy of liberality to salve recent wounds reopen old trade channels and prevent future wars over the coveted trans appalachian region.
this farsighted policy was regrettably not followed by the successors of the whigs.
in spirit the americans made a separate peace contrary to the french alliance.
in fact they did not.
the paris foreign ofce formally approved the terms of peace though disturbed by the lone wolf course of its american ally.
france was immensely relieved by the prospect of bringing the costly con ict to an end and of freeing itself from its embarrassing promises to the spanish crown.
america alone gained from the world girdling war.
the british though soon to stage a comeback were battered and beaten.
the french savored sweet revenge but plunged headlong down the slippery slope to bankruptcy and revolution.
the americans fared much better.
snatching their independence from the furnace of world con ict they began their national career with a splendid territorial birthright and a priceless heritage of freedom.
seldom if ever have any people been so favored.
chronology chronology battles of lexington and concord second continental congress americans capture british garrisons at ticonderoga and crown point battle of bunker hill king george iii formally proclaims colonies in rebellion failed invasion of canada 1778 clarks victories in the west battle of kings mountain battle of cowpens greene leads carolina campaign french and americans force cornwallis to surrender at yorktown paines common sense declaration of independence battle of trenton norths ministry collapses in britain treaty of paris battle of brandywine battle of germantown battle of saratoga treaty of fort stanwix formation of french american alliance battle of monmouth key terms second continental congress 146 bunker hill battle of 147 olive branch petition 147 hessians 148 common sense 150 declaration of independence 151 declaration of the rights of man 152 loyalists 156 people to know patriots 156 long island battle of 157 trenton battle of 158 saratoga battle of 160 model treaty 160 armed neutrality 161 fort stanwix treaty of 164 privateers 165 yorktown battle of 165 paris treaty of 167 ethan allen benedict arnold richard montgomery thomas paine richard henry lee lord charles cornwallis william howe john gentleman johnny burgoyne benjamin franklin comte de rochambeau nathanael greene joseph brant george rogers clark admiral de grasse chapter 8 america secedes from the empire 1775 1783 whose revolution.
h istorians once assumed that the revolution was just another chapter in the unfolding story of human liberty an important way station on a divinely ordained pathway toward moral perfection in human affairs.
this approach often labeled the whig view of history was best expressed in george bancrofts ten volume history of the united states of america published between the 1830s and 1870s.
by the end of the nineteenth century a group of historians known as the imperial school challenged bancroft arguing that the revolution was best understood not as the ful llment of national destiny but as a constitutional con ict within the british empire.
for historians like george beer charles andrews and lawrence gipson the revolution was the product of a collision between two different views of empire.
while the americans were moving steadily toward more self government britain increasingly tightened its grip threatening a stranglehold that eventually led to wrenching revolution.
by the early twentieth century these approaches were challenged by the so called progressive historians who argued that neither divine destiny nor constitutional quibbles had much to do with the revolution.
rather the revolution stemmed from deepseated class tensions within american society.
once released by revolt those tensions produced a truly transformed social order.
living themselves in a reform age when entrenched economic interests cowered under heavy attack progressive historians like carl becker insisted that the revolution was not just about home rule within the british empire but also about who should rule at home in america the upper or lower classes.
j franklin jameson took beckers analysis one step further in his inuential the american revolution considered as a social movement 1926.
he claimed that the revolution not only grew out of intense struggles between social groups but also inspired many ordinary americans to seek greater economic and political power fundamentally democratizing society in its wake.
in the 1950s the progressive historians fell out of favor as the political climate became more conser vative.
interpretations of the american revolution as a class struggle did not play well in a country obsessed with the spread of communism and in its place arose the so called consensus view.
historians such as robert brown and edmund morgan downplayed the role of class con ict in the revolutionary era but emphasized that colonists of all ranks shared a commitment to certain fundamental political principles of self government.
the unifying power of ideas was now back in fashion almost a hundred years after bancroft.
since the 1950s two broad interpretations have contended with each other and perpetuated the controversy over whether political ideals or economic and social realities were most responsible for the revolution.
the rst articulated most prominently by bernard bailyn has emphasized ideological and psychological factors.
focusing on the power of ideas to foment revolution bailyn argued that the colonists incited by their reading of seventeenth century and early eighteenth century eng lish political theorists grew extraordinarily perhaps even exaggeratedly suspicious of any attempts to tighten the imperial reins on the colonies.
when confronted with new taxes and commercial regulations these hypersensitive colonists screamed conspiracy against liberty and corrupt ministerial plot in time they took up armed insurrection in defense of their intellectual commitment to liberty.
a second school of historians writing during the 1960s and 1970s and inspired by the social movements of that turbulent era revived the progressive interpretation of the revolution.
gary nash in the urban crucible 1979 and edward countryman in a people in revolution 1981 pointed to the increasing social and economic divisions among americans in both the urban seaports and the isolated countryside in the years leading up to the revolution.
attacks by laborers on political elites and expressions of resentment toward wealth were taken as evidence of a society that was breeding revolutionary change from within quite aside from british provocations.
while the concerns of the progressive historians echo in these socioeconomic interpretations of the revolution the neoprogressives have been more careful not to reduce the issues simplistically to the one ring arena of economic self interest.
instead they have argued that the varying material circumstances of american participants led them to hold distinctive to learn more versions of republicanism giving the revolution a less unied and more complex ideological underpinning than the idealistic historians had previously suggested.
the dialogue between proponents of ideas and interests has gradually led to a more nuanced meeting of the two views.
most recently scholars have taken a more transatlantic view of the revolutions origins asking when and how colonists shifted from identifying as british to viewing themselves as american fred anderson has argued that long before rebellion the seven years war 1756 1763 helped create a sense of american identity apart from britain.
other historians such as t h breen argue that british nationalism actually intensied in the colonies over the course of the eighteenth century as economic and cultural ties between britain and north america strengthened through increased trade and the migration of ideas with the growth of print culture.
only when colonists realized that the british did not see them as equal imperial citizens entitled to the same rights as englishmen did american nationalism emerge and americans rebel.
to learn more david armitage the declaration of independence a global history 2007 robert m calhoon the loyalists in revolutionary america 1973 colin g calloway the american revolution in indian country 1995 caroline cox a proper sense of honor service and sacrice in george washingtons army 2004 joseph j ellis his excellency george washington 2004 david hackett fischer washingtons crossing 2004 james h hutson john adams and the diplomacy of the american revolution 1980 linda k kerber women of the republic intellect and ideology in revolutionary america 1980 samuel e morison john paul jones 1959 mary beth norton the british americans the loyalist exiles in england 1972 libertys daughters the revolutionary experience of american women 1980 cassandra pybus epic journeys of freedom runaway slaves of the american revolution and their global quest for liberty 2006 alan taylor liberty men and great proprietors the revolutionary settlement on the maine frontier 1760 1820 1990 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at part two building the new nation 1776 1860 b y 1783 americans had won their freedom.
now they had to build their country.
to be sure they were blessed with a vast and fertile land and they inherited from their colonial experience a proud legacy of selfrule.
but history provided scant precedent for erecting a republic on a national scale.
no law of nature guaranteed that the thirteen rebellious colonies would stay glued together as a single nation or that they would preserve not to mention expand their democratic way of life.
new institutions had to be created new habits of thought cultivated.
who could predict whether the american experiment in gov ernment by the people would succeed.
the feeble national government cobbled together under the articles of confederation during the revolutionary war soon proved woefully inadequate to the task of nation building.
in less than ten years after the revolutionary wars conclusion the articles were replaced by a new constitution but even its adoption did not end the debate over just what form american government should take.
would the president the congress or the courts be the dominant branch.
what should be the proper division of authority between the federal government and the the verdict of the people detail this election day crowd exudes the exuberant spirit of the era of andrew jackson when the advent of universal white male suffrage made the united states the modern worlds rst mass participatory democracy.
yet the black man with the wheelbarrow literally pushing his way into the painting is a pointed reminder that the curse of slavery still blighted this happy scene.
how could the rights of individuals be protected against a potentially powerful government.
what economic policies would best serve the infant republic.
how should the nation defend itself against foreign foes.
what principles should guide foreign policy.
was america a nation at all or was it merely a geographic expression destined to splinter into several bitterly quarreling sections as had happened to so many other would be countries.
after a shaky start under george washington and john adams in the 1790s buffeted by foreign troubles and domestic crises the new republic passed a major test when power was peacefully transferred from the conser vative federalists to the more liberal jeffersonians in the election of 1800.
a condent president jefferson proceeded boldly to expand the national territory with the landmark louisiana purchase in 1803.
but before long jefferson and then his successor james madison were embroiled in what eventually proved to be a fruitless effort to spare the united states from the ravages of the war then raging in europe.
america was dangerously divided during the war of 1812 and suffered a humiliating defeat.
but a new sense of national unity and purpose was unleashed in the land thereafter.
president monroe presiding over this era of good feelings proclaimed in the monroe doctrine of 1823 that both of the american continents were off limits to further european intervention.
the foundations of a continental scale economy were laid as a transportation revolution stitched the country together with canals and railroads and turnpikes.
settlers ooded over those new arteries into the burgeoning west often brusquely shouldering aside the native peoples.
immigrants especially from ireland and germany ocked to american shores.
the combination of new lands new labor and revolutionary new technologies like the telegraph and the railroad fed the growth of a market economy including the women weavers at work detail these simple cotton looms heralded the dawn of the industrial revolution which transformed the lives of americans even more radically than the events of 1776 commercialization of agriculture and the beginnings of the factory system of production.
old ways of life withered as the market economy drew women as well as men children as well as adults blacks as well as whites into its embrace.
ominously the slave system grew robustly as the production of cotton mostly for sale on european markets exploded into the booming southwest.
meanwhile the united states in the era of andrew jackson gave the world an impressive lesson in political science.
between roughly 1820 and 1840 americans virtually invented mass democracy creating huge political parties and enormously expanding political participation by enfranchising nearly all adult white males.
nor was the spirit of innovation con ned to the political realm.
a wave of reform and cultural vitality swept through many sectors of american society.
utopian experiments proliferated.
religious revivals and even new religions like mormonism ourished.
a national literature blossomed.
crusades were launched for temperance prison reform womens rights and the abolition of slavery.
by the second quarter of the nineteenth century the outlines of a distinctive american national character had begun to emerge.
americans were a diverse restless people tramping steadily westward eagerly forging their own nascent industrial revolution proudly exercising their democratic political rights impatient with the old in love with the new testily asserting their superiority over all other peoples and increasingly divided in heart in conscience and in politics over the single greatest blight on their record of nation making and democracy building slavery.
the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 the example of changing a constitution by assembling the wise men of the state instead of assembling armies will be worth as much to the world as the former examples we had given them thomas jefferson 1789 t he american revolution was not a revolution in the sense of a radical or total change.
it did not suddenly and violently overturn the entire political and social framework as later occurred in the french and russian revolutions.
what happened was accelerated evolution rather than outright revolution.
during the con ict itself people went on working and praying marrying and playing.
many of them were not seriously disturbed by the actual ghting and the most isolated communities scarcely knew that a war was on.
yet some striking changes were ushered in affecting social customs political institutions and ideas about society government and even gender roles.
the exodus of some eighty thousand substantial loyalists robbed the new ship of state of conser vative ballast.
this weakening of the aristocratic upper crust with all its culture and elegance paved the way for new patriot elites to emerge.
it also cleared the eld for more egalitarian ideas to sweep across the land.
the pursuit of equality all men are created equal the declaration of independence proclaimed and equality was every where the watchword.
most states reduced but usually did not eliminate altogether property holding requirements for voting.
ordinary men and women demanded to be addressed as mr and mrs titles once reserved for the wealthy and highborn.
employers were now called boss not master in 1784 new yorkers released a shipload of freshly arrived indentured servants on the grounds that their status violated democratic ideals by 1800 servitude was virtually unknown.
most americans ridiculed the lordly pretensions of continental army ofcers who formed an exclusive hereditary order the society of the cincinnati.
social democracy was further stimulated by the growth of trade orga ni zations for artisans and laborers.
citizens this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website aftermath of the revolution in several states ushed with republican fervor also sawed off the remaining shackles of medieval inheritance laws such as primogeniture which awarded all of a fathers property to the eldest son.
a protracted ght for separation of church and state resulted in notable gains.
although the well entrenched congregational church continued to be legally established in some new eng land states the anglican church tainted by association with the british crown was humbled.
de anglicized it re formed as the protestant episcopal church and was every where disestablished.
the struggle for divorce between religion and government proved ercest in virginia.
it was prolonged to 1786 when freethinking thomas jefferson and his co reformers including the baptists won a complete victory with the passage of the virginia statute for religious freedom.
see table 5 1 on established churches on p.
the egalitarian sentiments unleashed by the war likewise challenged the institution of slavery.
philadelphia quakers in 1775 founded the worlds rst antislavery society.
hostilities hampered the noxious trade in black ivory and the continental congress in 1774 called for the complete abolition of the slave trade a summons to which most of the states responded positively.
several northern states went further and either abolished slavery outright or provided for the gradual emancipation of blacks.
even on the plantations of virginia a few idealistic masters freed their human chattels the rst frail sprouts of the later abolitionist movement.
but this revolution of sentiments was sadly incomplete.
no states south of pennsylvania abolished slavery and in both north and south the law discriminated harshly against freed blacks and slaves alike.
emancipated african americans could be barred from purchasing property holding certain jobs and educating their children.
laws against interracial marriage also sprang up at this time.
why in this dawning democratic age did abolition not go further and cleanly blot the evil of slavery from the impact of the american revolution was worldwide.
about 1783 a british ship stopped at some islands off the east african coast where the natives were revolting against their arab masters.
when asked why they were ghting they replied america is free could not we be.
elizabeth mumbet freeman ca.
1744 1829 by susan anne livingston ridley sedgwick 1811 in 1781 having overheard revolutionary era talk about the rights of man mumbet sued her massachusetts master for her freedom from slavery.
she won her suit and lived the rest of her life as a paid domestic servant in the home of the lawyer who had pleaded her case.
the fresh face of the new nation.
the sorry truth is that the edgling idealism of the founding fathers was sacriced to political expediency.
a ght over slavery would have fractured the fragile national unity that was so desperately needed.
great as the evil of slavery is the young virginian james madison wrote in 1787 a dismemberment of the union would be worse nearly a century later the slavery issue did wreck the union temporarily.
likewise incomplete was the extension of the doctrine of equality to women.
some women did serve disguised as men in the military and new jerseys new constitution in 1776 even for a time enabled women to vote.
but though abigail adams teased her husband john in 1776 that the ladies were determined to foment a rebellion of their own if they were not given political rights most of the women in the chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 the revolution enhanced the expectations and power of women as wives and mothers.
as one matrimonial republican wrote in 1792 i object to the word obey in the marriageservice because it is a general word without limitations or denition.
the obedience between man and wife i conceive is or ought to be mutual.
marriage ought never to be considered a contract between a superior and an inferior but a reciprocal union of interest an implied partnership of interests where all differences are accommodated by conference and where the decision admits of no retrospect.
revolutionary era were still doing traditional womens work.
yet women did not go untouched by revolutionary ideals.
central to republican ideology was the concept of civic virtue the notion that democracy depended on the unselsh commitment of each citizen to the public good.
and who could better cultivate the habits of a virtuous citizenry than mothers to whom society entrusted the moral education of the young.
indeed the seless devotion of a mother to her family was often cited as the very model of proper republican behavior.
the idea of republican motherhood thus took root elevating women to a newly prestigious role as the special keepers of the nations conscience.
educational opportunities for women expanded in the expectation that educated wives and mothers could better cultivate the virtues demanded by the republic in their husbands daughters and sons.
republican women now bore crucial responsibility for the survival of the nation.
constitution making in the states the continental congress in 1776 called upon the colonies to draft new constitutions.
in effect the continental congress was actually asking the colonies to summon themselves into being as new states.
the sovereignty of these new states according to the theory of republicanism would rest on the authority of the people.
for a time the manufacture of governments was even more pressing than the manufacture of gunpowder.
although the states of connecticut and rhode island merely retouched their colonial charters constitution writers elsewhere worked tirelessly to capture on black inked parchment the republican spirit of the age.
massachusetts contributed one especially noteworthy innovation when it called a special convention to draft its constitution and then submitted the nal draft directly to the people for ratication.
once adopted in 1780 the massachusetts constitution could be changed only by another specially called constitutional convention.
this procedure was later imitated in the drafting and ratication of the federal constitution.
adopted almost a decade before the federal constitution the massachusetts constitution remains the longest lived constitution in the world.
the newly penned state constitutions had many features in common.
their similarity as it turned out made easier the drafting of a workable federal charter when the time was ripe.
in the british tradition a constitution was not a written document but rather an accumulation of laws customs and precedents.
americans invented something different.
the documents they drafted were contracts that de ned the powers of government as did the old colonial charters but they drew their authority from the people not from the royal seal of a distant king.
as written documents the state constitutions were intended to represent a fundamental law superior to the transient whims of ordinary legislation.
most of these documents included bills of rights specically guaranteeing long prized liberties against later legislative encroachment.
most of them required the annual election of legislators who were thus forced to stay in touch with the mood of the people.
all of them deliberately created weak executive and judicial branches at least by present day standards.
a generation of quarreling with his majestys ofcials had implanted a deep distrust of despotic governors and arbitrary judges.
in all the new state governments the legislatures as presumably the most democratic branch of government were given sweeping powers.
but as thomas jefferson warned 173 despots in a legislature would surely be as oppressive as one many americans soon came to agree with him.
the democratic character of the new state legislatures was vividly reected by the presence of many members from the recently enfranchised poorer west copley family portrait ca.
1776 1777 portrait painting like this one by john singleton copley 1738 1815 documents physical likenesses clothing styles and other material possessions typical of an era.
but it can do more than that.
in the execution of the painting itself the preeminent portrait painter of colonial america revealed important values of his time.
copleys composition and use of light emphasized the importance of the mother in the family.
mrs copley is the visual center of the painting the light falls predominantly on her a ern districts.
their inuence was powerfully felt in their several successful movements to relocate state capitals from the haughty eastern seaports into the less pretentious interior.
in the revolutionary era the capitals of new hampshire new york virginia north carolina south carolina and georgia were all moved westward.
these geographical shifts portended political shifts that deeply discomted many more conser vative americans.
and she provides the focus of activity for the family group.
although copley had moved to eng land in 1774 to avoid the disruptions of war he had made radical friends in his hometown of boston and surely had imbibed the sentiment of the age about republican motherhood a sentiment that revered women as homemakers and mothers the cultivators of good republican values in young citizens.
what other prevailing attitudes about gender and age for example might this painting reveal.
economic crosscurrents economic changes begotten by the war were likewise noteworthy but not overwhelming.
states seized control of former crown lands and although rich speculators had their day many of the large loyalist holdings were conscated and eventually cut up into small farms.
roger morriss huge estate in new york for chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 western merchants negotiating for tea in hong kong ca.
1800 yankee merchants and shippers gured prominently in the booming trade with china in the late eighteenth century.
among the american entrepreneurs who prospered in the china trade was warren delano ancestor of president franklin delano roosevelt.
example was sliced into 250 parcels thus accelerating the spread of economic democracy.
the frightful excesses of the french revolution were avoided partly because cheap land was easily available and because america had so few deeply entrenched landed aristocrats to be overthrown.
it is highly signicant that in the united states economic democracy broadly speaking preceded political democracy.
a sharp stimulus was given to manufacturing by the prewar nonimportation agreements and later by the war itself.
goods that had formerly been imported from britain were mostly cut off and the ingenious yankees were forced to make their own.
ten years after the revolution busy brandywine creek south of philadelphia was turning the water wheels of numerous mills along an eight mile stretch.
yet america remained overwhelmingly a nation of soil tillers.
economically speaking independence had drawbacks.
much of the coveted commerce of britain was still reserved for the loyal parts of the empire.
american ships were now barred from british and british west indies harbors.
fisheries were disrupted and bounties for ships stores had abruptly ended.
in some respects the hated british navigation laws were more disagreeable after independence than before.
new commercial outlets fortunately compensated partially for the loss of old ones.
americans could now trade freely with foreign nations subject to local restrictions a boon they had not enjoyed in the days of mercantilism.
enterprising yankee shippers ventured problems of a new government boldly and protably into the baltic and china seas.
in 1784 the empress of china carrying a valuable weed ginseng that was highly prized by chinese herb doctors as a cure for impotence led the way into the east asian markets.
yet the general economic picture was far from rosy.
war had spawned demoralizing extravagance speculation and proteering with prots for some as indecently high as 300 percent.
state governments had borrowed more during the war than they could ever hope to repay.
runaway ination had been ruinous to many citizens and congress had failed in its feeble attempts to curb economic laws.
the average citizen was probably worse off nancially at the end of the shooting than at the start.
the whole economic and social at mosphere was unhealthy.
a newly rich class of proteers was noisily conspicuous whereas many once wealthy people were left destitute.
the controversy leading to the revolutionary war had bred a keen distaste for taxes and encouraged disrespect for the majesty of the law generally.
john adams had been shocked when gleefully told by a horse jockey neighbor that the courts of justice were all closed a plight that proved to be only temporary.
a shaky start toward union what would the americans do with the independence they had so dearly won.
the revolution had dumped the responsibility of creating and operating a new central government squarely into their laps.
prospects for erecting a lasting regime were far from bright.
it is always difcult to set up a new government and doubly difcult to set up a new type of government.
the picture was further clouded in america by leaders preaching natural rights and looking suspiciously at all persons clothed with authority.
america was more a name than a nation and unity ran little deeper than the color on the map.
disruptive forces stalked the land.
the departure of the conser vative tory element left the political system inclined toward experimentation and innovation.
patriots had fought the war with a high degree of disunity but they had at least concurred on allegiance to a common cause.
now even that was gone.
it would have been almost a miracle if any government fashioned in all this confusion had long endured.
hard times the bane of all regimes set in shortly after the war and hit bottom in 1786.
as if other troubles were not enough british manufacturers with dammedup surpluses began ooding the american market with cut rate goods.
war baby american industries in particular suffered industrial colic from such ruthless competition.
one philadelphia newspaper in 1783 urged readers to don home stitched garments of homespun cloth of foreign gewgaws lets be free and wear the webs of liberty.
yet hopeful signs could be discerned.
the thirteen sovereign states were basically alike in governmental structure and functioned under similar constitutions.
americans enjoyed a rich political inheritance derived partly from britain and partly from their own homegrown devices for self government.
finally they were blessed with political leaders of a high order in men like george washington james madison john adams thomas jefferson and alexander hamilton.
creating a confederation the second continental congress of revolutionary days was little more than a conference of ambassadors from the thirteen states.
it was totally without constitutional authority and in general did only what it dared to do though it asserted some control over military affairs and foreign policy.
in nearly all respects the thirteen states were sovereign for they coined money raised armies and navies and erected tariff barriers.
the legislature of virginia even ratied separately the treaty of alliance of 1778 with france.
shortly before declaring independence in 1776 congress appointed a committee to draft a written constitution for the new nation.
the nished product was the articles of confederation.
adopted by congress in 1777 it was translated into french after the battle of saratoga so as to convince france that america had a genuine government in the making.
the articles were not ratied by all thirteen states until 1781 less than eight months before the victory at yorktown.
the chief apple of discord was western lands.
six of the jealous states including pennsylvania and maryland had no holdings beyond the allegheny mountains.
seven notably new york and virginia were favored with enormous acreage in most cases on the basis of earlier charter grants.
the six land hungry states argued that the more fortunate states would not have retained possession of this splendid prize if all the other states had not fought for it also.
a major chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 is claimed by conn and va 40n ceded by va 1784 ceded by conn 1786 sr ri l e oh io n.
ceded by n c 1790 er se tennessee es by mass.
claimed by conn.
ceded to pa in 1782 pennsylvania.
south carolina r e re l n h mass.
rhode island connecticut new jersey n at l a n t i c o c e a n georgia gulf of mexico mass.
north carolina 30n maine virginia ceded by s c to georgia 1795 aw delaware maryland n.
r s is s ip pi r red claimed by georgia.
ceded 1802 70w susquehanna r ceded by virginia 1792 kentucky te mi s new york r ceded by s c to georgia 1787.
e western reserve claimed by conn.
ceded 1800 claimed by virginia.
ceded 1784.
spanish louisiana ar k a nsa rio onta l ceded on.
claimed by mass.
ceded by va 1784 ceded by mass.
1785 k hur.
r claimed by n h and n y.
ceded 1791 vermont ceded by mass.
to n y 1786 e claimed by virginia.
ceded 1784 ir i m o uri la la k e m i c h i m ip p ss british north america canada e superior northwest sis territory s claimed by u s and great britain st la k 80w nc 90w gan 100w spanish florida 400 km.
boundary of territory ceded by new york 1782 territory ceded by virginia 1784 territory ceded by georgia 1802 other claims original thirteen states after their cessions states without land claims map 9 1 western land cessions to the united states 1782 1802 interactive map complaint was that the land rich states could sell their trans allegheny tracts and thus pay off pensions and other debts incurred in the common cause.
states without such holdings would have to tax themselves heavily to defray these obligations.
why not turn the whole western area over to the central government.
unanimous approval of the articles of confederation by the thirteen states was required and landstarved maryland stubbornly held out until march 1 1781.
maryland at length gave in when new york surrendered its western claims and virginia seemed about to do so.
to sweeten the pill congress pledged itself to dispose of these vast areas for the common benet it further agreed to carve from the new public domain not colonies but a number of republican states which in time would be admitted to the union on terms of complete equality with all the others.
this extraordinary commitment faithfully reected the anticolonial spirit of the revolution and the pledge was later fully redeemed in the famed northwest ordinance of 1787 see map 9 1.
fertile public lands thus transferred to the central government proved to be an invaluable bond of union.
the states that had thrown their heritage into the common pot had to remain in the union if they were to reap their share of the advantages from the land sales.
an army of westward moving pioneers purchased their farms from the federal government directly or indirectly and they learned to look to the national capital rather than to the state capitals with a consequent a crippled confederation weakening of local inuence.
finally a uniform national land policy was made possible.
the articles of confederation americas first constitution the articles of confederation some have said articles of confusion provided for a loose confederation or rm league of friendship thirteen independent states were thus linked together for joint action in dealing with common problems such as foreign affairs.
a clumsy congress was to be the chief agency of government.
there was no executive branch george iii had left a bad taste and the vital judicial arm was left almost exclusively to the states.
congress though dominant was severely hobbled.
each state had a single vote so that some sixty eight thousand rhode islanders had the same voice as more than ten times that many virginians.
all bills dealing with subjects of importance required the support of nine states any amendment of the articles themselves required unanimous ratication.
unanimity was almost impossible and this meant that the amending process perhaps fortunately was unworkable.
if it had been workable the republic might have struggled along with a patched up articles of confederation rather than replace it with an effective constitution.
the shackled congress was weak and was purposely designed to be weak.
suspicious states having just won control over taxation and commerce from britain had no desire to yield their newly acquired privileges to an american parliament even one of their own making.
two handicaps of congress were crippling.
it had no power to regulate commerce and this loophole left the states free to establish different and often con icting laws regarding tariffs and navigation.
nor could congress enforce its tax collection program.
it established a tax quota for each of the states and then asked them please to contribute their share on a voluntary basis.
the central authority a government by independence hall philadelphia 1776 originally built in the 1730s as a meeting place for the pennsylvania colonial assembly this building witnessed much history here washington was given command of the continental army the declaration of independence was signed and the constitution was hammered out.
the building began to be called independence hall in the 1820s and is today a major tourist destination in philadelphia.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 supplication was lucky if in any year it received onefourth of its requests.
the feeble national government in philadelphia could advise and advocate and appeal.
but in dealing with the independent states it could not command or coerce or control.
it could not act directly upon the individual citizens of a sovereign state it could not even protect itself against gross indignities.
in 1783 a group of mutinous pennsylvania soldiers whose pay was in arrears marched to philadelphia and made a threatening demonstration in front of independence hall.
after congress appealed in vain to the state for protection its members ed to safety at princeton college in new jersey.
the new congress with all its paper powers was even less effective than the old continental congress which had wielded no constitutional powers at all.
yet the articles of confederation weak though they were proved to be a landmark in government.
they were for those days a model of what a loose confederation could be.
thomas jefferson enthusiastically hailed the new structure as the best one existing or that ever did exist to compare it with the european governments he thought was like comparing heaven and hell but although the confederation was praiseworthy as confederations went the troubled times demanded not a loosely woven confederation but a tightly knit federation.
this involved the yielding by the states of their sovereignty to a completely recast federal government which in turn would leave them free to control their local affairs.
in spite of their defects the anemic articles of confederation were a signicant steppingstone toward the present constitution.
they clearly outlined the general powers that were to be exercised by the central government such as making treaties and establishing a postal ser vice.
as the rst written constitution of the republic the articles kept alive the ickering ideal of union and held the states together until such time as they were ripe for the establishment of a strong constitution by peaceful evolutionary methods.
without this intermediary jump the states probably would never have consented to the breathtaking leap from the old boycott association of 1774 to the constitution of the united states.
landmarks in land laws handcuffed though the congress of the confederation was it succeeded in passing supremely farsighted pieces of legislation.
these related to an immense part of the public domain recently acquired from the states and commonly known as the old northwest.
this area of land lay northwest of the ohio river east of the mississippi river and south of the great lakes.
the rst of these red letter laws was the land ordinance of 1785 see map 9 2.
it provided that the acreage of the old northwest should be sold and that the proceeds should be used to help pay off the national debt.
the vast area was to be surveyed before sale and settlement thus forestalling endless confusion and lawsuits.
it was to be divided into townships six miles square each of which in turn was to be split into thirtysix sections of one square mile each.
the sixteenth section of each township was set aside to be sold for the benet of the public schools a priceless gift to education in the northwest.
the orderly settlement of the northwest territory where the land was methodically surveyed and titles duly recorded contrasted sharply with the chaos south of the ohio river where uncertain ownership was the norm and fraud was rampant.
even more noteworthy was the northwest ordinance of 1787 which related to the governing of the old northwest.
this law came to grips with the problem of how a nation should deal with its colonies the same problem that had bedeviled the king and parliament in london.
the solution provided by the northwest ordinance was a judicious compromise temporary tutelage then permanent equality.
first there would be two evolutionary territorial stages during which the area would be subordinate to the federal government.
then when a territory could boast sixty thousand inhabitants it might be admitted by congress as a state with all the privileges of the thirteen charter members.
this is precisely what the continental congress had promised the states when they surrendered their lands in 1781.
the ordinance also forbade slavery in the old northwest a path breaking step though it exempted slaves already present.
the wisdom of congress in handling this explosive problem deserves warm praise.
if it had attempted to chain the new territories in permanent subordination a second american revolution almost certainly would have erupted in later years fought this time by the west against the east.
congress thus neatly solved the seemingly insoluble problem of empire.
the scheme worked so well that its basic principles were ultimately carried over from the old northwest to other frontier areas.
troubled foreign relations 90w 50n 80w section 16 reserved for school funds northwest territory boundaries indefinite present state boundary lak e superio r n british north america canada the seven ranges first area surveyed 36 km.
6 miles a township l ak an r 200 km.
lak 200 mi.
10 11 12 18 17 16 15 14 13 19 20 21 22 23 24 30 29 28 27 26 25 e e pennsylvania ania a pi lake michi g ip ron i ss u e h m iss rie spanish louisiana p pa pa 31 32 33 34 35 36 640 acres half section 320 acres oh io r 1 mile 40n virginia marietta tennessee o kentucky hi o r quarter section 160 acres half quarter section 80 acres virginia quarter quarter section 40 acres n c map 9 2 surveying the old northwest under the land ordinance of 1785 sections of a township under the land ordinance of 1785.
interactive map the worlds ugly duckling foreign relations especially with london remained troubled during these anxious years of the confederation.
britain resented the stab in the back from its rebellious offspring and for eight years refused to send a minister to americas backwoods capital.
london suggested with barbed irony that if it sent one it would have to send thirteen.
britain atly declined to make a commercial treaty or to repeal its ancient navigation laws.
lord shefeld whose ungenerous views prevailed argued persuasively in a widely sold pamphlet that britain would win back americas trade anyhow.
commerce he insisted would naturally follow old channels.
so why go to the americans hat in hand.
the british also ofcially closed their protable west indies trade to the united states though the yankees with their time tested skill in smuggling illegally partook nonetheless.
scheming british agents were also active along the far ung northern frontier.
they intrigued with the disgruntled allen brothers of vermont and sought to annex that rebellious area to britain.
along the northern border the redcoats continued to hold a chain of trading posts on u s soil and there they maintained their fur trade with the indians.
one plausible excuse for remaining was the failure of the american states to honor the treaty of peace in regard to debts and loyalists.
but the main purpose of britain in hanging on was probably to curry favor with the indians and keep their tomahawks lined up on the side of the king as a barrier against future american attacks on canada.
all these grievances against britain were maddening to patriotic americans.
some citizens demanded with more heat than wisdom that the united states force the british into line by imposing restrictions on their imports to america.
but congress could not control commerce and the states refused to adopt a uniform tariff policy.
some easy states deliberately lowered their tariffs in order to attract an unfair share of trade.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 spain though recently an enemy of britain was openly unfriendly to the new republic.
it controlled the mouth of the all important mississippi down which the pioneers of tennessee and kentucky were forced to oat their produce.
in 1784 spain closed the river to american commerce threatening the west with strangulation.
spain likewise claimed a large area north of the gulf of mexico including a part of west florida granted to the united states by the british in 1783.
at natchez on disputed soil it held an important fort.
it also schemed with the neighboring indians grievously antagonized by the rapacious land policies of georgia and north carolina to hem in the americans east of the appalachians.
spain and britain to 90w 80w 70w b r i ti sh n o r th am er i c a c an ada mi ss iss pi r ip n maine mass.
fort michilimackinac u s soil.
detroit u s soil n y n h fort niagara u s soil mass.
pa io oh st louis spanish louisiana n j md.
r u n i ted stat es south carolina new orleans georgia natchez 40n the horrid specter of anarchy del.
virginia north carolina disputed by spain and u s r i conn gether radiating their inuence out among resentful indian tribes prevented america from exercising effective control over about half of its total territory see map 9 3.
even france americas comrade in arms cooled off now that it had humbled britain.
the french demanded the repayment of money loaned during the war and restricted trade with their bustling west indies and other ports.
pirates of the north african states including the arrogant dey of algiers were ravaging americas mediterranean commerce and enslaving yankee sailors.
the british purchased protection for their own subjects and as colonists the americans had enjoyed this shield.
but as an independent nation the united states was too weak to ght and too poor to bribe.
a few yankee shippers engaged in the mediterranean trade with forged british protection papers but not all were so bold or so lucky.
john jay secretary for foreign affairs derived some hollow satisfaction from these insults.
he hoped they would at least humiliate the american people into framing a new government at home that would be strong enough to command respect abroad.
at l a n t i c ocean 400 km.
30n spanish florida british influence spanish influence british fort on u s soil map 9 3 main centers of spanish and british inuence after 1783 this map shows graphically that the united states in 1783 achieved complete independence in name only particularly in the area west of the appalachian mountains.
not until twenty years had passed did the new republic with the purchase of louisiana from france in 1803 eliminate foreign inuence from the east bank of the mississippi river.
much of florida remained in spanish hands until the adams ons treaty of 1819 see p 265 267.
interactive map economic storm clouds continued to loom in the mid1780s.
the requisition system of raising money was breaking down some of the states refused to pay anything while complaining bitterly about the tyranny of king congress interest on the public debt was piling up at home and the nations credit was evaporating abroad.
individual states were getting out of hand.
quarrels over boundaries generated numerous minor pitched battles.
some of the states were levying duties on goods from their neighbors new york for example taxed rewood from connecticut and cabbages from new jersey.
a number of the states were again starting to grind out depreciated paper currency and a few of them had passed laws sanctioning the semiworthless rag money as a contemporary rhymester put it bankrupts their creditors with rage pursue no stop no mercy from the debtor crew.
an alarming uprising known as shayss rebellion ared up in western massachusetts in 1786.
impoverished backcountry farmers many of them revolutionary war veterans were losing their farms through mortgage foreclosures and tax delinquencies.
led by the constitutional convention debtors protest 1787 this drawing done on the eve of the writing of the u s constitution features a farmer with a plow a rake and a bottle complaining takes all to pay taxes the discontent of debt rich and currency poor farmers alarmed republican leaders and helped persuade them that the articles of confederation needed to be replaced with a new constitution.
captain daniel shays a veteran of the revolution these desperate debtors demanded that the state issue paper money lighten taxes and suspend property takeovers.
hundreds of angry agitators again seizing their muskets attempted to enforce their demands.
massachusetts authorities responded with drastic action.
supported partly by contributions from wealthy citizens they raised a small army.
several skirmishes occurred at springeld three shaysites were killed and one was wounded and the movement collapsed.
daniel shays who believed that he was ghting anew against tyranny was condemned to death but was later pardoned.
shayss followers were crushed but the nightmarish memory lingered on.
the massachusetts legislature soon passed debtor relief laws of the kind shays had championed seemingly con rming thomas jeffersons fear of democratic despotism an elective despotism was not the government we fought for jefferson wrote.
the outbursts of shays and other distressed debtors struck fear in the hearts of the propertied class who began to suspect that the revolution had created a monster of mobocracy unbridled republicanism it seemed to many of the elite had fed an insatiable appetite for liberty that was fast becoming license.
civic virtue was no longer sufcient to rein in self interest and greed.
it had become undeniably evident one skeptic sorrowfully lamented that some malignant disorder has seized upon our body politic if republicanism was too shaky a ground upon which to construct a new nation a stronger central government would provide the needed foundation.
a few panicky citizens even talked of importing a european monarch to carry on where george iii had failed.
how critical were conditions under the confederation.
conservatives anxious to safeguard their wealth and position naturally exaggerated the seriousness of the nations plight.
they were eager to persuade their fellow citizens to amend the articles of confederation in favor of a muscular central government.
but the poorer states rights people pooh poohed the talk of anarchy.
many were debtors who feared that a powerful federal government would force them to pay their creditors.
yet friends and critics of the confederation agreed that it needed some strengthening.
popular toasts were cement to the union and a hoop to the barrel the chief differences arose over how this goal should be attained and how a maximum degree of states rights could be reconciled with a strong central government.
america probably could have muddled through somehow with amended articles of confederation.
but the adoption of a completely new constitution certainly spared the republic much costly indecision uncertainty and turmoil.
the nationwide picture was actually brightening before the constitution was drafted.
nearly half the states had not issued semiworthless paper currency and some of the monetary black sheep showed signs of returning to the sound money fold.
prosperity was beginning to emerge from the fog of depression.
by 1789 social tensions reached a fever pitch during shayss rebellion in 1787.
in an interview with a local massachusetts paper instigator daniel shays 1747 1825 explained how the debt ridden farmers hoped to free themselves from the demands of a merchantdominated government.
the rebels would seize arms and march directly to boston plunder it and then.
destroy the nest of devils who by their inuence make the court enact what they please burn it and lay the town of boston in ashes.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 overseas shipping had largely regained its place in the commercial world.
if conditions had been as grim in 1787 as painted by foes of the articles of confederation the move for a new constitution would hardly have encountered such heated opposition.
a convention of demigods control of commerce more than any other problem touched off the chain reaction that led to a constitutional convention.
interstate squabbling over this issue had become so alarming by 1786 that virginia taking the lead issued a call for a convention at annapolis maryland.
nine states appointed delegates but only ve were nally represented.
with so laughable a showing nothing could be done about the ticklish question of commerce.
a charismatic new yorker thirty oneyear old alexander hamilton brilliantly saved the convention from complete failure by engineering the adoption of his report.
it called upon congress to summon a convention to meet in philadelphia the next year not to deal with commerce alone but to bolster the entire fabric of the articles of confederation.
congress though slowly and certainly dying in new york city was reluctant to take a step that might hasten its day of reckoning.
but after six of the states had seized the bit in their teeth and appointed delegates anyhow congress belatedly issued the call for a convention for the sole and express purpose of revising the articles of confederation.
alexander hamilton 1755 1804 clearly revealed his preference for an aristocratic government in his philadelphia speech 1787 all communities divide themselves into the few and the many.
the rst are the rich and wellborn the other the mass of the people.
the people are turbulent and changing they seldom judge or determine right.
give therefore to the rst class a distinct permanent share in the government.
they will check the unsteadiness of the second and as they cannot receive any advantage by change they therefore will ever maintain good government.
every state chose representatives except for independent minded rhode island still rogues island a stronghold of paper moneyites.
these leaders were all appointed by the state legislatures whose members had been elected by voters who could qualify as property holders.
this double distillation inevitably brought together a select group of propertied men though it is a grotesque distortion to claim that they shaped the constitution primarily to protect their personal nancial interests.
when one of them did suggest restricting federal ofce to major property owners he was promptly denounced for the unwisdom of interweaving into a republican constitution a veneration for wealth a quorum of the fty ve emissaries from twelve states nally convened at philadelphia on may 25 1787 in the imposing red brick statehouse.
the smallness of the assemblage facilitated intimate acquaintance and hence compromise.
sessions were held in complete secrecy with armed sentinels posted at the doors.
delegates knew that they would generate heated differences and they did not want to advertise their own dissensions or put the ammunition of harmful arguments into the mouths of the opposition.
the caliber of the participants was extraordinarily high demigods jefferson called them.
the urgency of the crisis induced the ablest men to drop their personal pursuits and come to the aid of their country.
most of the members were lawyers and most of them fortunately were old hands at constitution making in their own states.
george washington towering austere and aloof among the demigods was unanimously elected chairman.
his enormous prestige as the sword of the revolution served to quiet overheated tempers.
benjamin franklin then eighty one added the urbanity of an elder statesman though he was inclined to be indiscreetly talkative in his declining years.
concerned for the secrecy of their deliberations the convention assigned chaperones to accompany franklin to dinner parties and make sure he held his tongue.
james madison then thirty six and a profound student of government made contributions so notable that he has been dubbed the father of the constitution alexander hamilton then only thirty two was present as an advocate of a super powerful central government.
his ve hour speech in behalf of his plan though the most eloquent of the convention left only one delegate convinced himself.
most of the ery revolutionary leaders of 1776 were absent.
thomas jefferson john adams and thomas searching for compromise thomas jefferson 1743 1826 despite his high regard for the leaders at the philadelphia convention still was not unduly concerned about shaysite rebellions.
he wrote in november 1787 what country before ever existed a century and a half without a rebellion.
the tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants.
it is its natural manure.
rising sun symbol at the top of washingtons chair this brass sun adorned the chair in which george washington sat during the constitutional convention.
pondering the symbol benjamin franklin observed i have the happiness to know it is a rising and not a setting sun paine were in europe samuel adams and john hancock were not elected by massachusetts.
patrick henry ardent champion of states rights was chosen as a delegate from virginia but declined to serve declaring that he smelled a rat it was perhaps well that these architects of revolution were absent.
the time had come to yield the stage to leaders interested in fashioning solid political systems.
patriots in philadelphia the fty ve delegates were a conser vative well to do body lawyers merchants shippers land speculators and moneylenders.
not a single spokesperson was present from the poorer debtor groups.
nineteen of the fty ve owned slaves.
they were young the average age was about forty two but experienced statesmen.
above all they were nationalists more interested in preserving and strengthening the young republic than in further stirring the roiling cauldron of popular democracy.
the delegates hoped to crystallize the last evaporating pools of revolutionary idealism into a stable political structure that would endure.
they strongly desired a rm dignied and respected government.
they believed in republicanism but sought to protect the american experiment from its weaknesses abroad and excesses at home.
in a broad sense the piratical dey of algiers who drove the delegates to their work was a founding father.
they aimed to clothe the central authority with genuine power especially in controlling tariffs so that the united states could wrest satisfactory commercial treaties from foreign nations.
the shortsighted hostility of the british mercantilists spurred the constitution framers to their task and in this sense the illiberal lord shefeld was also a founding father.
other motives hovered in the philadelphia hall.
delegates were determined to preserve the union forestall anarchy and ensure security of life and property against dangerous uprisings by the mobocracy above all they sought to curb the unrestrained democracy rampant in the various states.
we have probably had too good an opinion of human nature in forming our confederation washington concluded.
the specter of the recent outburst in massachusetts was especially alarming and in this sense daniel shays was yet another founding father.
grinding necessity extorted the constitution from a reluctant nation.
fear occupied the fty sixth chair.
hammering out a bundle of compromises some of the travel stained delegates when they rst reached philadelphia decided upon a daring step.
they would completely scrap the old articles of confederation despite explicit instructions from congress to revise.
technically these bolder spirits were determined to overthrow the existing government of the united states see table 9 1 by peaceful means.
a scheme proposed by populous virginia and known as the large state plan was rst pushed forward chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 table 9 1 evolution of federal union years attempts at union participants 1643 1684 1686 1689 1772 1776 1775 1781 1781 1789 1789 1790 new eng land confederation dominion of new eng land albany congress stamp act congress committees of correspondence first continental congress adopts the association second continental congress articles of confederation federal constitution as the framework of the constitution.
the virginia plans essence was that representation in both houses of a bicameral congress should be based on population an arrangement that would naturally give the larger states an advantage.
tiny new jersey suspicious of brawny virginia countered with the small state plan the new jersey plan provided for equal representation in a unicameral congress by states regardless of size and population as under the existing articles of confederation.
the weaker states feared that under the virginia scheme the stronger states would band together and lord it over the rest.
angry debate heightened by a sti ing heat wave led to deadlock.
the danger loomed that the convention would unravel in complete failure.
even skeptical old benjamin franklin seriously proposed that the daily sessions be opened with a prayer by a local clergyman.
after bitter and prolonged debate the great compromise of the convention was hammered out and agreed upon.
a cooling of tempers came coincidentally with a cooling of the temperature.
the larger states were conceded representation by population in the house of representatives art.
3 see the appendix and the smaller states were appeased by equal representation in the senate see art.
each state no matter how poor or small would have two senators.
the big states obviously yielded more.
as a sop to them the delegates agreed that every tax bill or revenue measure must originate in the house where population counted more heavily see art.
this critical compromise broke the logjam and from then on success seemed within reach.
the nal constitution was short not least because it grew out of the anglo american common law legal tradition which made it unnecessary to be specic about every conceivable detail.
it mostly provided a exible guide to broad rules of procedure rather than colonies colonies colonies colonies colonies colonies colonies states states a xed set of detailed laws.
the original unamended constitution contained just seven articles and ran to about ten printed pages.
elsewhere where civil law traditions prevailed constitutions took the form of elaborate legal codes and were often strikingly lengthy.
indias constitution for example which came into force in 1950 contains almost four hundred articles and runs to nearly two hundred pages.
in a signicant reversal of the arrangement most state constitutions had embodied the new constitution provided for a robust though still legally restrained executive in the presidency.
the framers were here partly inspired by the example of massachusetts where a vigorous popularly elected governor had suppressed shayss rebellion.
the president was to have broad authority to make appointments to domestic ofces including judgeships as well as veto power over legislation.
yet presidential power was far from absolute.
the president as commander in dr james mchenry 1753 1816 a delegate from maryland to the constitutional convention of 1787 took notes on the arguments made for and against the drafting of a new constitution gov.
randolph observed that the confederation is incompetent to any one object for which it was instituted.
the framers of it wise and great men but human rights were the chief knowle d ge of the times when it was framed so far as they applied to oppose great britain.
requisitions for men and money had never offered their form to our assemblies.
none of those vices that have since discovered themselves were apprehended.
a conservative constitution signing of the constitution of the united states 1787 george washington presided from the dais as the constitutional conventions president.
at a table in the front row sat james madison later called the father of the constitution who recorded the proceedings in shorthand.
daily from 10 a m to 3 p m from late may through mid september 1787 the fty ve delegates wrangled over ideas for a new federal government.
chief was granted the power to wage war but congress retained the crucial right to declare war a division of responsibilities that has been an invitation to con ict between president and congress ever since.
the constitution as drafted was a bundle of compromises they stand out in every section.
a key compromise was the method of electing the president indirectly by the electoral college rather than by direct means.
while the large states would have the advantage in the rst round of popular voting as a states share of electors was based on the total of its senators and representatives in congress the small states would gain a larger voice if no candidate got a majority of electoral votes and the election was thrown to the house of representatives where each state would have for this purpose only just a single vote see art.
although the framers of the constitution expected election by the house to occur frequently it has happened just twice in 1800 and in 1824.
sectional jealousy also intruded.
should the voteless slave of the southern states count as a person in apportioning direct taxes and in according representation in the house of representatives.
the south not wishing to be deprived of inuence answered yes the north replied no arguing that as slaves were not citi zens the north might as logically demand additional representation based on its horses.
as a compromise between total representation and none at all it was decided that a slave might count as three fths of a person.
hence the memorable if arbitrary three fths compromise see art.
most of the states wanted to shut off the african slave trade.
but south carolina and georgia requiring slave labor in their rice paddies and malarial swamps raised vehement protests.
by way of compromise the convention stipulated that the slave trade might continue until the end of 1807 at which time congress could turn off the spigot see art.
it did so as soon as the prescribed interval had elapsed.
meanwhile all the new state constitutions except georgias forbade overseas slave trade.
safeguards for conservatism heated clashes among the delegates have been overplayed.
the area of agreement was actually large otherwise the convention would have speedily disbanded.
economically the members of the constitutional convention generally saw eye to eye they demanded chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 sound money and the protection of private property.
politically they were in basic agreement they favored a stronger government with three branches and with checks and balances among them what critics branded a triple headed monster finally the convention was virtually unanimous in believing that manhood suffrage democracy government by democratick babblers was something to be feared and fought.
daniel shays the prime bogeyman still frightened the conser vative minded delegates.
they deliberately erected safeguards against the excesses of the mob and they made these barriers as strong as they dared.
the awesome federal judges were to be appointed for life.
the powerful president was to be elected indirectly by the electoral college the lordly senators were to be chosen indirectly by state legislatures see art.
only in the case of one half of one of the three great branches the house of representatives were qualied propertied citizens permitted to choose their ofcials by direct vote see art.
yet the new charter also contained democratic elements.
above all it stood foursquare on the two great principles of republicanism that the only legitimate government was one based on the consent of the governed and that the powers of government should be limited in this case specically limited by a written constitution.
the virtue of the people not the authority of the state was to be the ultimate guarantor of liberty justice and order.
we the people the preamble began in a ringing af rmation of these republican doctrines.
at the end of seventeen muggy weeks may 25 to september 17 1787 only forty two of the original ftyve members remained to sign the constitution.
three of the forty two refusing to do so returned to their states to resist ratication.
the remainder adjourning one of the philadelphia delegates recorded in his journal a brief episode involving benjamin franklin who was asked by a woman when the convention ended well doctor what have we got a republic or a monarchy.
the elder statesman answered a republic if you can keep it.
to the city tavern celebrated the toastworthy occasion.
but no members of the convention were completely happy about the result.
they were too near their work and too weary.
whatever their personal desires they nally had to compromise and adopt what was acceptable to the entire body and what presumably would be acceptable to the entire country.
the clash of federalists and antifederalists the framing fathers early foresaw that nationwide acceptance of the constitution would not be easy to obtain.
a formidable barrier was unanimous ratication by all thirteen states as required for amendment by the still standing articles of confederation.
but since absent rhode island was certain to veto the constitution the delegates boldly adopted a different scheme.
they stipulated that when nine states had registered their approval through specially elected conventions the constitution would become the supreme law of the land in those states ratifying see art.
this was extraordinary even revolutionary.
it was in effect an appeal over the heads of the congress that had called the convention and over the heads of the legislatures that had chosen its members to the people or those of the people who could vote.
in this way the framers could claim greater popular sanction for their handiwork.
a divided congress submitted the document to the states on this basis without recommendation of any kind.
the american people were somewhat astonished so well had the secrets of the convention been concealed.
the public had expected the old articles of confederation to be patched up now it was handed a startling new document in which many thought the precious jewel of state sovereignty was swallowed up see table 9 2.
one of the hottest debates of american history forthwith erupted.
the antifederalists who opposed the stronger federal government were arrayed against the federalists who obviously favored it.
a motley crew gathered in the antifederalist camp.
its leaders included prominent revolutionaries like samuel adams patrick henry and richard henry lee.
their followers consisted primarily though not exclusively of states rights devotees backcountry dwellers and one horse farmers in general the poorest classes see map 9 4.
they were joined by paper moneyites and debtors many of whom feared that a potent central government would force them to pay off their federalists and antifederalists table 9 2 strengthening the central government under articles of confederation under federal constitution a loose confederation of states 1 vote in congress for each state a rm union of people 2 votes in senate for each state representation by population in house see art.
ii iii simple majority vote in congress subject to presidential veto see art.
2 laws executed by powerful president see art.
ii iii congress to regulate both foreign and interstate commerce see art.
3 extensive power in congress to levy taxes see art.
1 federal courts capped by supreme court see art.
iii amendment less difcult see art.
v ample power to enforce laws by coercion of individuals and to some extent of states vote of 9 states in congress for all important mea sures laws administered loosely by committees of congress no congressional power over commerce no congressional power to levy taxes limited federal courts unanimity of states for amendment no authority to act directly upon individuals and no power to coerce states british north america canada rior r aw re nc e new york june 1788 vote 30 for 27 against l la k e s u p e st la ke new hampshire june 1788 vote 57 for 47 against massachusetts february 1788 vote 187 for 168 against rhode island may 1790 vote 34 for 32 against 40n connecticut january 1788 vote 128 for 40 against n la k e m i c h iga n ro hu n ntario lake o e lak erie pennsylvania december 1787 vote 46 for 23 against ohio interactive map r maryland april 1788 vote 63 for 11 against kentucky district n tennessee district s es ee virginia 70 w june 1788 vote 89 for 79 against r te n map 9 4 the struggle over ratication this mottled map shows that federalist support tended to cluster around the coastal areas which had enjoyed protable commerce with the outside world including the export of grain and tobacco.
impoverished frontiersmen suspicious of a powerful new central government under the constitution were generally antifederalists.
new jersey december 1787 vote 38 for 0 against delaware december 1787 vote 30 for 0 against north carolina november 1789 vote 194 for 77 against south carolina may 1788 vote 149 for 73 against federalist majority antifederalist majority georgia january 1788 vote 26 for 0 against 30 n evenly divided politically unorganized 8 0 w 300 km.
at l a n t i c ocean chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 richard henry lee 1732 1794 a prominent antifederalist attacked the proposed constitution in 1788 tis really astonishing that the same people who have just emerged from a long and cruel war in defense of liberty should now agree to x an elective despotism upon themselves and their posterity.
the same year prominent patriot patrick henry 1736 1799 agreed that the proposed constitution endangered everything the revolution had sought to protect this constitution is said to have beautiful features but when i come to examine these features sir they appear to me horridly frightful among other deformities it has an awful squinting it squints towards monarchy and does not this raise indignation in the breast of every american.
your president may easily become king your senate is so imperfectly constructed that your dearest rights may be sacriced by what may be a small minority.
where are your checks in this government.
debts and at full value.
large numbers of antifederalists saw in the constitution a plot by the upper crust to steal power back from the common folk.
silver buckled federalists had power and inuence on their side.
they enjoyed the support of such commanding gures as george washington and benjamin franklin.
most of them lived in the settled areas along the seaboard not in the raw backcountry.
overall they were wealthier than the antifederalists more educated and better orga nized.
they also controlled the press.
more than a hundred newspapers were published in america in the 1780s only a dozen supported the antifederalist cause.
antifederalists voiced vehement objections to the gilded trap known as the constitution.
they cried with much truth that it had been drawn up by the aristocratic elements and hence was antidemocratic.
they likewise charged that the sovereignty of the states was being submerged and that the freedoms of the indi vidual were jeopardized by the absence of a bill of rights.
they decried the dropping of annual elections for congressional representatives the erecting of a federal stronghold ten miles square later the district of columbia the creation of a standing army the omission of any reference to god and the highly questionable procedure of ratifying with only two thirds of the states.
a philadelphia newspaper added that benjamin franklin was a fool from age and george washington a fool from nature the great debate in the states special elections some apathetic but others hotly contested were held in the various states for members of the ratifying conventions see table 9 3.
the candidates federalist or antifederalist were elected on the basis of their pledges for or against the constitution.
with the ink barely dry on the parchment four small states quickly accepted the constitution for they had come off much better than they expected.
pennsylvania number two on the list of ratiers was the rst large state to act but not until high handed irregularities had been employed by the federalist legislature in calling a convention.
these included the forcible seating of two antifederalist members their clothes torn and their faces red with rage in order to complete a quorum.
massachusetts the second most populous state provided an acid test.
if the constitution had failed in massachusetts the entire movement might easily have bogged down.
the boston ratifying convention at rst contained an antifederalist majority.
it included grudging shaysites and the aging samuel adams as suspicious of government power in 1787 as he had been in 1776.
the assembly buzzed with dismaying talk of summoning another constitutional convention as though the nation had not already shot its bolt.
clearly the choice was not between this constitution and a better one but between this constitution and the creaking articles of confederation.
the absence of a bill of rights alarmed the antifederalists.
but the federalists gave them solemn assurances that the rst congress would add such a safeguard by amendment and ratication was then secured in massachusetts by the rather narrow margin of 187 to 168.
three more states fell into line.
the last of these was new hampshire whose convention at rst had contained a strong antifederalist majority.
the federal ratifying the constitution table 9 3 ratication of the constitution state date vote in convention rank in population population 1.
dec 7 1787 dec 12 1787 dec 18 1787 jan 2 1788 jan 9 1788 feb 7 1788 unanimous 46 to 23 unanimous unanimous 128 to 40 187 to 168 59 096 433 611 184 139 82 548 237 655 475 199 apr.
28 1788 may 23 1788 june 21 1788 june 26 1788 july 26 1788 nov 21 1789 may 29 1790 63 to 11 149 to 73 57 to 46 89 to 79 30 to 27 195 to 77 34 to 32 319 728 249 073 141 899 747 610 340 241 395 005 69 112 7.
delaware pennsylvania new jersey georgia connecticut massachusetts incl.
maine maryland south carolina new hampshire virginia new york north carolina rhode island ists cleverly arranged a prompt adjournment and then won over enough waverers to secure ratication.
nine states all but virginia new york north carolina and rhode island had now taken shelter under the new federal roof and the document was ofcially adopted on june 21 1788.
francis hopkinson exulted in his song the new roof huzza.
my brave boys our work is complete the world shall admire columbias fair seat.
but such rejoicing was premature so long as the four dissenters conspicuously new york and virginia dug in their heels.
the four laggard states proud virginia the biggest and most populous state provided erce antifederalist opposition.
there the college bred federalist orators for once encountered worthy antagonists including the ery patrick henry.
he professed to see in the fearsome document the death warrant of liberty.
george washington james madison and john marshall on the federalist side lent inuential support.
with new hampshire about to ratify the new union was going to be formed anyhow and virginia could not very well continue comfortably as an independent state.
after exciting debate in the state convention ratication carried 89 to 79.
new york also experienced an uphill struggle burdened as it was with its own heavily antifederalist state convention.
alexander hamilton at heart favored a much stronger central government than that under debate but he contributed his sparkling personality and persuasive eloquence to whipping up support for federalism as framed.
he also joined john jay and james madison in penning a masterly series of articles for the new york newspapers.
though designed as propaganda these essays remain the most penetrating commentary ever written on the constitution and are still widely sold in book form as the federalist.
probably the most famous of these is madisons federalist no.
10 which brilliantly refuted the conventional wisdom of the day that it was impossible to extend a republican form of government over a large territory.
new york nally yielded.
realizing that the state could not prosper apart from the union the convention ratied the document by the close count of 30 to 27.
at the same time it approved thirty two proposed amendments and vain hope issued a call for yet another convention to modify the constitution.
last ditch dissent developed in only two states.
a hostile convention met in north carolina then adjourned without taking a vote.
rhode island did not even summon a ratifying convention rejecting the constitution by popular referendum.
the two most ruggedly individualist centers of the colonial era homes of the otherwise minded thus ran true to chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 banner paraded by the society of pewterers in new york city 1788 this silk banner was carried by members of the society of pewterers in a parade in new york city on july 23 1788 to celebrate the impending ratication of the united states constitution by new york state.
the enthusiasm of these craftsmen for the constitution conrms that not all federalists were well to do.
the first coin authorized by congress 1787 the fugio cent was minted by a private company and remained in circulation until the 1850s.
the word fugio i y and the sundial show that time ies mind your business urges diligence.
they were to change their course albeit unwillingly only after the new government had been in operation for some months.
the race for ratication despite much apathy was close and quite bitter in some localities.
no lives were lost but riotous disturbances broke out in new york and pennsylvania involving bruises and bloodshed.
there was much behind the scenes pressure on delegates who had promised their constituents to vote against the constitution.
the last four states ratied a triumphant cartoon this cartoon appeared in the massachusetts centinel on august 2 1788.
note the two laggards especially the sorry condition of rhode island.
the new constitution not because they wanted to but because they had to.
they could not safely exist outside the fold.
a conservative triumph the minority had triumphed twice.
a militant minority of american radicals had engineered the military revolution that cast off the unwritten british constitution.
a militant minority of conser vatives now embracing many of the earlier radicals had engineered two massachusetts citizens took opposite positions on the new constitution.
jonathan smith a farmer unsympathetic to shayss rebellion of 1787 wrote i am a plain man and i get my living by the plow.
i have lived in a part of the country where i have known the worth of good government by the want of it.
the black cloud of shays rebellion rose last winter in my area.
it brought on a state of anarchy that led to tyranny.
when i saw this constitution i found that it was a cure for these disorders.
i got a copy of it and read it over and over.
i dont think the worse of the constitution because lawyers and men of learning and moneyed men are fond of it.
they are all embarked in the same cause with us and we must all swim or sink together.
amos singletary 1721 1806 who described himself as a poor man argued against the constitution we fought great britain some said for a three penny tax on tea but it was not that.
it was because they claimed a right to tax us and bind us in all cases whatever.
and does not this constitution do the same.
these lawyers and men of learning and money men that talk so nely and gloss over matters so smoothly to make us poor illiterate people swallow down the pill.
they expect to be the managers of the constitution and get all the power and money into their own hands.
and then they will swallow up all us little folks just as the whale swallowed up jonah.
the peaceful revolution that overthrew the inadequate constitution known as the articles of confederation.
eleven states in effect had seceded from the confederation leaving the two still in actually out in the cold.
a majority had not spoken.
only about one fourth of the adult white males in the country chiey the propertied people had voted for delegates to the ratifying conventions.
careful estimates indicate that if the new constitution had been submitted to a manhoodsuffrage vote as in new york it would have encountered much more opposition probably defeat.
conservatism was victorious.
safeguards had been erected against mob rule excesses while the republican gains of the revolution were conserved.
radicals such as patrick henry who had ousted british rule saw themselves in turn upended by american conser vatives.
the federalists were convinced that by setting the drifting ship of state on a steady course they could restore economic and political stability.
yet if the architects of the constitution were conservative it is worth emphasizing that they conserved the principle of republican government through a redenition of popular sovereignty.
unlike the antifederalists who believed that the sovereignty of the people resided in a single branch of government the legislature the federalists contended that every branch executive judiciary and legislature effectively represented the people.
by ingeniously embedding the doctrine of selfrule in a self limiting system of checks and balances among these branches the constitution reconciled the potentially con icting principles of liberty and order.
it represented a marvelous achievement one that elevated the ideals of the revolution even while setting boundaries to them.
one of the distinctive and enduring paradoxes of american history was thus revealed in the united states conser vatives and radicals alike have championed the heritage of republican revolution.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 chronology first continental congress calls for abolition of slave trade military ofcers form society of the cincinnati philadelphia quakers found worlds rst antislavery society land ordinance of 1785 new jersey constitution temporarily gives women the vote virginia statute for religious freedom shayss rebellion meeting of ve states to discuss revision of the articles of confederation articles of confederation adopted by second continental congress northwest ordinance constitutional convention in philadelphia ratication by nine states guarantees a new government under the constitution massachusetts adopts rst constitution drafted in convention and ratied by popular vote articles of confederation put into effect key terms society of the cincinnati 174 disestablished 175 virginia statute for religious freedom 175 civic virtue 176 articles of confederation 179 old northwest 182 land ordinance of 1785 182 northwest ordinance 182 people to know shayss rebellion 184 virginia plan 188 new jersey plan 188 great compromise 188 common law 188 civil law 188 three fths compromise 189 antifederalists 190 federalists 190 the federalist 193 lord shefeld daniel shays patrick henry varying viewpoints the constitution revolutionary or counterrevolutionary.
a lthough the constitution has endured for over two centuries as the basis of american government historians have differed sharply over how to interpret its origins and meaning.
the so called nationalist school of historians writing in the late nineteenth century viewed the constitution as the logical culmination of the revolution and more generally as a crucial step in the god given progress of anglosaxon peoples.
as described in john fiskes the critical period of american history 1888 the young nation buffeted by foreign threats and growing internal chaos with only a weak central government to lean on was saved by the adoption of a more rigorous constitution the ultimate ful llment of republican ideals.
by the early twentieth century however the progressive historians had turned a more critical eye to the constitution.
having observed the supreme court of their own day repeatedly overrule legislation designed to better social conditions for the masses they began to view the original document as an instrument created by elite conser vatives to wrest political power away from the common people.
for historians like carl becker and charles beard the constitution was part of the revolutionary struggle between the lower classes small farmers debtors and laborers and the upper classes merchants nanciers and manufacturers.
beards an economic interpretation of the constitution of the united states 1913 argued that the articles of confederation had protected debtors and small property owners and displeased wealthy elites heavily invested in trade the public debt and the promotion of manufacturing.
only a stronger more centralized government could protect their extensive property interests.
reviewing the economic holdings of the founding fathers beard determined that most of those men were indeed deeply involved in investments that would increase in value under the constitution.
in effect beard argued the constitution represented a successful attempt by conser vative elites to buttress their own economic supremacy at the expense of less fortunate americans.
he further contended that the constitution was ratied by default because the people most disadvantaged by the new government did not possess the property quali cations needed to vote more evidence of the class con ict underlying the struggle between the federalists and the antifederalists.
beards economic interpretation of the constitution held sway through the 1940s.
historians like merrill jensen elaborated on beards analysis by arguing that the 1780s were not in fact mired in chaos but rather were hopeful times for many americans.
in the 1950s however this analysis fell victim to the attacks of the consensus historians who sought explanations for the constitution in factors other than class interest.
scholars such as robert brown and forrest mcdonald convincingly disputed beards evidence about delegates property ownership and refuted his portrayal of the masses as propertyless and disfranchised.
they argued that the constitution derived from an emerging consensus that the country needed a stronger central government.
scholars since the 1950s have searched for new ways to understand the origins of the constitution.
the most inuential work has been gordon woods creation of the american republic 1969.
wood reinterpreted the ratication controversy as a struggle to de ne the true essence of republicanism.
antifederalists so feared human inclination toward corruption that they shuddered at the prospect of putting powerful political weapons in the hands of a central government.
they saw small governments susceptible to local control as the only safeguard against tyranny.
federalists on the other hand believed that a strong balanced national government would rein in selsh human instincts and channel them toward the pursuit of the common good.
alarmed by the indulgences of the state governments the federalists james madison in particular especially in federalist no.
10 developed the novel ideal of an extensive republic a polity that would achieve stability by virtue of its great size and diversity.
this conception challenged the conventional wisdom that a republic could survive only if it extended over a small area with a homogeneous population.
in this sense wood argued the constitution represented a bold experiment the ful llment rather than the repudiation of the most advanced ideas of the revolutionary era even though it emanated from traditional elites determined to curtail dangerous disruptions to the social order.
chapter 9 the confederation and the constitution 1776 1790 to learn more richard bernstein with kim s rice are we to be a nation.
the making of the constitution 1987 ruth bloch visionary republic millennial themes in american thought 1756 1800 1986 richard bushman the renement of america persons houses cities 1992 ron chernow alexander hamilton 2004 joseph ellis founding brothers the revolutionary generation 2001 joanne pope melish disowning slavery gradual emancipation and race in new england 1780 1860 1998 jack rakove james madison and the creation of the american republic 2002 ed the federalist the essential essays by alexander hamilton james madison and john jay 2003 david szatmary shays rebellion 1980 gordon s wood the radicalism of the american revolution 1991 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at launching the new ship of state 1789 1800 i shall only say that i hold with montesquieu that a government must be tted to a nation as much as a coat to the individual and consequently that what may be good at philadelphia may be bad at paris and ridiculous at petersburg russia.
alexander hamilton 1799 a mericas new ship of state did not spread its sails to the most favorable breezes.
within twelve troubled years the american people had risen up and thrown overboard both the british yoke and the articles of confederation.
a decade of lawbreaking and constitution smashing was not the best training for government making.
americans had come to regard a central authority replacing that of george iii as a necessary evil something to be distrusted watched and curbed.
the nances of the infant government were likewise precarious.
the revenue had declined to a trickle whereas the public debt with interest heavily in arrears was mountainous.
worthless paper money both state and national was as plentiful as metallic money was scarce.
americas precarious national security was also threatened by the wars that rocked europe in the wake of the french revolution of 1789 an event that also roiled domestic politics in the edgling united states.
in the face of all those difculties the americans were brashly trying to erect a republic on an immense scale something that no other people had attempted and that traditional political theory deemed impossible.
the eyes of a skeptical world were on the upstart united states.
growing pains when the constitution was launched in 1789 the republic was continuing to grow at an amazing rate.
population was doubling about every twenty ve years and the rst ofcial census of 1790 recorded almost 4 million people.
cities had blossomed proportionately philadelphia numbered 42 000 new york 33 000 boston 18 000 charleston 16 000 and baltimore 13 000.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website chapter 7 democracy and dissent force of public opinion how did the ideas of jeffersonians differ from those of the federalists.
while presiding over the first meeting of the u s senate in 1789 vice president john adams called the senators attention to a pressing procedural question how would they address george washington the newly elected president.
adams insisted that washington deserved an impressive title a designation lending dignity and weight to his office.
the vice president warned the senators that if they called washington simply president of the united states the common people of foreign countries as well as the sailors and soldiers would despise him to all eternity adams recommended his highness the president of the united states and protector of their liberties but some senators favored his elective majesty or his excellency adamss initiative caught many persons including washington completely by surprise.
they regarded the entire debate as ridiculous.
james madison a member of the house of representatives announced that pretentious european titles were ill suited to the genius of the people and the nature of our government thomas jefferson who was then residing in paris could not comprehend what motivated the vice president and in private correspondence he repeated benjamin franklins judgment that adams means well for his watch the video george washington the father of our country well wishers spread flowers in front of george washington as he rides through trenton on his way from virginia to new york for his inauguration as the first president of the united states in 1789.
chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 country is always an honest man often a wise one but sometimes and in some things absolutely out of his senses when the senators learned that their efforts embarrassed washington they dropped the topic.
the leader of the new republic would be called president of the united states.
one wag however dubbed the portly adams his rotundity he comic opera quality of the debate about how to address washington should not obscure the participants serious concern about setting government policy.
the members of the first congress could not take the survival of republican government for granted.
all of them of course wanted to secure the revolution.
the recently ratified constitution transferred sovereignty from the states to the people a bold and unprecedented decision that many americans feared would generate chronic instability.
translating constitutional abstractions into practical legislation would have been difficult even under the most favorable conditions.
but these were especially trying times.
great britain and france rivals in a century of war put nearly unbearable pressures on the leaders of the new republic and in the process made foreign policy a bitterly divisive issue.
although no one welcomed them political parties gradually took shape during this period.
neither the jeffersonians also called the republicans nor the federalists as the two major groups were called doubted that the united states would one day become a great commercial power.
they differed however on how best to manage the transition from an agrarian household economy to an international system of trade and industry.
the federalists encouraged rapid integration of the united states into a world economy but however enthusiastic they were about capitalism they did not trust the people or local government to do the job effectively.
a modern economy they insisted required strong national institutions that would be directed by a social elite who understood the financial challenge and who would work in the best interests of the people.
such claims frightened persons who came to identify themselves as jeffersonians.
strong financial institutions they thought had corrupted the government of great britain from which they had just separated themselves.
they searched for alternative ways to accommodate the needs of commerce and industry.
unlike the federalists the jeffersonians put their faith in the people defined for the most part politically as white yeoman farmers.
the jeffersonians insisted that ordinary entrepreneurs if they could be freed from intrusive government regulations could be trusted to resist greed and crass materialism and to sustain the virtue of the republic.
during the 1790s former allies were surprised to discover themselves at odds over such basic political issues.
one person hamilton for example would stake out a position.
another such as jefferson or madison would respond perhaps speaking a little more extravagantly than a specific issue demanded goaded by the rhetorical nature of public debate.
the first in turn would rebut passionately the new position.
by the middle of the decade this dialectic had almost spun out of control taking the young republic to the brink of political violence.
t leaders of every persuasion had to learn to live with public opinion the revolutionary elite had invited the people to participate in government but the gentlemen assumed that ordinary voters would automatically defer to their social betters.
instead the founders discovered they had created a rough and tumble political culture a robust public sphere of cheap newspapers and street demonstrations.
the newly empowered public followed the great debates of the period through articles they read in hundreds of highly partisan journals and magazines.
just as television did in the twentieth century print journalism opened politics to a large audience that previously might have been indifferent to the activities of elected officials.
by the time john adams left the presidency in 1800 he had learned this lesson well.
the ordinary workers and farmers of the united states feisty individuals who thought they were as good as anyone else and who were not afraid to let their political opinions be known were not likely to let their president become an elective majesty principle and pragmatism establishing a new government why was george washington unable to overcome division within the new government.
in 1788 george washington enjoyed great popularity throughout the nation.
the people remembered him as the selfless leader of the continental army and even before the states had ratified the constitution everyone assumed he would be chosen president of the united states.
he received the unanimous support of the electoral college an achievement that no subsequent president has duplicated.
adams a respected massachusetts lawyer who championed national independence in 1776 was selected vice president.
as washington left his beloved virginia plantation mount vernon for new york city he recognized that the people now so vocal in their support could be fickle.
i fear he explained with mature insight if the issue of public measures should not correspond with their sanguine expectations they will turn the extravagant.
into equally extravagant.
censures washington owed much of his success as the nations first president to an instinctive feeling for the symbolic possibilities of political power.
although he possessed only modest speaking abilities and never matched the intellectual brilliance of some contemporaries washington sensed that he had come to embody the hopes and fears of the new republic and thus without ever quite articulating the attributes necessary to achieve charisma an instinctive ability that some leaders have to merge their own personality with the abstract goals of the government he carefully monitored his official behavior.
washington knew that if he did not convincingly demonstrate the existence of a strong republic people who championed the sovereignty of the individual states would attempt to weaken federal authority before it was ever properly established.
the first congress quickly established executive departments.
some congressmen wanted to prohibit presidents from dismissing cabinet level appointees without senate approval but james madison still a voice for a strong independent executive led conflicting visions jefferson and hamilton a successful fight against this restriction on presidential authority.
madison recognized that the chief executive could not function unless he had personal confidence in the people with whom he worked.
in 1789 congress created the departments of war state and the treasury and as secretaries washington nominated henry knox thomas jefferson and alexander hamilton respectively.
edmund randolph served as part time attorney general a position that ranked slightly lower in prestige than the head of a department.
since the secretary of the treasury oversaw the collection of customs and other future federal taxes hamilton could anticipate having several thousand jobs to dispense an obvious source of political patronage.
to modern americans accustomed to a huge federal bureaucracy the size of washingtons government seems amazingly small.
when jefferson arrived in new york to take over the state department for example he found two chief clerks two assistants and a part time translator.
with this tiny staff he not only maintained contacts with the representatives of foreign governments collected information about world affairs and communicated with u s officials living overseas but also organized the entire federal census.
since the constitution tied congressional representation to state population it was extremely important to count the number of inhabitants fairly and efficiently a task that strained the resources of the new administration.
in 1790 at a cost of only 44 377 28 hundreds of federal enumerators were dispatched to obtain an accurate tally of the nations inhabitants.
anxious to impress predatory european monarchies with the rapid growth of the united states washington hoped the number would be large.
the final figure of 3 929 214 people of which some 700 000 were african american slaves disappointed the president.
jefferson immediately recognized that his new job would allow him little leisure for personal interests.
the situation in other departments was similar.
overworked clerks scribbled madly just to keep up with the press of correspondence.
john adams reviewing a bundle of letters and memos grumbled that often the handwriting is almost illegible considering these working conditions it is not surprising that the president had difficulty persuading able people to accept positions in the new government.
it is even more astonishing that hamilton and jefferson were able to accomplish as much as they did with so little assistance.
congress also provided for a federal court system.
the judiciary act of 1789 the work primarily of connecticut congressman oliver ellsworth created a supreme court staffed by a chief justice and five associate justices.
in addition the statute set up thirteen district courts authorized to review the decisions of the state courts.
john jay a leading figure in new york politics agreed to serve as chief justice but since federal judges in the 1790s were expected to travel hundreds of miles over terrible roads to attend sessions of the inferior courts few persons of outstanding talent and training joined jay on the federal bench.
one who did judge james iredell complained that service on the supreme court had transformed him into a travelling postboy remembering the financial insecurity of the old confederation government the newly elected congressmen passed the tariff of 1789 a tax of approximately 5 percent on imports.
the new levy generated considerable revenue for the young republic.
even before it went into effect however the act sparked controversy.
southern planters who relied heavily on european imports and the northern shippers who could control the flow of imports into the south claimed that the tariff discriminated against southern interests in favor of those of northern merchants.
conflicting visions jefferson and hamilton why did alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson find it so difficult to cooperate as members of washingtons cabinet.
washingtons first cabinet included two extraordinary personalities alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson.
both had served the country with distinction during the revolution were recognized by contemporaries as men of special genius as well as high ambition and brought to public office a powerful vision of how the american people could achieve greatness.
the story of their opposing views during the decade of the 1790s provides insight into the birth and development of political parties.
it also reveals how a common political ideology republicanism see chapter 6 could be interpreted in such vastly different ways that decisions about government policy turned friends into adversaries.
indeed the falling out of hamilton and jefferson reflected deep potentially explosive political divisions within american society.
hamilton was a brilliant dynamic young lawyer who had distinguished himself as washingtons aide de camp during the revolution.
born in the west indies the child of an adulterous relationship hamilton employed charm courage and intellect to fulfill his inexhaustible ambition.
he strove not for wealth but for reputation.
men and women who fell under his spell found him almost irresistible but to enemies hamilton appeared a dark calculating even evil genius.
he advocated a strong central government and refused to be bound by the strict wording of the constitution a document hamilton once called a shilly shally thing while he had fought for american independence he admired british culture and during the 1790s he advocated closer commercial and diplomatic ties with the former mother country with whom he said we have a similarity of tastes language and general manners jefferson possessed a profoundly different temperament.
this tall virginian was more reflective and shone less brightly in society than hamilton.
contemporaries sometimes interpreted his retiring manner as lack of ambition.
they misread jefferson.
he thirsted not for power or wealth but for an opportunity to advance the democratic principles that he had stated so eloquently in the declaration of independence.
when jefferson became secretary of state in january 1790 he had just returned from paris where he witnessed the first exhilarating moments of the french revolution.
these earthshaking events he believed marked the beginning of a worldwide republican assault on absolute monarchy and aristocratic privilege.
his european experiences biased jefferson in favor of france over great britain when the two nations clashed.
the contrast between these two powerful figures during the early years of washingtons administration should not be exaggerated.
they shared many fundamental beliefs.
indeed both chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 read the document alexander hamilton opposing visions for the new nation during the first years of washingtons administration neither hamilton top nor jefferson bottom recognized the full extent of their differences.
but as events forced the federal government to make decisions on economic and foreign affairs the two secretaries increasingly came into open conflict.
hamilton and jefferson insisted they were working for the creation of a strong prosperous republic one in which commerce would play an important role.
hamilton was publicly accused of being a secret monarchist but he never repudiated the ideals of the american revolution.
rather than being spokespersons for competing ideologies hamilton and jefferson were different kinds of republicans who during the 1790s attempted as best they could to cope with unprecedented political challenges.
however much these two men had in common serious differences emerged.
washingtons secretaries disagreed on precisely how the united states should fulfill its destiny.
as head of the treasury department hamilton urged his fellow citizens to think in terms of bold commercial development of farms and factories embedded within a complex financial network that would reduce the nations reliance on foreign trade.
because great britain had already established an elaborate system of banking and credit the secretary looked to that country for economic models that might be reproduced on this side of the atlantic.
hamilton also voiced concerns about the role of the people in shaping public policy.
his view of human nature caused him to fear democratic excess.
he assumed that in a republican society the gravest threat to political stability was anarchy rather than monarchy.
the truth he claimed unquestionably is that the only path to a subversion of the republican system of the country is by flattering the prejudices of the people and exciting their jealousies and apprehensions to throw affairs into confusion and bring on civil commotion the best hope for the survival of the republic hamilton believed lay with the countrys monied classes.
if the wealthiest people could be persuaded that their economic self interest could be advanced or at least made less insecure by the central government then they would work to strengthen it and by so doing bring a greater measure of prosperity to the common people.
from hamiltons perspective there was no conflict between private greed and public good one was the source of the other.
on almost every detail jefferson challenged hamiltons analysis.
the secretary of state assumed that the strength of the american economy lay not in its industrial potential but in its agricultural productivity.
the immensity of land represented the countrys major economic resource.
contrary to the claims of some critics jefferson did not advocate agrarian self sufficiency or look back nostalgically to a golden age dominated by simple yeomen.
he recognized the necessity of change and while he thought that persons who worked the soil were more responsible citizens than were those who labored in factories for wages he encouraged the nations farmers to participate in an expanding international market.
americans could exchange raw materials for finer manufactures than they are able to execute themselves unlike hamilton jefferson expressed faith in the ability of the american people to shape policy.
throughout this troubled decade even when the very survival of constitutional government seemed in doubt jefferson maintained a boundless optimism in the judgment of the common folk.
he instinctively trusted the people feared that uncontrolled government power might destroy their liberties and insisted public officials follow the letter of the constitution a frame of government he described as the wisest ever presented to men the greatest threat to the young republic he argued came from the corrupt activities of pseudoaristocrats persons who placed the protection of property and civil order above the preservation of liberty to tie the nations future to the selfish interests of a privileged class bankers manufacturers and speculators seemed cynical as well as dangerous.
he despised speculators who encouraged the hamiltons plan for prosperity and security rage of getting rich in a day since such gaming activities inevitably promoted the kinds of public vice that threatened republican government.
to mortgage the future of the common people by creating a large national debt struck jefferson as particularly insane.
but the responsibility for shaping the economy of the new nation fell mainly to alexander hamilton as the first secretary of the treasury.
hamiltons plan for prosperity and security why did many americans oppose alexander hamiltons blueprint for national prosperity.
the unsettled state of the nations finances presented the new government with a staggering challenge.
in august 1789 the house of representatives announced that adequate provision for the support of public credit is a matter of high importance to the national honor and prosperity however pressing the problem appeared no one was prepared to advance a solution and the house asked the secretary of the treasury to make suggestions.
congress may have received more than it bargained for.
hamilton threw himself into the task.
he read deeply in abstruse economic literature.
he even developed a questionnaire designed to find out how the u s economy really worked and sent it to scores of commercial and political leaders throughout the country.
but when hamiltons three major reports on public credit on banking and on manufacturers were complete they bore the unmistakable stamp of his own creative genius.
the secretary synthesized a vast amount of information into an economic blueprint so complex so innovative that even his allies were slightly baffled.
theodore sedgwick a congressman who supported hamiltons program explained weakly that the secretarys ideas were difficult to understand.
while we are in our infancy in the knowledge of finance certainly washington never fully grasped the subtleties of hamiltons plan.
the secretary presented his report on the public credit to congress on january 14 1790.
his research revealed that the nations outstanding debt stood at approximately 54 million.
this sum represented various obligations that the u s government had incurred during the revolutionary war.
in addition to foreign loans the figure included loan certificates the government had issued to its own citizens and soldiers.
but that was not all.
the states still owed creditors approximately 25 million.
during the 1780s americans desperate for cash had been forced to sell government certificates to speculators at greatly discounted prices and it was estimated that approximately 40 million of the nations debt was owed to twenty thousand people only 20 percent of whom were the original creditors.
funding and assumption hamiltons report on the public credit contained two major recommendations covering the areas of funding and assumption.
first under his plan the united states promised to fund its foreign and domestic obligations at full face value.
current holders of loan certificates whoever they were and no matter how they obtained them could exchange the old certificates for new government bonds bearing a moderate rate of interest.
second the secretary urged the federal government to assume responsibility for paying the remaining state debts.
hamilton reasoned that his credit system would accomplish several desirable goals.
it would significantly reduce the power of the individual states in shaping national economic policy something hamilton regarded as essential in maintaining a strong federal government.
moreover the creation of a fully funded national debt signaled to investors throughout the world that the united states was now solvent that its bonds represented a good risk.
hamilton argued that investment capital which might otherwise flow to europe would remain in this country providing a source of money for commercial and industrial investment.
in short hamilton invited the countrys wealthiest citizens to invest in the future of the united states.
critics claimed that the only people who stood to profit from the scheme were hamiltons friends some of whom sat in congress and who had purchased great numbers of public securities at very low prices.
to hamiltons great surprise madison his friend and collaborator in writing the federalist attacked the funding scheme in the house of representatives.
the virginia congressman agreed that the united states should honor its debts.
he worried however about the citizens and soldiers who because of personal financial hardship had been compelled to sell their certificates at prices far below face value.
why should wealthy speculators now profit from their hardship.
if the government treated the current holders of certificates less generously madison declared then there might be sufficient funds to provide equitable treatment for the distressed patriots.
whatever the moral justification for madisons plan may have been it proved unworkable on the national level.
far too many records had been lost since the revolution for the treasury department to be able to identify all the original holders.
in february 1790 congress soundly defeated madisons proposal.
the assumption portion of hamiltons plan unleashed even greater criticism.
some states had already paid their revolutionary debts and hamiltons program seemed designed to reward certain states massachusetts and south carolina for example simply because they had failed to put their finances in order.
in addition the secretarys opponents in congress became suspicious that assumption was merely a ploy to increase the power and wealth of hamiltons immediate friends.
the secretarys people scarce disguise their design observed william maclay a crusty scots irish senator from pennsylvania which is to create a mass of debts which will justify them in seizing all the sources of government no doubt maclay and others expressed genuine fears.
some of those who protested however were simply looking after their own speculative schemes.
these men had contracted to purchase huge tracts of vacant western lands from the state and federal governments.
they anticipated that when settlers finally arrived in these areas the price of land would skyrocket.
in the meantime the speculators had paid for the land with revolutionary certificates often purchased on the open market at fifteen cents on the dollar.
this meant that one could obtain 1 000 acres for only 150.
hamiltons assumption proposal threatened to destroy these lucrative transactions by cutting off the supply of cut rate securities.
on april 12 a rebellious house led by madison defeated assumption.
chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 the victory was short lived.
hamilton and congressional supporters resorted to legislative horse trading to revive his foundering program.
in exchange for locating the new federal capital on the potomac river a move that would stimulate the depressed economy of northern virginia several key congressmen who shared madisons political philosophy changed their votes on assumption.
hamilton may also have offered to give the state of virginia more federal money than it actually deserved.
whatever the details of these negotiations may have been in august washington signed assumption and funding into law.
the first element of hamiltons design was now securely in place.
interpreting the constitution the bank controversy the persistent hamilton submitted his second report to congress in january 1791.
he proposed that the u s government charter a national bank.
this privately owned institution would be funded in part by the federal government.
indeed since the bank of the united states would own millions of dollars of new u s bonds its financial stability would be tied directly to the strength of the federal government and of course to the success of hamiltons program.
the secretary of the treasury argued that a growing financial community required a central bank to facilitate increasingly complex commercial transactions.
the institution not only would serve as the main depository of the u s government but also would issue currency acceptable in payment of federal taxes.
because of that guarantee the money would maintain its value while in circulation.
madison and others in congress immediately raised a howl of protest.
while they were not oblivious to the many important services a national bank might provide for a growing country they suspected that banks especially those modeled on british institutions might perpetuate a large monied interest in the united states.
and how was one to interpret the constitution.
that document said nothing specifically about chartering financial corporations and critics warned that if hamilton and his supporters were allowed to stretch fundamental law on this occasion they could not be held back in the future.
popular liberties would be at the mercy of whomever happened to be in office.
to take a single step jefferson warned beyond the boundaries thus specifically drawn around the powers of congress is to take possession of a boundless field of power no longer susceptible to definition on this issue hamilton stubbornly refused to compromise announcing angrily this is the first symptom of a spirit which must either be killed or will kill the constitution of the united states this intense controversy involving his closest advisers worried the president.
even though the bank bill passed congress february 8 washington seriously considered vetoing the legislation on constitutional grounds.
before doing so however he requested written opinions from the members of his cabinet.
jeffersons rambling wholly predictable attack on the bank of the united states was not one of his more persuasive performances.
by contrast in only a few days hamilton prepared a masterful essay titled defense of the constitutionality of the bank he assured the president that article i section 8 of the constitution the congress shall have power.
to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers justified issuing charters to national banks.
the foregoing powers on which hamilton placed so much weight were taxation regulation of commerce and making war.
he boldly articulated a doctrine of implied powers an interpretation of the constitution that neither madison nor jefferson had anticipated.
hamiltons loose construction carried the day and on february 25 1791 washington signed the bank act into law.
hamilton triumphed in congress but the general public looked on his actions with growing fear and hostility.
many persons associated huge national debts and privileged banks with the decay of public virtue.
men of jeffersons temperament believed that great britain a country hamilton held in high regard had compromised the purity of its ancient constitution by allowing speculators to worm their way into positions of political power.
hamilton seemed intent on reproducing this corrupt system in the united states.
when news of his proposal to fund the national debt at full face value leaked out for example urban speculators rushed to rural areas where they purchased loan certificates from unsuspecting citizens at bargain prices.
to backcountry farmers making money without actually engaging in physical labor appeared immoral unrepublican and certainly un american.
when the greed of a former treasury department official led to several serious bankruptcies in 1792 ordinary citizens began to listen more closely to what madison jefferson and their associates were saying about growing corruption in high places.
setback for hamilton in his third major report report on manufactures submitted to congress in december 1791 hamilton revealed the final details of his grand design for the economic future of the united states.
this lengthy document suggested ways by which the federal government might stimulate manufacturing.
if the country wanted to free itself from dependence on european imports hamilton observed then it had to develop its own industry textile mills for example.
without direct government intervention however the process would take decades.
americans would continue to invest in agriculture.
but according to the secretary of the treasury protective tariffs and special industrial bounties would greatly accelerate the growth of a balanced economy and with proper planning the united states would soon hold its own with england and france.
in congress the battle lines were clearly drawn.
hamiltons opponents not yet a disciplined party but a loose coalition of men who shared madisons and jeffersons misgivings about the secretarys program ignored his economic arguments.
instead they engaged him on moral and political grounds.
madison railed against the dangers of consolidation a process that threatened to concentrate all power in the federal government leaving the states defenseless.
under the confederation of course madison had stood with the nationalists against the advocates of extreme states rights.
his disagreements with hamilton over economic policy coupled with the necessity of pleasing the voters of his virginia congressional district every two years transformed madison into a spokesman for the states echoing the substance of antifederalist arguments he had once hotly rejected see chapter 6.
jefferson attacked the report on manufactures from a different angle.
he assumed largely because he had been horrified by charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs europes urban poverty that cities breed vice.
the government jefferson argued should do nothing to promote their development.
he believed that hamiltons proposal guaranteed that american workers would leave the countryside and crowd into urban centers.
i think our government will remain virtuous for many centuries jefferson explained as long as they the people are chiefly agricultural.
when they get piled upon one another in large cities as in europe they will become corrupt as in europe and southern congressmen saw tariffs and bounties as vehicles for enriching hamiltons northern friends at the planters expense.
the recommendations in the report on manufactures were soundly defeated in the house of representatives.
charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs how did foreign affairs affect domestic politics during the 1790s.
during washingtons second term 1793 1797 war in europe dramatically thrust foreign affairs into the forefront of american life.
the impact of this development on the conduct of domestic politics was devastating.
officials who had formerly disagreed on economic policy now began to identify their interests with either britain or france europes most powerful nations.
differences of political opinion however trivial were suddenly cited as evidence that one group or the other had entered into treasonous correspondence with external enemies eager to compromise the independence and prosperity of the united states.
as jefferson observed during the troubled summer of 1793 european conflict kindled and brought forward the two parties with an ardour which our own interests merely could never excite the spirit of nationalism even spilled over into scientific debate.
the normally dispassionate jefferson reacted very badly when a french writer claimed among other things that north american animals were smaller than those found in europe.
see the feature essay defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment pp.
formal political organizations the federalists and republicans were born in this poisonous atmosphere.
the clash between the groups developed over how best to preserve the new republic.
the republicans jeffersonians advocated states rights strict interpretation of the constitution friendship with france and vigilance against the avaricious monopolizing spirit of commerce and commercial men the federalists urged a strong national government central economic planning closer ties with great britain and maintenance of public order even if that meant calling out federal troops.
the peril of neutrality great britain treated the united states with arrogance.
the colonists had defeated the redcoats on land but on the high seas the americans were no match for the british navy the strongest in the world.
indeed the young republic could not even compel its old adversary to comply with the treaty of 1783 in which the british had agreed to vacate military posts in the northwest territory.
in 1794 approximately a thousand british soldiers still occupied american land an obstruction that governor george clinton of new york claimed had excluded u s citizens from a very valuable trade to which their situation would naturally have invited them moreover even though 75 percent of american imports came from great britain that country refused to grant the united states full commercial reciprocity.
among other provocations it barred american shipping from the lucrative west indian trade.
france presented a very different challenge.
in may 1789 louis xvi desperate for revenue authorized a meeting of a representative assembly known as the estates general.
by so doing the king unleashed explosive revolutionary forces that toppled the monarchy and cost him his life january 1793.
the men who seized power and they came and went rapidly were militant republicans ideologues eager to liberate all europe from feudal institutions.
in the early years of the french revolution france drew on the american experience and thomas paine and the marquis de lafayette enjoyed great popularity.
but the french found they could not stop the violence of revolution.
constitutional reform turned into bloody purges and one radical group the jacobins guillotined thousands of people who were suspected of monarchist sympathies during the so called reign of terror october 1793 july 1794.
these horrific events left americans confused.
while those who shared jeffersons views cheered the spread of republicanism others who sided with hamilton condemned french expansionism and political excess.
in the face of growing international tension neutrality seemed the most prudent course for the united states.
but that policy was easier for a weak country to proclaim than to defend.
in february 1793 france declared war on great britain what the leaders of revolutionary france called the war of all peoples against all kings and these powerful european rivals immediately challenged the official american position on shipping free ships make free goods meaning that belligerents should not interfere with the shipping of neutral carriers.
to make matters worse no one was certain whether the franco american treaties of 1778 see chapter 5 legally bound the united states to support its old ally against great britain.
both hamilton and jefferson wanted to avoid war.
the secretary of state however believed that nations desiring american goods should be forced to honor american neutrality and therefore that if britain treated the united states as a colonial possession if the royal navy stopped american ships on the high seas and forced seamen to serve the king in other words if it impressed american sailors then the united states should award france special commercial advantages.
hamilton thought jeffersons scheme insane.
he pointed out that britain possessed the largest navy in the world and was not likely to be coerced by american threats.
the united states he counseled should appease the former mother country even if that meant swallowing national pride.
a newly appointed french minister to the united states edmond gent precipitated the first major diplomatic crisis.
this incompetent young man arrived in charleston south carolina in april 1793.
he found considerable popular enthusiasm for the french revolution and buoyed by this reception he authorized privately owned american vessels to seize british ships in the name chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 read the document proclamation of neutrality 1793 the execution of louis xvi by french revolutionaries served to deepen the growing political division in america.
although they deplored the excesses of the reign of terror jeffersonian republicans continued to support the french people.
federalists feared that the violence and lawlessness would spread to the united states.
such actions clearly violated u s neutrality and invited british retaliation.
when u s government officials warned gent to desist he threatened to take his appeal directly to the american people who presumably loved france more than did members of washingtons administration.
this confrontation particularly embarrassed jefferson the most outspoken pro french member of the cabinet.
he described gent as hot headed all imagination no judgment passionate disrespectful and even indecent towards the president washington did not wait to discover whether the treaties of 1778 were still in force.
before he had formally received the impudent french minister the president issued a proclamation of neutrality april 22.
ironically after gent learned that the jacobins intended to cut off his head if he returned to france he requested asylum married into an extremely wealthy family and spent the remainder of his life in new york.
jays treaty sparks domestic unrest great britain failed to take advantage of gents insolence.
instead it pushed the united states to the brink of war.
british forts in the northwest territory remained a constant source of tension.
in june 1793 a new element was added.
the london government blockaded french ports to neutral shipping and in november its navy captured several hundred american vessels trading in the french west indies.
the british had not even bothered to give the united states advance warning of a change in policy.
outraged members of congress especially those who identified with jefferson and madison demanded retaliation an embargo a stoppage of debt payment even war.
before this rhetoric produced armed struggle washington made one final effort to preserve peace.
in may 1794 he sent chief justice john jay to london to negotiate a formidable list of grievances.
the effort resulted in a political humiliation known simply as jays treaty.
jays main objectives were removal of the british forts on u s territory payment for ships taken in the west indies improved commercial relations and acceptance of the american definition of neutral rights.
jeffersons supporters by now openly called the republican interest anticipated a treaty favorable to the united states.
after all they explained the war with france had not gone well for great britain and the british people were surely desperate for american foodstuffs.
even before jay departed however his mission stood charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs little chance of success.
hamilton anxious as ever to placate the british had already secretly informed british officials that the united states would compromise on most issues.
not surprisingly when jay reached london he encountered polite but firm resistance.
the chief justice did persuade the british to abandon their frontier posts and to allow small american ships to trade in the british west indies but they rejected out of hand the u s position on neutral rights.
the royal navy would continue to search american vessels on the high seas for contraband and to impress sailors suspected of being british citizens.
moreover there would be no compensation for the ships seized in 1793 until the americans paid british merchants for debts contracted before the revolution.
and to the particular annoyance of southerners not a word was said about the slaves the british army had carried off at the conclusion of the war.
while jay salvaged the peace he appeared to have betrayed the national interest.
news of jays treaty perhaps more correctly called hamiltons treaty produced an angry outcry in the nations capital.
even washington was apprehensive.
he submitted the document to the senate without recommending ratification a sign that the president was not entirely happy with the results of jays mission.
after an extremely bitter debate the upper house controlled by federalists accepted a revised version of the treaty june 1795.
the vote was 20 to 10 a bare two thirds majority.
the details of the jay agreement soon leaked to the press.
this was an important moment in american political history.
the popular journals sparked a firestorm of objection.
throughout the country people who had generally been apathetic about national politics were swept up in a wave of protest.
urban mobs condemned jays alleged sellout rural settlers burned him in effigy.
jay jokingly told friends he could find his way across the country simply by following the light of those fires.
southerners announced they would not pay prerevolutionary debts to british merchants.
the virginia legislature proposed a constitutional amendment reducing the senates role in the treaty making process.
as fisher ames a federalist congressman noted darkly these little whirlwinds of dry leaves and dirt portend a hurricane his prediction proved accurate.
the storm broke in the house of representatives.
republican congressmen led by madison thought they could stop jays treaty by refusing to appropriate funds for its implementation.
as part of their plan they demanded that washington show the house state papers relating to jays mission.
the challenge raised complex issues of constitutional law.
the house for example was claiming a voice in treaty ratification a power explicitly reserved to the senate.
second there was the question of executive secrecy in the interest of national security.
could the president withhold information from the public.
according to washington as well as all subsequent presidents the answer was yes.
he took the occasion to lecture the rebellious representatives that the nature of foreign negotiations requires caution and their success must often depend on secrecy the president still had a trump card to play.
he raised the possibility that the house was really contemplating his impeachment.
such an action was of course unthinkable.
even criticizing washington in public was politically dangerous and as soon as he redefined the issue before congress petitions supporting the president flooded into the nations capital.
the maryland read the document the jay treaty 1794 john jay 1745 1829 was a successful lawyer and politician from new york.
he served in the continental congress during the revolution co authored the federalist papers with james madison and alexander hamilton and later became the first chief justice of the u s supreme court.
legislature for example declared its unabated reliance on the integrity judgment and patriotism of the president of the united states a statement that clearly called into question the patriotism of certain republican congressmen.
the federalists won a stunning tactical victory over the opposition.
had a less popular man than washington occupied the presidency however they would not have fared so well.
the division between the two parties was beyond repair.
the republicans labeled the federalists the british party the federalists believed that the republicans were in league with the french.
by the time jays treaty became law june 14 1795 the two giants of washingtons first cabinet had retired.
late in 1793 jefferson returned to his virginia plantation monticello where despite his separation from day to day political affairs he remained the chief spokesman for the republican party.
his rival hamilton left the treasury in january 1795 to practice law in new york city.
he maintained close ties with important federalist officials and even more than jefferson hamilton concerned himself with the details of party organization.
complete the assignment defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment on myhistorylab feature essay n ationalism promotes patriotism.
however these expressions of pride can turn malicious.
the physical environment of a country can be seen as giving the people who live there special attributes.
when claims of superiority seem to have this sort of seemingly scientific justification the rhetoric of nationalism can become dangerous often outright racist.
such a situation developed during the earliest years of the american republic.
even before the revolution respected scientists such as benjamin franklin resented disparaging remarks about american inferiority.
europeans accepted as fact the notion that new world animals and humans were smaller slower and less clever than those found in the old world.
franklin dismissed the theory as nonsense and at a dinner party in paris he took the opportunity to demonstrate that if size really mattered then the americans were bigger.
when the abbe raynal a french naturalist announced that everything american was substandard compared to european experience franklin challenged his host to a test.
all the americans at the table stood so did the french.
franklin noted with satisfaction that the americans had the finest stature and form raynal he observed was a mere shrimp although franklin may have won the battle of the dinner table other americans still worried that new world creatures fell short of european standards.
the seeds of doubt could be traced to a widely read scientific treatise entitled histoire naturelle the first volumes of which appeared in 1749.
defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment the author french philosopher comte de buffon argued that the climate of north america produced animals of smaller size than those encountered in the old world.
as evidence buffon cited the absence of elephants lions and other large beasts in the new world.
the only new world creatures that exceeded their old world counterparts in size he declared were the toads and snakes that thrived in north americas abundant swamps.
worse yet buffon asserted that americas climate caused animals found in europe to shrink and diminish when transported to the new world.
for buffon native americans were a case in point.
on the basis of superficial reports of indian weakness buffon announced that conditions in the new world were pernicious to men who are degenerated debilitated and vitiated in a surprising manner in all parts of their organization the implications of this idea were not lost on people such as franklin.
if the american environment sapped the indians of vitality it was only a matter a comparative view of the quadrupeds of europe and america bear red deer beaver otter cow europe lb.
153 7 288 8 18 5 8 9 763 0 america lb.
410 0 273 0 45 0 12 0 2500 0 source adapted from thomas jefferson notes on the state of virginia 1787.
illustration of frogs from comte de buffons histoire naturelle 1749.
buffon declared that in the damp american climate only cold blooded animals such as snakes and frogs flourished and grew larger than their european counterparts.
of time until european settlers who breathed the same air drank the same water and cultivated the same land succumbed to sloth.
one of buffons followers counseled those colonists condemned to live in such an unpromising environment to know how to make themselves happy.
with mediocrity leaving intellectual greatness to those who had wisely remained in the old world.
american anger over buffons theory came to a boil following the american revolution.
the new nation had its honor to defend.
if as the french scientist had maintained the north american climate caused the physical mental and moral abilities of humans to decline then the republican experiment of the young united states seemed destined to fail.
having already asserted that all men are created equal in the declaration of independence thomas jefferson set out to prove american equality through science.
an uncompromising patriot he devoted himself almost entirely to the defense of the fledgling republic spending much of the 1780s poring over accounts of american animals in search of holes in buffons theory.
jefferson published his results in 1785.
in notes on the state of virginia he countered buffon with a lengthy series of tables comparing the weight of european and american animals.
not surprisingly jefferson always tipped the scale in favor of the new world.
while europes puny flying squirrels weighed only 2 2 pounds america could boast of impressive 4 pound squirrels.
american bears were three times fatter than old world bears.
and most telling america had once been the home of huge ice age animals called woolly mammoths.
they looked a lot like elephants and one recently unearthed in kentucky matched the best old world elephants in terms of size.
jefferson did not stop there.
determined to use science to improve the international reputation of the united states jefferson commissioned the governor of new hampshire to kill a giant moose which was then shipped to paris as a present for buffon.
the plan miscarried.
while hunters managed to shoot the moose and drag it from the forest the unrefrigerated voyage to france made for an extremely foul smelling gift.
for jefferson the unlucky mooses decay was a minor problem since by his own reasoning he had put to rest misguided european ideas about animal deficiency in the new american republic.
turning from moose to men jefferson took a step that transformed a harmless squabble over the weight of squirrels into something much more alarming.
using the latest scientific research jefferson claimed that climate had almost no effect on human beings.
instead a persons race determined his or her size vitality and intelligence.
in this scheme european americans and native americans were equal.
and according to jefferson both were vastly superior to africans.
a celebration of national pride had now become a defense of racism.
to make his case jefferson first defended native americans against buffons assertions of climate induced inferiority.
buffon had suggested that indians beardless faces and lack of ardour for their female demonstrated their physical inadequacy in comparison to manly europeans.
in response jefferson outlined the practice of face plucking.
with them it is disgraceful to be hairy he claimed of native americans because many believed it likens them to hogs moreover the indians did not value french style womanizing.
jefferson explained that their soul is wholly bent upon war a trait that procures them glory among men and makes them the admiration of women differences between whites and indians could be attributed not to the environment but to culture.
indeed he saw the two groups as a single race so closely related that he recommended letting them intermix and become one people jefferson rejected completely any notion that africans in america could be part of this one people an unbridgeable biological gulf separated whites and indians groups that jefferson lumped together as homo sapiens europaeus from blacks.
jefferson argued that while europeans and native americans produced fine arts and engaged in brilliant oratory african slaves exhibited no skill in painting or sculpture and never uttered a thought above the level of plain narration with only anecdotal evidence to support his claims jefferson concluded that blacks were inferior to the whites in the endowments of both body and mind according to jefferson the harsh truth was that whether found in africa on carolina rice plantations or on the streets of boston africans were a different species of the same genus they were a separate race unworthy of genuine political and social equality.
during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries american nationalists seized upon jeffersons ideas seeing notes on the state of virginia as a blueprint for a republican society grounded in rational science and dedicated to racial inequality.
in a world still dominated by powerful monarchies and old world cultures americans of all european backgrounds took comfort in being equal to each other and superior to african americans.
in an atmosphere of strident nationalism few were willing to explain differences between whites and blacks as culturally conditioned.
there existed in jeffersons words a real distinction which nature has made white americans were destined by nature to be free while enslaved blacks whose labor formed the backbone of the whites economy must accept their lesser place in the nations future.
jeffersons scientific thinking about race inspired by national insecurity and a frenchmans musing on new world toads promoted a divisiveness in american society that continues to trouble the nation.
questions for discussion 1.
why were americans such as thomas jefferson so defensive about the size of american animals.
what was the relationship between science and racism in jeffersons thinking.
chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 read the document the treaty of greenville at the treaty of greenville in 1795 negotiators shared this calumet or peace pipe a spiritually symbolic act for native americans.
this superficial recognition of the legitimacy of native american cultures barely disguised the indians crushing loss of sovereignty.
pushing the native americans aside before great britain finally withdrew its troops from the great lakes and northwest territory its military officers encouraged local indian groups the shawnee chippewa and miami to attack settlers and traders from the united states.
the indians who even without british encouragement fully appreciated that the newcomers intended to seize their land won several impressive victories over federal troops in the area that would become western ohio and indiana.
in 1790 general josiah harmar led his soldiers into an ambush.
the following year an army under general arthur st clair suffered more than nine hundred casualties near the wabash river.
but the indians were militarily more vulnerable than they realized for when confronted with a major u s army under the command of general anthony wayne they received no support from their former british allies.
at the battle of fallen timbers august 20 1794 waynes forces crushed indian resistance in the northwest territory and the native peoples were compelled to sign the treaty of greenville formally ceding to the u s government the land that became ohio.
in 1796 the last british soldiers departed for canada.
shrewd negotiations mixed with pure luck helped secure the nations southwestern frontier.
for complex reasons having to do with the state of european diplomacy spanish officials in 1795 encouraged the u s representative in madrid to discuss the navigation of the mississippi river.
before this initiative the spanish government not only had closed the river to american commerce but also had incited the indians of the region to harass settlers from the united states see chapter 6.
relations between the two countries probably would have deteriorated further had the united states not signed jays treaty.
the spanish assumed quite erroneously that great britain and the united states had formed an alliance to strip spain of its north american possessions.
to avoid this imagined disaster officials in madrid offered the american envoy thomas pinckney extraordinary concessions the opening of the mississippi the right to deposit goods in new orleans without paying duties a secure southern boundary on the 31st parallel a line roughly parallel to the northern boundary of florida and running west to the mississippi and a promise to stay out of indian affairs.
an amazed pinckney signed the treaty of san lorenzo also called pinckneys treaty on october 27 1795 and in march the senate ratified the document without a single dissenting vote.
pinckney who came from a prominent south carolina family instantly became the hero of the federalist party.
a new revolution in the americas events in the french colony of saint domingue during the 1790s presented the washington administration with a particularly difficult foreign policy question.
located in the eastern portion of the caribbean island of hispaniola saint dominique was home to a large slave population of african descent.
in fact these slaves far outnumbered the white french living in the colony.
when these slaves rebelled against their masters in 1791 both sides called upon the united states for assistance.
washington father of american liberty but also himself a slave owner had to decide whether to support the rebels in their bid for liberty or the slave masters in their battle to regain control.
american popular opinion especially in the south favored the white french population.
most white americans were uncomfortable with the idea of an independent republic governed by free black politicians.
worse yet a successful slave rebellion in the caribbean might encourage slaves in the united states to insurrection.
thomas jefferson called the expulsion of whites from saint domingue a tragedy and warned that if something was not done to prevent the contagion of slave rebellion from spreading then we shall be the murderers of our own children washington ultimately decided to support the slave owners of saint domingue.
his government loaned over 700 000 to the french planters trying to restore their authority.
american merchants supplied the french with arms and supplies but also supplied the rebels.
although the southern colonies were spared any large scale insurrections slave owners continued to worry throughout the 1790s.
the united states became home to an influx of white french refugees.
in the end the rebels succeeded in defeating their french masters.
they also drove off invasions by the spanish and british who were at war with revolutionary france and hoped to take advantage of the turmoil to seize the colony.
in 1804 the freedom fighters declared the independence of the republic of haiti the second independent republic founded in the americas after the united states.
popular political culture read the document s n j md.
r essee r spanish claim line 1785 s c r pa ille reenv y of g treat line pittsburgh territory va cincinnati ga n y e eri ke la.
ten n orth 31 n de latitu flint r r st clair s defeat nov 4 1791 northwest.
n c tenn statehood 1796 ho chatta och.
ee r ns as atlantic ocean ky mi yazoo ssissi p ark a del.
va r ft detroit ft miami br.
fallen timbers aug 20 1794 r ee um harmar s defeat a m oct 22 1790.
i spanish louisiana r i upper canada major indian battles conn pa ito ry io oh major indian battles ft niagara io r p da na a c ft miami built 1794 te rr dutchman s point vt n h ft oswego mass.
n y u sissipp t es w th mis r no ft detroit maine part of mass.
pointe au fer oswegatchie ft michilimackinac r pe ca oh ke er wa bas hr la w lo n l ad aw a re nc er.
at the treaty of san lorenzo pickneys treaty 1796 st gre ky 100 miles 50 100 kilometers apalachicola r spanish florida gulf of mexico maximum spanish claim 1784 line of pinckney s treaty 1795 spanish held forts british held forts 0 100 200 kilometers conquest of the west 200 miles withdrawal of the british defeat of native americans and negotiations with spain secured the nations frontiers.
popular political culture why was it hard for americans to accept political dissent as a part of political activity.
more than any other event during washingtons administration ratification of jays treaty generated intense political strife.
even as members of congress voted as republicans or federalists they condemned the rising partisan spirit as a grave threat to the stability of the united states.
popular writers equated party with faction and faction with conspiracy to overthrow legitimate authority party conflict also suggested that americans had lost the sense of common purpose that had united them during the revolution.
contemporaries did not appreciate the beneficial role that parties could play by presenting alternative solutions to foreign and domestic problems.
organized opposition smacked of disloyalty and therefore had to be eliminated by any means fair or foul.
these intellectual currents coupled with the existence of two parties created an atmosphere that bred suspicion.
in the name of national unity federalists as well as republicans advocated the destruction of political adversaries.
informing the public news and politics more than any other single element newspapers transformed the political culture of the united states.
americans were voracious readers.
in 1789 a foreign visitor observed the common people here are on a footing in point of literature with the middle ranks of europe.
they all read and write and understand arithmetic almost every little town now furnishes a circulating library a rapidly expanding number of newspapers appealed to this large literate audience.
john fenno established the gazette of the united states 1789 a journal that supported hamiltons political philosophy.
the republicans responded in october 1790 with philip freneaus influential national gazette.
while the format of the publications was similar to that of the colonial papers their tone was quite different.
these fiercely partisan journals presented rumor chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 and opinion as fact.
public officials were regularly dragged through the rhetorical mud.
jefferson for example was accused of cowardice hamilton vilified as an adulterer.
as party competition became more bitter editors showed less restraint.
one republican paper even suggested that george washington had been a british agent during the revolution.
no wonder fisher ames announced in 1801 the newspapers are an overmatch for any government this decade also witnessed the birth of political clubs.
these democratic or republican associations as they were called first appeared in 1793 and were modeled on the political debating societies that sprang up in france during the early years of the french revolution.
perhaps because of the french connection federalists assumed that the american clubs represented the interests of the republican party.
their purpose was clearly political indoctrination.
the philadelphia society announced it would cultivate a just knowledge of rational liberty a democratic club in new york city asked each member to declare himself a firm and steadfast friend of the equal rights of man by 1794 at least twenty four clubs were holding regular meetings.
how many americans actually attended their debates is not known but regardless of the number the clubs obviously complemented the newspapers in providing the common people with highly partisan political information.
whiskey rebellion charges of republican conspiracy political tensions became explosive in 1794.
the federalists convinced themselves that the republicans were actually prepared to employ violence against the u s government.
although the charge was without foundation it took on plausibility in the context of growing party strife.
read the document the crisis developed when a group of farmers living in western pennsylvania protested a federal excise tax on distilled whiskey that congress had originally passed in 1791.
these men did not relish paying any taxes but this tax struck them as particularly unfair.
they made a good deal of money distilling their grain into whiskey and the excise threatened to put them out of business.
largely because the republican governor of pennsylvania refused to suppress the angry farmers washington and other leading federalists assumed that the insurrection represented a direct political challenge.
the president called out fifteen thousand militiamen and accompanied by hamilton he marched against the rebels.
the expedition was an embarrassing fiasco.
the distillers disappeared and predictably enough no one living in the pittsburgh region seemed to know where the troublemakers had gone.
two supposed rebels were convicted of high crimes against the united states one was reportedly a simpleton and the other insane.
washington eventually pardoned both men.
as peace returned to the frontier republicans gained much electoral support from voters the federalists had alienated.
in the national political forum however the whiskey rebellion had just begun.
spokesmen for both parties offered sinister explanations for the seemingly innocuous affair.
washington blamed the republican clubs for promoting civil unrest.
he apparently believed that the opposition party had dispatched french agents to western pennsylvania to undermine the authority of the federal government.
in november 1794 washington informed congress that these self created societies in other words the republican political clubs had inspired a spirit inimical to all order indeed the whiskey rebellion had been fomented by combinations of men who.
have disseminated from an ignorance or perversion of facts suspicions jealousies and accusations of the whole government george washington whiskey rebellion address to congress 1794 tarring and feathering federal officials was one way in which western pennsylvanians protested the tax on whiskey in 1794.
washingtons call for troops to put down the insurrection drew more volunteers than he had been able to raise during most of the revolution.
source north wind picture archives.
the adams presidency the presidents interpretation of this rural tax revolt was no less charitable than the conspiratorial explanation offered by the republicans.
jefferson labeled the entire episode a hamiltonian device to create an army for the purpose of intimidating republicans.
how else could one explain the administrations gross overreaction to a few disgruntled farmers.
an insurrection was announced and proclaimed and armed against jefferson noted but could never be found the response of both parties reveals a pervasive fear of some secret evil design to destroy the republic.
the clubs and newspapers as yet unfamiliar tools for mobilizing public opinion fanned these anxieties convincing many government officials that the first amendment should not be interpreted as protecting political dissent.
washingtons farewell in september 1796 washington published his famed farewell address formally declaring his intention to retire from the presidency.
in the address which was printed in newspapers throughout the country washington warned against all political factions.
written in large part by hamilton who drew on a draft prepared several years earlier by madison the address served narrowly partisan ends.
the product of growing political strife it sought to advance the federalist cause in the forthcoming election.
by waiting until september to announce his retirement washington denied the republicans valuable time to organize an effective campaign.
there was an element of irony in this initiative.
washington had always maintained he stood above party.
while he may have done so in the early years of his presidency events such as the signing of jays treaty and the suppression of the whiskey rebellion transformed him in the eyes of many americans into a spokesman solely for hamiltons federalist party.
washington also spoke to foreign policy matters in the address.
he counseled the united states to avoid making any permanent alliances with distant nations that had no real interest in promoting american security.
this statement guided foreign relations for many years and became the credo of later american isolationists who argued that the united states should steer clear of foreign entanglements.
the adams presidency why were some federalists willing to sacrifice political freedoms for party advantage.
the election of 1796 took place in an atmosphere of mutual distrust.
jefferson soon to be the vice president informed a friend that an anglican and aristocratic party has sprung up whose avowed object is to draw over us the substance as they have already done the forms of british government on their part the federalists were convinced their republican opponents wanted to hand the government over to french radicals.
by modern standards the structures of both political parties were primitive.
leaders of national stature such as madison and hamilton wrote letters encouraging local gentlemen around the country to support a certain candidate but no one attempted to canvass the voters in advance of the election.
during the campaign the federalists sowed the seeds of their eventual destruction.
party stalwarts agreed that john adams should stand against the republican candidate thomas jefferson.
hamilton however could not leave well enough alone.
from his law office in new york city he schemed to deprive adams of the presidency.
his motives were obscure.
he apparently feared that an independentminded adams would be difficult to manipulate.
he was correct.
hamilton exploited an awkward feature of the electoral college.
in accordance with the constitution each elector cast two ballots and the person who gained the most votes became president.
the runner up regardless of party affiliation served as vice president.
ordinarily the federalist electors would have cast one vote for adams and one for thomas pinckney the hero of the negotiations with spain and the partys choice for vice president.
everyone hoped of course there would be no tie.
hamilton secretly urged southern federalists to support only pinckney even if that meant throwing away an electors second vote.
if everything had gone according to plan pinckney would have received more votes than adams but when new englanders loyal to adams heard of hamiltons maneuvering they dropped pinckney.
when the votes were counted adams had 71 jefferson 68 and pinckney 59.
hamiltons treachery not only angered the new president but also heightened tensions within the federalist party.
moreover it forced adams to work with a republican vice president.
adams hoped that he and jefferson could cooperate as they had during the revolution they had served together on the committee that drafted the declaration of independence but partisan pressures soon overwhelmed the presidents good intentions.
jefferson recorded their final attempt at reconciliation.
strolling home one night after dinner jefferson and adams reached a place where our road separated his being down market street mine along fifth and we took leave and he adams never after that.
consulted me as to any measure of the government the election of 1796 candidate j adams jefferson t pinckney burr party federalist republican federalist republican electoral vote the xyz affair and domestic politics foreign affairs immediately occupied adamss full attention.
the french government regarded jays treaty as an affront.
by allowing great britain to define the conditions for neutrality the united states had in effect sided with that nation against the interests of france.
relations between the two countries had steadily deteriorated.
the french refused to receive charles cotesworth pinckney the u s representative in paris.
pierre adet the french minister in philadelphia openly tried to influence the 1796 election in favor of the republicans.
his meddling in domestic politics not only embarrassed jefferson it also offended the american people.
the situation then took a violent turn.
in 1797 french privateers began seizing american ships.
since neither the united states nor france officially declared war the hostilities came to be known as the quasi war.
hamilton and his friends welcomed a popular outpouring of anti french sentiment.
the high federalists as members of chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 hamiltons wing of the party were called counseled the president to prepare for all out war hoping that war would purge the united states of french influence.
adams was not persuaded to escalate the conflict.
he dispatched a special commission in a final attempt to remove the sources of antagonism.
this famous negotiating team consisted of charles pinckney john marshall and elbridge gerry.
they were instructed to obtain compensation for the ships seized by french privateers as well as release from the treaties of 1778.
the commission was shocked by the outrageous treatment it received in france.
instead of dealing directly with talleyrand the minister of foreign relations they met with obscure intermediaries who demanded a huge bribe.
the commission reported that talleyrand would not open negotiations unless he was given 250 000.
in addition the french government expected a loan of millions of dollars.
the americans refused to play this insulting game.
pinckney angrily sputtered no no not a sixpence and with marshall he returned to the united states.
when they arrived home marshall offered his much quoted toast millions for defense but not one cent for tribute diplomatic humiliation set off a domestic political explosion.
when adams presented the commissions official correspondence before congress the names of talleyrands lackeys were labeled x y and z the federalists burst out with a war cry.
at last they would be able to even old scores with the republicans.
in april 1798 a federalist newspaper in new york city announced ominously that any american who refused to censure france must have a soul black enough to be fit for treasons strategems and spoils rumors of conspiracy referred to as the xyz affair spread throughout the country.
personal friendships between republicans and federalists were shattered.
jefferson described the tense political atmosphere in a letter to an old colleague you and i have formerly seen warm debates and high political passions.
but gentlemen of different politics would then speak to each other and separate the business of the senate from that of society.
it is not so now.
men who have been intimate all their lives cross the streets to avoid meeting and turn their heads another way lest they should be obliged to touch their hats he would do so only on condition that adams appoint hamilton as second in command.
this demand placed the president in a terrible dilemma.
several revolutionary veterans henry knox for example outranked hamilton.
moreover the former secretary of the treasury had consistently undermined adamss authority and to give hamilton a position of real power in the government seemed awkward at best.
when washington insisted however adams was forced to support hamilton.
the chief of the high federalists threw himself into the task of recruiting and supplying the troops.
no detail escaped his attention.
he and secretary of war mchenry made certain that in this political army only loyal federalists received commissions.
they even denied adamss son in law a post.
the entire enterprise took on an air of unreality.
hamilton longed for military glory and he may have contemplated attacking spains latin american colonies.
his driving obsession however was the restoration of political order.
no doubt he agreed with a federalist senator from connecticut who predicted that the republicans never will yield till violence is introduced we must have a partial civil war.
and the bayonet must convince some who are beyond the reach of other arguments hamilton should not have treated adams with such open contempt.
after all the massachusetts statesman was still the president and without presidential cooperation hamilton could not fulfill his grand military ambitions.
yet whenever pressing questions concerning the army arose adams was nowhere to be found.
he let commissions lie on his desk unsigned he took overlong vacations to new england.
he made it quite clear his first love was the navy.
in may 1798 the president persuaded congress to establish the navy department.
for this new cabinet position he selected benjamin stoddert a person who did not take orders from hamilton.
moreover adams further infuriated the high federalists by refusing to ask congress for a formal declaration of war.
when they pressed him adams threatened to resign making jefferson president.
as the weeks passed the american people increasingly regarded the idle army as an expensive extravagance.
crushing political dissent silencing political opposition the alien and sedition acts in the spring of 1798 high federalists assumed that it was just a matter of time until adams asked congress for a formal declaration of war.
in the meantime they pushed for a general rearmament new fighting ships additional harbor fortifications and most important a greatly expanded u s army.
about the need for land forces adams remained understandably skeptical.
he saw no likelihood of french invasion.
the president missed the political point.
the army the federalists wanted was intended not to thwart french aggression but to stifle internal opposition.
indeed militant federalists used the xyz affair as the occasion to institute what jefferson termed the reign of witches the threat to the republicans was not simply a figment of the vice presidents overwrought imagination.
when theodore sedgwick now a federalist senator from massachusetts first learned of the commissions failure he observed in words that capture the high federalists vindictiveness it will afford a glorious opportunity to destroy faction.
improve it during the summer of 1798 a provisional army gradually came into existence.
george washington agreed to lead the troops but the federalists did not rely solely on the army to crush political dissent.
during the summer of 1798 the partys majority in congress passed a group of bills known collectively as the alien and sedition acts.
this legislation authorized the use of federal courts and the powers of the presidency to silence the republicans.
the acts were born of fear and vindictiveness and in their efforts to punish the followers of jefferson the federalists created the nations first major crisis over civil liberties.
congress drew up three separate alien acts.
the first the alien enemies law vested the president with extraordinary wartime powers.
on his own authority he could detain or deport citizens of nations with which the united states was at war and who behaved in a manner he thought suspicious.
since adams refused to ask for a declaration of war this legislation never went into effect.
a second act the alien law empowered the president to expel any foreigner from the united states simply by executive decree.
congress limited the acts to two years and while adams did not attempt to enforce them the mere threat of arrest caused some frenchmen to flee the country.
the third act the naturalization law was the most flagrantly political of the adams presidency read the document the alien and sedition acts 1798 created martyrs the actions of the administration persuaded republicans that the survival of free government was at stake.
time was running out.
there is no event jefferson warned.
however atrocious which may not be expected kentucky and virginia resolutions in the early years of the republic political dissent sometimes escalated to physical violence.
this fistfight took place on the floor of congress february 15 1798.
the combatants are republican matthew lyon and federalist roger griswold.
the act established a fourteen year probationary period before foreigners could apply for full u s citizenship.
federalists recognized that recent immigrants especially the irish tended to vote republican.
the naturalization law therefore was designed to keep hordes of wild irishmen away from the polls for as long as possible.
the sedition law struck at the heart of free political exchange.
it defined criticism of the u s government as criminal libel citizens found guilty by a jury were subject to fines and imprisonment.
congress entrusted enforcement of the act to the federal courts.
republicans were justly worried that the sedition law undermined rights guaranteed by the first amendment.
when they protested however the high federalists dismissed their complaints.
the constitution they declared did not condone the most groundless and malignant lies striking at the safety and existence of the nation they were determined to shut down the opposition press and were willing to give the government what seemed almost dictatorial powers to achieve that end.
the jeffersonians also expressed concern over the federal judiciarys expanded role in punishing sedition.
they believed such matters were best left to state officials.
americans living in widely scattered regions of the country soon witnessed political repression firsthand.
district courts staffed by federalist appointees indicted seventeen people for criticizing the government.
several cases were absurd.
in newark new jersey for example a drunkard staggered out of a tavern to watch a sixteen gun salute fired in honor of president adams.
when the man expressed the hope a cannonball might lodge in adamss ample posterior he was arrested.
no wonder a new york city journal declared that joking may be very dangerous even to a free country the federal courts had become political tools.
while the fumbling efforts at enforcement of the sedition law did not silence opposition indeed they sparked even greater criticism and by the fall of 1798 jefferson and madison were convinced that the federalists envisioned the creation of a police state.
according to madison the sedition law ought to produce universal alarm it threatened the free communication of ideas that he deemed the only effectual guardian of every other right some extreme republicans such as john taylor of virginia recommended secession from the union others advocated armed resistance.
but jefferson wisely counseled against such extreme strategies.
this is not the kind of opposition the american people will permit he reminded his desperate supporters.
the last best hope for american freedom lay in the state legislatures.
as the crisis deepened jefferson and madison drafted separate protests known as the kentucky and virginia resolutions.
both statements vigorously defended the right of individual state assemblies to interpret the constitutionality of federal law.
jefferson wrote the kentucky resolutions in november 1798 and in an outburst of partisan anger he flirted with a doctrine of nullification as dangerous to the survival of the united states as anything advanced by hamilton and his high federalist friends.
in the kentucky resolutions jefferson described the federal union as a compact.
the states transferred certain explicit powers to the national government but in his opinion they retained full authority over all matters not specifically mentioned in the constitution.
jefferson rejected hamiltons broad interpretation of the general welfare clause.
every state jefferson argued has a natural right in cases not within the compact.
to nullify of their own authority all assumptions of power by others within their limits carried to an extreme this logic could have led to the breakup of the federal government and in 1798 kentucky legislators were not prepared to take such a radical stance.
while they diluted jeffersons prose they fully accepted his belief that the alien and sedition acts were unconstitutional and ought to be repealed.
when madison drafted the virginia resolutions in december he took a stand more temperate than jeffersons.
madison urged the states to defend the rights of the american people but he resisted the notion that a single state legislature could or should have the authority to overthrow federal law.
adamss finest hour in february 1799 president adams belatedly declared his independence from the hamiltonian wing of the federalist party.
throughout the confrontation with france adams had shown little enthusiasm for war.
following the xyz debacle he began to receive informal reports that talleyrand had changed his tune.
the french foreign minister told elbridge gerry and other americans that the bribery episode had been an unfortunate misunderstanding and that if the united states sent new representatives he was prepared to negotiate in good faith.
the high federalists ridiculed this report.
chapter 7 democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 but adams still brooding over hamiltons appointment to the army decided to throw his own waning prestige behind peace.
in february he suddenly asked the senate to confirm william vans murray as u s representative to france.
the move caught the high federalists totally by surprise.
they sputtered with outrage.
it is solely the presidents act pickering cried and we were all thunderstruck when we heard of it adams was just warming to the task.
in may he fired pickering and mchenry an action he should have taken months earlier.
with peace in the offing american taxpayers complained more and more about the cost of maintaining an unnecessary army.
the president was only too happy to dismantle hamiltons dream.
when the new negotiators oliver ellsworth and william davie joined murray finally arrived in france in november 1799 they discovered that yet another group had come to power there.
this government headed by napoleon bonaparte cooperated in drawing up an agreement known as the convention of mortefontaine.
the french refused to compensate the americans for vessels taken during the quasi war but they did declare the treaties of 1778 null and void.
moreover the convention removed annoying french restrictions on u s commerce.
not only had adams avoided war but he had also created an atmosphere of mutual trust that paved the way for the purchase of the louisiana territory.
the president declared with considerable justification that the second french mission was the most disinterested the most determined and the most successful act of my whole life it also cost him reelection.
the peaceful revolution the election of 1800 what did jefferson mean when he claimed in his first inaugural address that we are all republicans we are all federalists.
on the eve of the election of 1800 the federalists were fatally divided.
adams enjoyed wide popularity among the federalist rank and file especially in new england but articulate party leaders such as hamilton vowed to punish the president for his betrayal of their militant policies.
hamilton even composed a scathing pamphlet titled letter concerning the public conduct and character of john adams an essay that questioned adamss ability to hold high office.
once again the former secretary of the treasury attempted to rig the voting in the electoral college so that the partys vice presidential candidate charles cotesworth pinckney would receive more ballots than adams and america would be saved from the fangs of jefferson as in 1796 the conspiracy backfired.
the republicans gained 73 votes while the federalists trailed with 65.
to everyones surprise however the election was not resolved in the electoral college.
when the ballots were counted jefferson and his running mate aaron burr had tied.
this accident a republican elector should have thrown away his second vote sent the selection of the next president to the house of representatives a lame duck body still controlled by members of the federalist party.
as the house began its work on february 27 1801 excitement ran high.
each state delegation cast a single vote with nine votes needed for election.
on the first ballot jefferson received the support of eight states burr six and two states divided evenly.
people predicted a quick victory for jefferson but after dozens of ballots the house had still not selected a president.
the scene was now ludicrous observed one witness.
many had sent home for night caps and pillows and wrapped in shawls and greatcoats lay about the floor of the committee rooms or sat sleeping in their seats the drama dragged on for days.
to add to the confusion burr unaccountably refused to withdraw.
contemporaries thought his ambition had overcome his good sense.
the logjam finally broke when leading federalists decided that jefferson whatever his faults would make a more responsible president than would the shifty burr.
even hamilton labeled burr the most dangerous man of the community on the thirty sixth ballot representative james a bayard of delaware announced he no longer supported burr.
this decision coupled with burrs inaction gave jefferson the presidency ten states to four.
the election of 1800 candidate jefferson burr j adams c pinckney party republican republican federalist federalist electoral vote the twelfth amendment ratified in 1804 saved the american people from repeating this potentially dangerous turn of events.
henceforth the electoral college cast separate ballots for president and vice president.
listen to the audio file jefferson and liberty william birchs illustration of the partially constructed united states capitol building in washington d c in 1800.
when jefferson first took office the nations new capital was little more than a swampy and isolated village.
study resources during the final days of his presidency adams appointed as many federalists as possible to the federal bench.
jefferson protested the hasty manner in which these midnight judges were selected.
one of them john marshall became chief justice of the united states a post he held with distinction for thirty four years.
but behind the last minute flurry of activity lay bitterness and disappointment.
adams never forgave hamilton.
no party the federalist president wrote that ever existed knew itself so little or so vainly overrated its own influence and popularity as ours.
none ever understood so ill the causes of its own power or so wantonly destroyed them on the morning of jeffersons inauguration adams slipped away from the capital now located in washington d c unnoticed and unappreciated.
in the address that adams missed jefferson attempted to quiet partisan fears.
we are all republicans we are all federalists the new president declared.
by this statement he did not mean to suggest that party differences were no longer important.
jefferson reminded his audience that whatever the politicians might say the people shared a deep commitment to a federal union based on republican ideals set forth during the american revolution.
indeed the president interpreted the election of 1800 as a revolutionary episode as the fulfillment of the principles of 1776.
the federalists were thoroughly dispirited by the entire experience.
in the end it had not been hamiltons foolish electoral schemes that destroyed the partys chances in 1800.
rather the federalists had lost touch with a majority of the american people.
in office adams and hamilton whatever their own differences may have been betrayed their doubts about popular sovereignty too often and when it came time to marshal broad support to mobilize public opinion in favor of the party of wealth and privilege few responded.
as secretary of war oliver wolcott observed on hearing of jeffersons victory have our party shown that they possess the necessary skill and courage to deserve.
what have they done.
they write private letters.
to each other but they do nothing to give a proper direction to the public mind conclusion danger of political extremism from a broader historical perspective the election of 1800 seems noteworthy for what did not occur.
there were no riots in the streets no attempted coup by military officers no secession from the union nothing except the peaceful transfer of government from the leaders of one political party to those of the opposition.
americans had weathered the alien and sedition acts the meddling by predatory foreign powers in domestic affairs the shrilly partisan rhetoric of hack journalists and now at the start of a new century they were impressed with their own achievement.
as one woman who attended jeffersons inauguration noted the changes of administration which in every government and in every age have most generally been epochs of confusion villainy and bloodshed in this our happy country take place without any species of distraction or disorder but as she well understood indeed as modern americans must constantly relearn extremism in the name of partisan political truth can easily unravel the delicate fabric of representative democracy and leave the republic at the mercy of those who would manipulate the public for private benefit.
study resources take the study plan for chapter 7 democracy and dissent on myhistorylab time line 1787 constitution of the united states signed september 1789 george washington inaugurated april louis xvi of france calls meeting of the estates general may congress approves hamiltons plan for funding and assumption july bank of the united states is chartered february hamiltons report on manufactures rejected by congress december 1793 frances revolutionary government announces a war of all people against all kings february gent affair strains relations with france april washington issues proclamation of neutrality april spread of democratic clubs alarms federalists jefferson resigns as secretary of state december whiskey rebellion put down by u s army july november general anthony wayne defeats indians at the battle of fallen timbers august 1795 hamilton resigns as secretary of the treasury january jays treaty divides the nation june pinckneys treaty with spain is a welcome surprise october 1796 washington publishes farewell address september john adams elected president december 1797 xyz affair poisons u s relations with france october 1798 1800 quasi war with france 1798 congress passes the alien and sedition acts june and july provisional army is formed virginia and kentucky resolutions protest the alien and sedition acts november and december 1799 george washington dies december 1800 convention of mortefontaine is signed with france ending quasi war september 1801 house of representatives elects thomas jefferson president february chapter 7 chapter review chapter review force of public opinion how did the ideas of jeffersonians differ from those of the federalists.
while both jeffersonians and federalists agreed that the new united states would eventually become a great commercial power they differed on how best to achieve the transition from an agrarian economy to an international system based on trade and industry.
the federalists believed that this would require strong national institutions directed by a social elite but jeffersonians distrusted strong financial institutions and put their faith in independent white yeomen farmers who would be free of intrusive government regulations.
p 156 principle and pragmatism establishing a new government charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs how did foreign affairs affect domestic politics during the 1790s.
the french revolution split american opinion.
republicans cheered it federalists condemned it.
when france declared war on britain 1793 the extremely unpopular jays treaty 1794 with britain provoked heated political debate between its federalist supporters and republican opponents.
disagreements over how to deal with french aggression and insults during the quasi war and the xyz affair drove a wedge between the peace seeking president john adams and the high federalists who called for war and military expansion.
this divide helped jefferson win the election of 1800.
p 163 popular political culture pa n why was george washington unable to overcome division within the new government.
why was it hard for americans to accept political dissent as a part of political activity.
despite his huge popularity among all segments of the american population president washington was unable to bridge the differences between the two most brilliant and strong willed members of his cabinet thomas jefferson and alexander hamilton.
these two men fought throughout washingtons presidency over their different visions for the future of the republic.
hamilton imagined an urban commercial nation with a strong central government jefferson championed a simple agrarian republic.
p 158 in the 1790s many americans equated political dissent with disloyalty.
during the whiskey rebellion 1794 both federalists and republicans feared the other party planned to use violence to crush political opposition.
in the 1790s many americans lamented the loss of unity that had tied them together during the struggle for independence.
they feared that partisan politics might lead to a conspiracy to overthrow the legitimately elected government.
p 169 conflicting visions jefferson and hamilton the adams presidency va why did alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson find it so difficult to cooperate as members of washingtons cabinet.
why were some federalists willing to sacrifice political freedoms for party advantage.
while both hamilton and jefferson insisted they were working to create a strong prosperous republic in which commerce would be important they differed profoundly on how to achieve that goal.
where hamilton was pro british and wanted the american economy to imitate britains reliance on trade and industry jefferson supported the french revolution and believed that americas economic strength lay not in developing an industrial workforce but in increasing the countrys agricultural productivity so that farmers could exchange raw materials for imported manufactured goods.
p 159 many republicans believed that the support of jeffersonian republicans for france had compromised american sovereignty.
hamilton and the high federalists believed that a standing army was necessary to defend against invasion and to silence domestic dissent so that it could not split the republic apart.
they rationalized that the sacrifice of political liberties entailed in the alien and sedition acts were necessary to protect the republic from corrupting foreign particularly french influences.
this was especially important since they anticipated the onset of a war with france.
they used the rationale of national security to justify their pursuit of party power.
p 171 hamiltons plan for prosperity and security the peaceful revolution the election of 1800 fer dutchman s point vt n h oswego mass.
n y why did many americans oppose alexander hamiltons blueprint for national prosperity.
many citizens especially farmers and former soldiers felt that hamiltons plan to fund state loan certificates at full value would reward the immoral unrepublican and un american actions of speculators by allowing them to make money without physical labor.
many also complained that this plan rewarded the financial irresponsibility of states like massachusetts and south carolina.
supporters of jefferson rejected hamiltons vision of the united states as a commercial and manufacturing nation feared that his plan for a bank of the united states would perpetuate a large monied interest and protested that his doctrine of implied powers would lead to the steady growth of governmental power.
p 161 r i conn what did jefferson mean when he claimed in his first inaugural address that we are all republicans we are all federalists.
jefferson did not mean that party differences had disappeared or were no longer important after the election of 1800.
instead he wished to remind his audience that whatever their political differences the people were united by a deep commitment to a federal union based on republican ideals as set forth in the american revolution.
p 174 study resources key terms and definitions bank of the united states national bank proposed by secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton and established in 1791.
it served as a central depository for the u s government and had the authority to issue currency.
p 162 implied powers powers the constitution did not explicitly grant the federal government but that it could be interpreted to grant.
p 162 french revolution 1789 1799.
p 163 a social and political revolution in france interests and warned americans against political factions and foreign entanglements.
p 171 quasi war undeclared war between the united states and france in the late 1790s.
p 171 xyz affair a diplomatic incident in which american peace commissioners sent to france by president john adams in 1797 were insulted with bribe demands from their french counterparts dubbed x y and z in american newspapers.
the incident heightened war fever against france.
p 172 jays treaty treaty with britain negotiated by chief justice john jay in 1794.
though the british agreed to surrender forts on u s territory the treaty provoked a storm of protest in america.
p 164 alien and sedition acts collective name given to four laws congress passed in 1798 to suppress criticism of the federal government and curb liberties of foreigners living in the united states.
p 172 whiskey rebellion protests in 1794 by western pennsylvania farmers against a federal tax on whiskey.
the uprising was suppressed when president george washington called an army of 15 000 troops to the area.
p 170 kentucky and virginia resolutions statements penned by thomas jefferson and james madison to mobilize opposition to the alien and sedition acts which they argued were unconstitutional.
jeffersons statement the kentucky resolution suggested that states could declare null and void congressional acts they deemed unconstitutional.
p 173 farewell address in this 1796 document president george washington announced his intention not to seek a third term.
he also stressed federalist critical thinking questions 1.
how were the disagreements between hamilton and jefferson a 3.
how important were popular opinion and party politics in poisoning reflection of popular culture in the country during the 1790s.
how did american foreign policy during the 1790s influence the the adams presidency.
how could a constitutional republic justify the passage of highly growth of political dissent.
partisan legislation such as the alien and sedition acts.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 7 on myhistorylab force of public opinion popular political culture watch the video george washington the father of our country p 157 read the document george washington whiskey rebellion address to congress 1794 p 170 conflicting visions jefferson and hamilton the adams presidency read the document alexander hamilton opposing visions for the new nation p 160 charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs read the document p 164 the alien and sedition acts 1798 the peaceful revolution the election of 1800 proclamation of neutrality 1793 listen to the audio file jefferson and liberty p 174 read the document complete the assignment defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment p 166 read the document read the document p 173 the jay treaty 1794 p 165 the treaty of greenville p 168 read the document the treaty of san lorenzo pickneys treaty 1796 p 169 indicates study plan media assignment republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision contents and learning objectives regional identities in a new republic pg.
180 how did the republics growth shape the market economy and relations with native americans.
embarrassments overseas pg.
193 why did the united states find it difficult to avoid military conflict during this period.
the strange war of 1812 pg.
196 why is the war of 1812 sometimes thought of as a second war of independence.
jefferson as president pg.
183 how did practical politics challenge jeffersons political principles.
feature essay barbary pirates and american captives the nations first hostage crisis jeffersons critics pg.
187 how did jeffersonians deal with the difficult problems of party politics and slavery.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 6 the republican experiment a new political morality in 1788 lewis hallam and john henry petitioned the general assembly of pennsylvania to open a theater.
although a 1786 state law banned the performance of stage plays and other disorderly sports many philadelphia leaders favored the request to hold representations in their city.
a committee appointed to study the issue concluded that a theater would contribute to the general refinement of manners and the polish of society some supporters even argued that the sooner the united states had a professional theater the sooner the young republic would escape the foreign yoke of british culture.
the quakers of philadelphia dismissed such claims as out of hand.
they warned that such seminaries of lewdness and irreligion would quickly undermine the virtue of the people they pointed out that no sooner is a playhouse opened than it becomes surrounded with.
brothels since pennsylvania was already suffering from a stagnation of commerce and a scarcity of money unmistakable signs of gods displeasure it seemed unwise to risk divine punishment by encouraging new hot beds of vice such rhetoric did not sit well with other citizens who interpreted the revolutionary experience from an entirely different perspective.
at issue they insisted was not popular morality but state censorship.
if the government silenced the stage then the same authority.
may with equal justice dictate the shape and texture of our dress or the modes and ceremonies of our worship depriving those who wanted to see plays of an opportunity to do so they argued will abridge the natural right of every freeman to dispose of his time and money according to his own tastes and dispositions throughout post revolutionary america everyday matters such as the opening of a new playhouse provoked passionate public debate.
these divisions were symptomatic of a new uncertain political culture struggling to find the proper balance between public morality and private freedom.
during the long fight against although the words slave and slavery do not appear in the u s constitution debate over slavery and the slave trade resulted in a compromise in which both institutions persisted in the new republic.
not everyone was pleased with the compromise.
the library company of philadelphia commissioned this painting liberty displaying the arts and sciences 1792 by samuel jennings.
the broken chain at the feet of the goddess liberty is meant to demonstrate her opposition to slavery.
source the library company of philadelphia.
great britain americans had defended individual rights.
the problem was that the same people also believed that a republic that compromised its virtue could not long preserve liberty and independence.
in 1776 thomas paine had reminded ordinary men and women that the sun never shined on a cause of greater worth.
tis not the concern of a day a year or an age posterity are virtually involved in the contest and will be more or less affected even to the end of time by the proceedings now during the 1780s americans understood their responsibility not only to each other but also to history.
they worried however that they might not successfully meet the challenge.
the dangers were clear.
individual states seemed intent on looking out for local interests rather than the national welfare.
revolutionary leaders such as george washington and james madison concluded that the united states needed a strong central government to protect rights and property.
their creative quest for solutions brought forth a new and enduring constitution.
defining republican culture what were the limits of equality in the republican society of the new united states.
today the term republican no longer possesses the evocative power it did for most eighteenth century americans.
for them it defined not a political party but rather an entire political culture.
after all they had done something that no other people had achieved for a very long time.
they founded a national government without a monarch or aristocracy in other words a genuine republic.
making the new system work was a daunting task.
those americans who read deeply in ancient and renaissance history knew that most republics had failed often within a few years only to be replaced by tyrants who cared not at all what ordinary people thought about the public good.
to preserve their republic from such a fate victorious revolutionaries such as samuel adams chapter 6 the republican experiment recast fundamental political values.
for them republicanism represented more than a particular form of government.
it was a way of life a core ideology an uncompromising commitment to liberty and equality.
adams and his contemporaries certainly believed that creating a new nation state involved more than simply winning independence from great britain.
more than did any other form of government they insisted a republic demanded an exceptionally high degree of public morality.
if american citizens substituted luxury prodigality and profligacy for prudence virtue and economy then their revolution surely would have been in vain.
maintaining popular virtue was crucial to success.
an innocent stage play therefore set off alarm bells.
such foolish gratifications seemed to compromise republican goals.
it is not surprising that when confronted by such temptations adams thundered rome athens and all the cities of renown whence came your fall white americans came out of the revolution with an almost euphoric sense of the nations special destiny.
this expansive outlook encountered among so many ordinary men and women owed much to the spread of protestant evangelicalism.
however skeptical jefferson and franklin may have been about revealed religion the great mass of american people subscribed to an almost utopian vision of the countrys future.
to this new republic god had promised progress and prosperity.
the signs were visible for everyone.
there is not upon the face of the earth a body of people more happy or rising into consequence with more rapid stride one man announced in 1786 than the inhabitants of the united states of america.
population is increasing new houses building new lands clearing new settlements forming and new manufactures establishing with a rapidity beyond conception such experience did not translate easily or smoothly into the creation of a strong central government.
modern americans tend to take for granted the acceptance of the constitution.
its merits seem self evident largely because it has survived for two centuries.
but in the early 1780s no one could have predicted that the constitution as we know it would have been written much less ratified.
it was equally possible that the americans would have supported a weak confederation or perhaps allowed the various states and regions to go their separate ways.
in this uncertain political atmosphere americans divided sharply over the relative importance of liberty and order.
the revolutionary experience had called into question the legitimacy of any form of special privilege.
as one republican informed an aristocratic colleague in the south carolina assembly the day is arrived when goodness and not wealth are the only criterions of greatness a legislative leader in pennsylvania put the point even more bluntly no man has a greater claim of special privilege for his 100 000 than i have for my 5 the man who passionately defended social equality for those of varying economic status however may still have resisted the extension of civil rights to women or blacks.
nevertheless liberty was contagious and americans of all backgrounds began to make new demands on society and government.
for them the revolution had suggested radical alternatives and in many forums throughout the nation especially in the elected state assemblies they insisted on being heard.
in certain quarters the celebration of liberty met with mixed response.
some americans often the very men who had resisted british tyranny worried that the citizens of the new nation were caught up in a wild destructive scramble for material wealth.
democratic excesses seemed to threaten order to endanger the rights of property.
surely a republic could not long survive unless its citizens showed greater self control.
for people concerned about the loss of order the state assemblies appeared to be the greatest source of instability.
popularly elected representatives lacked what men of property defined as real civic virtue an ability to work for the common good rather than their private interests.
working out the tensions between order and liberty between property and equality generated an outpouring of political genius.
at other times in american history persons of extraordinary talent have been drawn to theology commerce or science but during the 1780s the countrys intellectual leaders thomas jefferson james madison alexander hamilton and john adams among others focused their creative energies on the problem of how republicans ought to govern themselves.
living in the shadow of revolution during the 1780s why were americans so sensitive to the dangers of aristocratic display.
revolution changed american society often in ways no one had planned.
this phenomenon is not surprising.
the great revolutions of modern times produced radical transformations in french russian and chinese societies.
by comparison the immediate results of the american revolution appear much tamer less wrenching.
nevertheless national independence compelled people to reevaluate hierarchical social relations that they had taken for granted during the colonial period.
the faltering first steps of independence raised fundamental questions about the meaning of equality in american society some of which remain as pressing today as during the 1780s.
social and political reform following the war americans aggressively ferreted out and with republican fervor denounced any traces of aristocratic pretense.
as colonists they had long resented the claims that certain englishmen made to special privilege simply because of noble birth.
even so committed a republican as george washington had to be reminded that artificial status was contrary to republican principles.
in 1783 he and the officers who had served during the revolution formed the society of the cincinnati a hereditary organization in which membership passed from father to eldest son.
the soldiers meant no harm they simply wanted to maintain old friendships.
but anxious republicans throughout america let out a howl of protest and one south carolina legislator aedanus burke warned that the society intended to create an hereditary peerage.
which would undermine the constitution and destroy civil liberty after an living in the shadow of revolution embarrassed washington called for appropriate reforms of the societys bylaws the cincinnati crisis receded.
the fear of privilege remained however and wealthy americans dropped honorific titles such as esquire lawyers of republican persuasion chided judges who had adopted the english custom of wearing great flowing wigs to court.
the appearance of equality was as important as its actual achievement.
in fact the distribution of wealth in postwar america was more uneven than it had been in the mid eighteenth century.
the sudden accumulation of large fortunes by new families made other americans particularly sensitive to aristocratic display for it seemed intolerable that a revolution waged against a monarchy should produce a class of persons legally or even visibly distinguished from their fellow citizens.
republican ferment also encouraged many states to lower property requirements for voting.
after the break with great britain such a step seemed logical.
as one group of farmers declared no man can be free independent unless he possesses a voice.
in the choice of the most important officers in the legislature pennsylvania and georgia allowed all white male taxpayers to participate in elections.
other states were less democratic but with the exception of massachusetts they reduced property qualifications.
the reforms however did not significantly expand the american electorate.
long before the revolution an overwhelming percentage of free white males had owned enough land to vote.
in any case during the 1780s republican lawmakers were not prepared to experiment with universal manhood suffrage john adams observed that if the states pushed the reforms too far new claims will arise women will demand a vote.
and every man who has not a farthing will demand an equal vote with any other the most important changes in voting patterns were the result of western migration.
as americans moved to the frontier they received full political representation in their state legislatures and because new districts tended to be poorer than established coastal settlements their representatives seemed less cultured less well trained than those sent by eastern voters.
moreover western delegates resented traveling so far to attend legislative meetings and they lobbied successfully to transfer state capitals to more convenient locations.
during this period georgia moved the seat of its government from savannah to augusta south carolina from charles town to columbia north carolina from new bern to raleigh virginia from williamsburg to richmond new york from new york city to albany and new hampshire from portsmouth to concord.
after gaining independence americans also reexamined the relationship between church and state.
republican spokespersons such as thomas jefferson insisted that rulers had no right to interfere with the free expression of an individuals religious beliefs.
as governor of virginia he strenuously advocated the disestablishment of the anglican church an institution that had received tax monies and other benefits during the colonial period.
jefferson and his allies regarded such special privilege not only as a denial of religious freedom after all rival denominations did not receive tax money but also as a vestige of aristocratic society.
in 1786 virginia cut the last ties between church and state.
other southern states disestablished the anglican church but in massachusetts and new hampshire congregational churches continued to enjoy special status.
moreover while americans championed toleration they seldom favored philosophies that radically challenged christian values.
african americans in the new republic revolutionary fervor forced americans to confront the most appalling contradiction to republican principles slavery.
the quaker leader john woolman 1720 1772 probably did more than any other white person of the era to remind people of the evils of this institution.
a trip he took through the southern colonies as a young man forever impressed upon woolman the dark gloominess of slavery.
in a sermon the outspoken humanitarian declared that men having power too often misapplied it that though we made slaves of the negroes and the turks made slaves of the christians i believed that liberty was the natural right of all men equally during the revolutionary period abolitionist sentiment spread.
both in private and in public people began to criticize slavery in other than religious language.
no doubt the double standard of their own political rhetoric embarrassed many white americans.
they hotly demanded liberation from parliamentary enslavement at the same time that they held several hundred thousand blacks in permanent bondage.
by keeping the issue of slavery before the public through writing and petitioning african americans powerfully undermined arguments advanced in favor of human bondage.
they demanded freedom reminding white lawmakers that african american men and women had the same natural right to liberty as did other americans.
in 1779 for example a group of african americans living in connecticut pointedly asked the members of the state assembly whether it is consistent with the present claims of the united states to hold so many thousands of the race of adam our common father in perpetual slavery in new hampshire nineteen persons who called themselves natives of africa reminded local legislators that private or public tyranny and slavery are alike detestable to minds conscious of the equal dignity of human nature the scientific accomplishments of benjamin banneker 1731 1806 marylands african american astronomer and mathematician and the international fame of phillis wheatley 1753 1784 bostons celebrated african muse made it increasingly difficult for white americans to maintain credibly that african americans could not hold their own in a free society.
wheatleys poems went through many editions and after reading her work the great french philosopher voltaire rebuked a friend who had claimed there never would be negro poets as voltaire discovered wheatley writes excellent verse in english banneker like wheatley enjoyed a well deserved reputation in his case for contributions as a scientist.
after receiving a copy of an almanac that banneker had published in philadelphia thomas jefferson concluded that nature has given to our black brethren talents equal to those of the other colors of men in the northern states there was no real economic justification for slavery and white laborers often recent european immigrants resented having to compete in the workplace against slaves.
this economic situation combined with the acknowledgment chapter 6 the republican experiment of the double standard represented by slavery contributed to the establishment of antislavery societies.
in 1775 franklin helped organize a group in philadelphia called the society for the relief of free negroes unlawfully held.
john jay alexander hamilton and other prominent new yorkers founded a manumission society in 1785.
by 1792 antislavery societies were meeting from virginia to massachusetts and in the northern states at least these groups working for the same ends as various christian evangelicals put slaveholders on the intellectual defensive for the first time in american history.
in several states north of virginia the abolition of slavery took a number of different forms.
even before achieving statehood vermont drafted a constitution 1777 that specifically prohibited slavery.
in 1780 the pennsylvania legislature passed a law effecting the gradual emancipation of slaves.
although the massachusetts assembly refused to address the issue directly the state courts took up the challenge and liberated the african americans.
a judge ruled slavery unconstitutional in massachusetts because it conflicted with a clause in the state bill of rights declaring all men.
free and equal according to one enthusiast this decision freed a grate number of blacks.
are held in a state of slavery within the bowels of a free and christian country by 1800 slavery was well on the road to extinction in the northern states.
these positive developments did not mean that white people accepted blacks as equals.
in fact in the very states that outlawed slavery african americans faced systematic discrimination.
free blacks were generally excluded from voting juries and militia duty they were denied rights and responsibilities usually associated with full citizenship.
they rarely enjoyed access to education and in cities such as philadelphia and new york where african americans went to look for work they ended up living in segregated wards or neighborhoods.
even in the churches institutions that had often spoken out against slavery free african americans were denied equal standing with white worshipers.
humiliations of this sort persuaded african americans to form their own churches.
in philadelphia richard allen a former slave founded the bethel church for negro methodists 1793 and later organized the african methodist episcopal church 1816 an institution of great cultural as well as religious significance for nineteenth century american blacks.
even in the south where african americans made up a large percentage of the population slavery disturbed thoughtful white republicans.
some planters simply freed their slaves and by 1790 the number of free blacks living in virginia was 12 766.
by 1800 the figure had reached 30 750.
there is no question that this trend reflected the uneasiness among white masters.
richard randolph one of virginias wealthier planters explained that he freed his slaves to make restitution as far as i am able to an unfortunate race of bond men over whom my ancestors have usurped and exercised the most lawless and monstrous tyranny george washington also manumitted his slaves.
to be sure most southern slaveholders especially those living in south carolina and georgia rejected this course of action.
their economic well being depended on slave labor.
perhaps more significant however is the fact that no southern leader during the era of republican experimentation defended slavery as a positive good.
such overtly racist rhetoric did not become part of the public discourse until the nineteenth century.
despite promising starts in that direction the southern states did not abolish slavery.
the economic incentives to maintain a servile labor force especially after the invention of the cotton gin in 1793 and the opening up of the alabama and mississippi frontier overwhelmed the initial abolitionist impulse.
an opportunity to translate the principles of the american revolution into social practice had been lost at least temporarily.
jefferson reported in 1805 i have long since given up the expectation of any early provision for the extinction of slavery among us unlike some contemporary virginians the man who wrote the declaration of independence condoned slavery on his own plantation even fathering several children by a woman who since she was his slave had little choice in the matter of her pregnancy.
the challenge of womens rights a 1797 sketch by architect and engineer benjamin henry latrobe depicting african americans in norfolk virginia shaving and dressing in preparation for a sunday afternoon.
latrobes drawings of blacks in the american south offer valuable glimpses of daily life in the region.
the revolutionary experience accelerated changes in the way ordinary people viewed the family.
at the beginning of the eighteenth century fathers claimed authority over other members of their families simply on the grounds that they were fathers.
as patriarchs they demanded obedience.
if they behaved like brutal despots so be it fathers could treat wives and children however they pleased.
living in the shadow of revolution read the document phillis wheatley religious and moral poems this engraving of phillis wheatley appeared in her volume of verse poems on various subjects religious and moral 1773 the first book published by an african american.
the english philosopher john locke 1632 1704 powerfully undermined arguments of this sort.
in his extremely popular treatise some thoughts concerning education 1693 locke insisted that the mind was not formed at birth.
the child learned from experience and if the infant witnessed violent arbitrary behavior then the baby would become an abusive adult.
as locke warned parents if you punish him the child for what he sees you practice yourself he will not think that severity to proceed from kindness in you careful to amend a fault in him but will be apt to interpret it as peevishness and arbitrary imperiousness of a father enlightened eighteenth century mothers and fathers especially fathers condemned tyranny in the home.
at the time of the american revolution few seriously accepted the notion that fathers be they tyrannical kings or heads of ordinary families enjoyed unlimited powers over women and children.
indeed people in england as well as america increasingly described the family in terms of love and companionship.
instead of duties they spoke of affection.
this transformation in the way men and women viewed relations of power within the family was most evident in the popular novels of the period.
americans devoured pamela and clarissa stories by the english writer samuel richardson about women who were the innocent victims of unreformed males usually deceitful lovers and unforgiving fathers.
it was in this changing intellectual environment that american women began making new demands not only on their husbands but also on republican institutions.
abigail adams one of the generations most articulate women instructed her husband john as he set off for the opening of the continental congress i desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands john responded in a condescending manner.
the ladies would have to wait until the country achieved independence.
in 1777 lucy knox took an even stronger line with her husband general henry knox.
when he was about to return home from the army she warned him i hope you will not consider yourself as commander in chief in your own house but be convinced.
that there is such a thing as equal command if knox accepted lucys argument he did so because she was a good republican wife and mother.
in fact women justified their assertiveness largely on the basis of political ideology.
if survival of republics really depended on the virtue of their citizens they argued then it was the special responsibility of women as mothers to nurture the right values in their children and as wives to instruct their husbands in proper behavior.
contemporaries claimed that the woman who possessed virtue and prudence could easily mold the taste the manners and the conduct of her admirers according to her pleasure in fact nothing short of a general reformation of manners would take place were the ladies to use their power in discouraging our licentious manners during this period women began to petition for divorce on new grounds.
one case is particularly instructive concerning changing attitudes toward women and the family.
in 1784 john backus an undistinguished massachusetts silversmith was hauled before a local court and asked why he beat his wife.
he responded that it was partly owing to his education for his father treated his mother in the same manner the difference between backuss case and his fathers was that backuss wife refused to tolerate such abuse and she sued successfully for divorce.
studies of divorce patterns in connecticut and pennsylvania show that after 1773 women divorced on about the same terms as men.
the war itself presented some women with fresh opportunities.
in 1780 ester deberdt reed founded a large volunteer womens organization in philadelphia the first of its kind in the united states that raised more than 300 000 for washingtons army.
other women ran family farms and businesses while their husbands fought the british.
and in 1790 the new jersey legislature explicitly allowed women who owned property to vote.
despite these scattered gains republican society still defined womens roles exclusively in terms of mother wife and homemaker.
other pursuits seemed unnatural even threatening and it is perhaps not surprising therefore that in 1807 new jersey lawmakers angry over a close election in which women voters apparently determined the result repealed female suffrage in the interests of safety quiet and good order and dignity of the state even an allegedly progressive thinker such as jefferson could not imagine allowing women to participate in serious politics.
when in 1807 his secretary of the treasury albert gallatin called attention chapter 6 the republican experiment flush of independence.
these early constitutions were provisional but they nevertheless provided the framers of the federal constitution of 1787 with invaluable insights into the strengths and weaknesses of government based on the will of the people.
blueprints for state government despite disagreements over details americans who wrote the various state constitutions shared certain political assumptions.
first they insisted on preparing written documents.
for many of them of course this seemed a natural step.
as colonists they had lived under royal charters documents that described the workings of local government in detail.
the massachusetts bay charter of 1629 for example see chapter 2 guaranteed that the puritans would enjoy the rights of englishmen even after they had moved to the new world.
and in new england congregationalists drew up church covenants stating in clear contractual language the rights and responsibilities of the entire congregation.
however logical the decision to produce written documents may have seemed to the americans it represented a major break with english practice.
political philosophers in the mother country had long boasted of britains unwritten constitution a collection of judicial reports and parliamentary statutes.
but this highly vaunted system had not protected the colonists from oppression hence after declaring independence americans demanded that their state constitutions explicitly define the rights of the people as well as the power of their rulers.
abigail adams wife of president john adams was a brilliant woman whose plea to limit the power of husbands gained little sympathetic attention.
this portrait of her by benjamin blyth is from c 1766 to the shortage of educated people to serve in government jobs and suggested recruiting women jefferson responded sharply the appointment of a woman to office is an innovation for which the public is not prepared nor am i the states experiments in republicanism following independence why did the states insist on drafting written constitutions.
in may 1776 the second continental congress invited the states to adopt constitutions.
the old colonial charters fi lled with references to king and parliament were clearly no longer adequate and within a few years most states had taken action.
rhode island and connecticut already enjoyed republican government by virtue of their unique seventeenth century charters that allowed the voters to select both governors and legislators.
eleven other states plus vermont created new political structures and their deliberations reveal how americans living in different regions and reacting to different social pressures defined fundamental republican principles.
several constitutions were boldly experimental and some states later rewrote documents that had been drafted in the first natural rights and the state constitutions the authors of the state constitutions believed men and women possessed certain natural rights over which government exercised no control whatsoever.
so that future rulers potential tyrants would know the exact limits of authority these fundamental rights were carefully spelled out.
indeed the people of massachusetts rejected the proposed state constitution of 1778 largely because it lacked a full statement of their basic rights.
they demanded a guarantee of rights of conscience and.
security of persons and property which every member in the state hath a right to expect from the supreme power eight state constitutions contained specific declarations of rights.
the length and character of these lists varied but in general they affirmed three fundamental freedoms religion speech and press.
they protected citizens from unlawful searches and seizures they upheld trial by jury.
george mason a shrewd political thinker who had written important revolutionary pamphlets penned the most influential declaration of rights.
it was appended to the virginia constitution of 1776 and the words were incorporated into other state constitutions as well as the famed bill of rights of the federal constitution.
in almost every state delegates to constitutional conventions drastically reduced the power of the governor.
the constitutions of pennsylvania and georgia abolished the governors office.
in four other states terms such as president were substituted for governor.
even when those who designed the new state governments provided for a governor they severely circumscribed his authority.
stumbling toward a new national government he was allowed to make almost no political appointments and while the state legislators closely monitored his activities he possessed no veto over their decisions massachusetts being the lone exception.
most early constitutions lodged nearly all effective power in the legislature.
this decision made good sense to men who had served under powerful royal governors during the late colonial period.
these ambitious crown appointees had used executive patronage to influence members of the colonial assemblies and as the americans drafted their new republican constitutions they were determined to bring their governors under tight control.
in fact the writers of the state constitutions were so fearful of the concentration of power in the hands of a single person that they failed to appreciate that elected governors like the representatives themselves were now the servants of a free people.
the legislature dominated early state government.
the constitutions of pennsylvania and georgia provided for a unicameral or one house system and since any male taxpayer could cast a ballot in these states their legislatures became the nations most democratic.
other states authorized the creation of two houses but even as they did so some of the more demanding republicans wondered why america needed a senate or upper house at all.
what social and economic interests they asked did that body represent that could not be more fully and directly voiced in the lower house.
after all america had just freed itself of an aristocracy.
the two house form survived the revolution largely because it was familiar and because some persons had already begun to suspect that certain checks on the popular will however arbitrary they might have appeared were necessary to preserve minority rights.
power to the people massachusetts did not adopt a constitution until 1780 several years after the other states had done so.
the experience of the people of massachusetts is particularly significant because in their efforts to establish a workable system of republican government they hit on a remarkable political innovation.
after the rejection of two constitutions drafted by the state legislature the responsibility fell to a specially elected convention of delegates whose sole purpose was the formation of a new constitution john adams took a position of leadership at this convention and served as the chief architect of the governmental framework of massachusetts.
this framework included a house and senate a popularly elected governor who unlike the chief executives of other states possessed a veto over legislative bills and property qualifications for officeholders as well as voters.
the most striking aspect of the 1780 constitution however was the wording of its opening sentence we.
the people of massachusetts.
agree upon ordain and establish this powerful statement would be echoed in the federal constitution.
the massachusetts experiment reminded americans that ordinary officeholders could not be trusted to define fundamental rights.
that important task required a convention of delegates who could legitimately claim to speak for the people.
in 1780 no one knew whether the state experiments would succeed.
there was no question that a different type of person had begun to appear in public office one who seemed to the local gentry at least a little poorer and less polished than they would have liked.
when one virginian surveyed the newly elected house of burgesses in 1776 he discovered it was composed of men not quite so well dressed nor so politely educated nor so highly born as some assemblies i have formerly seen this particular virginian approved of such change for he believed that the peoples men however plain they might appear possessed honesty and sincerity.
they were in fact representative republicans people who insisted they were anyones equal in this burgeoning society.
other americans were less optimistic about the nations immediate prospects.
the health of a small republic depended entirely on the virtue of its people.
if they or their elected officials succumbed to material temptation if they failed to comprehend the moral dimensions of political power or if personal liberty threatened the rights of property then the state constitutions were no more than worthless pieces of paper.
the risk of excess seemed great.
in 1778 a group of new englanders fearful that unbridled freedom would create political anarchy observed the idea of liberty has been held up in so dazzling colours that some of us may not be willing to submit to that subordination necessary in the freest states stumbling toward a new national government why did many americans regard the articles of confederation as inadequate.
when the second continental congress convened in 1775 the delegates found themselves waging war in the name of a country that did not yet exist.
as the military crisis deepened congress gradually often reluctantly assumed greater authority over national affairs but everyone agreed such narrowly conceived measures were a poor substitute for a legally constituted government.
the separate states could not possibly deal with the range of issues that now confronted the american people.
indeed if independence meant anything in a world of sovereign nations it implied the creation of a central authority capable of conducting war borrowing money regulating trade and negotiating treaties.
articles of confederation the challenge of creating a viable central government proved more difficult than anyone anticipated.
congress appointed a committee to draw up a plan for confederation.
john dickinson the lawyer who had written an important revolutionary pamphlet titled letters from a farmer in pennsylvania headed the committee.
dickinson envisioned the creation of a strong central government and the report his committee presented on july 12 1776 shocked delegates who assumed that the constitution would authorize a loose confederation of states.
dickinsons plan placed the western territories land claimed by the separate states under congressional control.
in addition dickinsons committee called for equal state representation in congress.
since some states such as virginia and massachusetts were more populous than others the plan fueled tensions between large and small states.
also unsettling was dickinsons recommendation chapter 6 the republican experiment that taxes be paid to congress on the basis of a states total population black read the document the articles of confederation 1777 as well as white a formula that angered southerners who did not think slaves should be counted.
indeed even before the british evacuated boston dickinsons committee raised many difficult political questions that would divide americans for several decades.
not surprisingly the draft of the plan the articles of confederation that congress finally approved in november 1777 bore little resemblance to dickinsons original plan.
the articles jealously guarded the sovereignty of the states.
the delegates who drafted the framework shared a general republican conviction that power especially power so far removed from the people was inherently dangerous and that the only way to preserve liberty was to place as many constraints as possible on federal authority.
the result was a government that many people regarded as powerless.
the articles provided for a single legislative body consisting of representatives selected in 1977 the u s.
postal service issued this stamp to commemorate the bicentennial of the drafting of annually by the state legislatures.
each the nations first constitution the articles of confederation.
the second continental congress appointed state possessed a single vote in congress.
it a thirteen man committee one from each state to draft the document although only five figures are could send as many as seven delegates as shown here.
few as two but if they divided evenly on a certain issue the state lost its vote.
there was no independent execuregion was claimed by various states most of it actually belonged to tive and no veto over legislative decisions.
the articles also denied native americans.
in a series of land grabs that federal negotiators congress the power of taxation a serious oversight in time of war.
the called treaties the united states government took the land comprisnational government could obtain funds only by asking the states for ing much of modern ohio indiana illinois and kentucky.
since the contributions called requisitions but if a state failed to cooperate indians had put their faith in the british during the war they could and many did congress limped along without financial support.
do little to resist the humiliating treaty agreements at fort mcintosh amendments to this constitution required assent by all thirteen states.
1785 fort stanwix 1784 and fort finney 1786.
as john the authors of the new system expected the weak national governdickinson then serving as the president of the supreme executive ment to handle foreign relations military matters indian affairs and council of pennsylvania told the indians since great britain has interstate disputes.
they most emphatically did not award congress surrendered the back country with all the forts.
that they the ownership of the lands west of the appalachian mountains.
indians must now depend upon us for the preservation if they the new constitution sent to the states for ratification encoundared to resist we will instantly turn upon them our armies.
and tered apathy and hostility.
most americans were far more interested extirpate them from the land where they were born and now live in local affairs than in the actions of congress.
when a british army some states such as virginia and georgia claimed land all marched through a state creating a need for immediate military the way from the atlantic ocean to the elusive south seas in aid people spoke positively about central government but as effect extending their boundaries to the pacific coast by virtue soon as the threat had passed they sang a different tune.
during of royal charters.
state legislators their appetites whetted by this period even the slightest encroachment on state sovereignty aggressive land speculators anticipated generating large revrankled republicans who feared centralization would inevitably enues through land sales.
connecticut new york pennsylvania promote corruption.
and north carolina also announced intentions to seize blocks of western land.
other states were not blessed with vague or ambiguous royal western land key to the charters.
the boundaries of maryland delaware and new jersey first constitution had been established many years earlier and it seemed as if peothe major bone of contention with the articles however was the ple living in these states would be permanently cut off from the disposition of the vast unsurveyed territory west of the appalachians anticipated bounty.
in protest these landless states stubbornly that everyone hoped the british would soon surrender.
although the refused to ratify the articles of confederation.
marylanders were stumbling toward a new national government particularly vociferous.
all the states had made sacrifices for the common good during the revolution they complained and it appeared only fair that all states should profit from the fruits of victory in this case from the sale of western lands.
marylands spokesmen feared that if congress did not void virginias excessive claims to all of the northwest territory the land west of pennsylvania and north of the ohio river as well as to a large area south of the ohio beyond the cumberland gap known as kentucky then marylanders would desert their home state in search of cheap virginia farms leaving maryland an underpopulated wasteland.
virginians scoffed at the pleas for equity.
they suspected that behind the marylanders statements of high purpose lay the greed of speculators.
private land companies had sprung up before the revolution and purchased large tracts from the indians in areas claimed by virginia.
their agents petitioned parliament to legitimize these questionable transactions.
their efforts failed.
after the declaration of independence however the companies shifted the focus of their lobbying to congress particularly to the representatives of landless states like maryland.
by liberally distributing shares of stock officials of the indiana illinois and wabash companies gained powerful supporters such as benjamin franklin robert morris and thomas johnson governor of maryland.
these activities encouraged delaware and new jersey to modify their read the document northwest ordinance july 3 1787 map shows present day boundaries.
minn gre canada at l si wisconsin i r.
michigan northwest territory illinois misso ur demands and join the confederation while maryland held out for five years.
the leaders of virginia though remained firm.
why they asked should virginia surrender its historic claims to western lands to enrich a handful of selfish speculators.
the states resolved the bitter controversy in 1781 as much by accident as by design.
virginia agreed to cede its holdings north of the ohio river to the confederation on condition that congress nullify the land companies earlier purchases from the indians.
a practical consideration had softened virginias resolve.
republicans such as jefferson worried about expanding their state beyond the mountains with poor transportation links it seemed impossible to govern such a large territory effectively from richmond.
the western settlers might even come to regard virginia as a colonial power insensitive to their needs.
marylanders who dreamed of making fortunes on the land market grumbled but when a british army appeared on their border they prudently accepted the articles march 1 1781.
congress required another three years to work out the details of the virginia cession.
other landed states followed virginias example.
these transfers established an important principle for after 1781 it was agreed that the west belonged not to the separate states but to the united states.
in this matter at least the national government now exercised full sovereignty.
no one greeted ratification of the articles with much enthusiasm.
when they thought about national politics at all americans concerned themselves primarily with winning independence.
the new government gradually developed an administrative bureaucracy and in 1781 it formally created the departments of war foreign affairs and finance.
by far the most influential figure in the confederation was robert morris 1734 1806 a freewheeling philadelphia merchant who was appointed the first superintendent of finance.
although he was a brilliant manager morriss decisions as superintendent provoked controversy and deep suspicion.
he hardly seemed a model republican.
morris mixed public funds under his control with personal accounts and he never lost an opportunity to make a profit.
while such practices were not illegal his apparent improprieties undermined his own political agenda.
he desperately wanted to strengthen the central government but highly vocal critics resisted labeling morris a pecuniary dictator es ipp ak mis ss indiana i r ohio r ohio.
northwest territory the u s government auctioned off the land in the northwest territory the region defined by the ohio river the great lakes and the mississippi river.
proceeds from the sale of one section in each township were set aside for the creation and support of public schools.
northwest ordinance the confederations major achievement whatever the weaknesses of congress may have been it did score one impressive triumph.
congressional action brought order to western settlement especially in the northwest territory and incorporated frontier americans into an expanding federal system.
in 1781 the prospects for success did not seem promising.
for years colonial authorities had ignored people who migrated far inland sending neither money nor soldiers to protect them from indian attack.
tensions between the seaboard colonies and the frontier regions had sometimes flared into violence.
disorders occurred in south carolina in 1767 in north carolina in 1769 and in vermont in 1777.
with thousands of men and women most of them squatters pouring across the appalachian mountains congress had to act quickly to avoid the past errors of royal and colonial authorities.
the republican experiment view the map a western land claims ceded by the states a a c r e e w lo e s u p er i o lak r d n british north america canada er nc.
aw r chapter 6 maine st l part of mass.
northwest territory ceded by virginia 1784 ron hu ke la lake m ich iga vermont n n ca u ceded by massachusetts ke la ceded by connecticut p massachusetts rhode island connecticut pennsylvania 17 82 new jersey y ork r delaware d c maryland ew io oh new hampshire new york ntario e eri ceded by new york r a r ke o p e la ceded by conn 1800 missouri ad ce virginia by n d territory of virginia de cumberland until 1792 gap kentucky sis sip pi mis ceded by spain to france 1800 r louisiana ceded by south carolina to georgia ceded by north carolina tennessee atlantic ocean north carolina state of franklin south carolina ceded by georgia georgia ceded by spain 31 north latitude spanish fl boundary of territory ceded by new york o r id gulf of mexico 200 miles 200 kilometers boundary of territory ceded by virginia in 1784 a original thirteen states after their land cession western land claims ceded by the states after winning the war the major issue facing the continental congress under the articles of confederation was mediating conflicting states claims to rich western land.
by 1802 the states had ceded all rights to the federal government.
the initial attempt to deal with this explosive problem came in 1784.
jefferson then serving as a member of congress drafted an ordinance that became the basis for later more enduring legislation.
jefferson recommended carving ten new states out of the western lands located north of the ohio river and recently ceded to the united states by virginia.
he specified that each new state establish a republican form of government.
when the population of a territory equaled that of the smallest state already in the confederation the region could apply for full statehood.
in the meantime free white males could participate in local government a democratic guarantee that frightened some of jeffersons more conservative colleagues.
the impoverished congress was eager to sell off the western territory as quickly as possible.
after all the frontier represented a source of income that did not depend on the unreliable generosity of the states.
a second ordinance passed in 1785 and called the land ordinance established an orderly process for laying out new townships and marketing public lands.
public response disappointed congress.
surveying the lands took far longer than anticipated and few persons possessed enough hard currency to make even the minimum purchase.
finally a solution to the problem came from manasseh cutler a new england minister turned land speculator and congressional lobbyist and his associates who included several former officers of the continental army.
cutler and his associates representing the ohio and scioto companies offered to purchase more than six million strengthening federal authority land ordinance of 1785 grid pattern of a township 36 sections of 640 acres 1 square mile each income of one section reserved for the support of public education 6 miles a half section a 320 acres b quarter section 160 acres c half quarter section 80 acres d quarter quarter section 40 acres c b 6 miles unsurveyed acres of land located in present day southeastern ohio by persuading congress to accept at full face value government loan certificates that had been issued to soldiers during the revolution.
on the open market the ohio company could pick up the certificates for as little as 10 percent of their face value thus the company stood to make a fortune.
like so many other get rich quick schemes however this one failed to produce the anticipated millions.
unfortunately for cutler and his friends small homesteaders settled wherever they pleased refusing to pay either government or speculators for the land.
congress worried about the excess liberty on the frontier.
in the 1780s the west seemed to be filling up with people who by eastern standards were uncultured.
timothy pickering a new englander declared that the emigrants to the frontier lands are the least worthy subjects in the united states.
they are little less savage than the indians and when possessed of the most fertile spots for want of industry live miserably the charge was as old as the frontier itself.
indeed seventeenth century englishmen had said the same things of the earliest virginians.
the lawless image stuck however and even a sober observer such as washington insisted that the west crawled with banditti the ordinance of 1784 placed the government of the territories in the hands of people about whom congressmen and speculators had second thoughts.
these various currents shaped the ordinance of 1787 one of the final acts passed under the confederation.
the bill also called the northwest ordinance provided a new structure for government of the northwest territory.
the plan authorized the creation of between three and five territories each to be ruled by a governor a secretary and three judges appointed by congress.
when the population reached five thousand voters who owned property could elect an assembly but its decisions were subject to the governors absolute veto.
once sixty thousand persons resided in a territory they could write a constitution and petition for full statehood.
while these procedures represented a retreat from jeffersons original proposal the ordinance of 1787 contained d d 1 mile several significant features.
a bill of rights guaranteed the settlers the right to trial by jury freedom of religion and due process of law.
in addition the act outlawed slavery a prohibition that freed the future states of ohio indiana illinois michigan and wisconsin from the curse of human bondage.
by contrast settlement south of the ohio river received far less attention from congress.
long before the end of the war thousands of americans streamed through the cumberland gap into a part of virginia known as kentucky.
the most famous of these settlers was daniel boone.
in 1775 the population of kentucky was approximately one hundred by 1784 it had jumped to thirty thousand.
speculators purchased large tracts from the indians planning to resell this acreage to settlers at handsome profits.
in 1776 one land company asked congress to reorganize the companys holdings into a new state called transylvania.
while nothing came of this selfserving request another even more aggressive group of speculators in 1784 carved the state of franklin out of a section of present day tennessee then claimed by north carolina.
rival speculators prevented formal recognition of franklins government.
by 1790 the entire region south of the ohio river had been transformed into a crazy quilt of claims and counterclaims that generated lawsuits for many years to come.
strengthening federal authority what did the nationalists call for and how did they aim to achieve their initiatives.
despite its success in bringing order to the northwest territory the confederation increasingly came under heavy fire from critics who wanted a stronger central government.
complaints varied from region to region from person to person but most disappointment reflected economic frustration.
americans had assumed that peace would restore economic growth but recovery following the revolution was slow.
chapter 6 the republican experiment the nationalist critique even before england signed a treaty with america its merchants flooded american ports with consumer items and offered easy credit.
families that had postponed purchases of imported goods either because of british blockade or personal hardship now rushed to buy european finery.
this sudden renewal of trade with great britain on such a large scale strained the american economy.
gold and silver flowed back across the atlantic leaving the united states desperately short of hard currency.
when large merchant houses called in their debts ordinary american consumers often found themselves on the brink of bankruptcy.
the disagreeable state of our commerce observed james wilson an advocate of strong national government has been the result of extravagant and injudicious importation.
we seemed to have forgot that to pay was as necessary in trade as to purchase to blame the confederation alone for the economic depression would be unfair.
nevertheless during the 1780s many people agreed that a stronger central government could somehow have brought greater stability to the struggling economy.
in their rush to acquire imported luxuries americans seemed to have deserted republican principles and a weak congress was helpless to restore national virtue.
critics pointed to the governments inability to regulate trade.
whenever a northern congressman suggested restricting british access to american markets southern representatives who feared any controls on the export of tobacco or rice bellowed in protest.
southerners anticipated that navigation acts written by the confederation would put planters under the yoke of northern shipping interests.
the countrys chronic fiscal instability increased public anxiety.
while the war was still in progress congress printed well over 200 million in paper money but because of extraordinarily high inflation the rate of exchange for continental bills soon declined to a fraction of their face value.
in 1781 congress facing insolvency turned to the states for help.
they were asked to retire the depreciated currency.
the situation was spinning out of control.
several states pressed to pay their own war related debts not only recirculated the continental bills but also issued nearly worthless money of their own.
a heavy burden of state and national debt compounded the general sense of economic crisis.
revolutionary soldiers had yet to be paid.
women and men who had loaned money and goods to the government clamored for reimbursement.
foreign creditors demanded interest on funds advanced during the revolution.
these pressures grew but congress was unable to respond.
the articles specifically prohibited congress from taxing the american people.
it required little imagination to see that the confederation would soon default on its legal obligations unless something was done quickly.
in response an aggressive group of men announced that they knew how to save the confederation.
the nationalists persons such as alexander hamilton james madison and robert morris called for major constitutional reforms the chief of which was an amendment allowing congress to collect a 5 percent tax on imported goods sold in the states.
revenues generated by the proposed impost of 1781 would be used by the confederation to reduce the national debt.
on this point the nationalists were adamant.
they recognized that whoever paid the public debt would gain the public trust.
if the states assumed the responsibility then the country could easily fragment into separate republics.
a national debt hamilton explained in 1781 if it is not excessive will be to us a national blessing.
it will be a powerful cement to our union twelve states accepted the impost amendment but rhode island where local interests argued that the tax would make congress independent of their constituents resolutely refused to cooperate.
one negative vote on this proposed constitutional change and the taxing scheme was dead.
state leaders frankly thought the nationalists were up to no good.
the localists were especially apprehensive of fiscal plans advanced by robert morris.
his profiteering as superintendent of finance appeared a threat to the moral fiber of the young republic.
richard henry lee and samuel adams men of impeccable patriotic credentials decried morriss efforts to create a national bank.
such an institution would bring forth a flock of social parasites the kind of people that americans associated with corrupt monarchical government.
one person declared that if an impost ever passed morris will have all the money in his pocket the nationalists regarded their opponents as economically naive.
a country with the potential of the united states required a complex centralized fiscal system.
but for all their pretensions to realism the nationalists of the early 1780s were politically inept.
they underestimated the depth of republican fears and in their rush to strengthen the articles they overplayed their hand.
a group of extreme nationalists even appealed to the army for support.
to this day no one knows the full story of the newburgh conspiracy of 1783.
officers of the continental army stationed at newburgh new york worried that congress would disband them without funding their pensions began to lobby intensively for relief.
in march they scheduled general meetings to protest the weakness and duplicity of congress.
the officers initial efforts were harmless enough but frustrated nationalists such as morris and hamilton hoped that if the army exerted sufficient pressure on the government perhaps even threatened a military takeover then stubborn americans might be compelled to amend the articles.
the conspirators failed to take george washingtons integrity into account.
no matter how much he wanted a strong central government he would not tolerate insubordination by the military.
washington confronted the officers directly at newburgh intending to read a prepared statement.
fumbling with his glasses before his men he commented gentlemen you must pardon me.
i have grown gray in your service and now find myself growing blind the unexpected vulnerability of this great soldier reduced the troops to tears and in an instant the rebellion was broken.
washington deserves credit for preserving civilian rule in this country.
diplomatic humiliation in foreign affairs congress endured further embarrassment.
it could not even enforce the provisions of its own peace treaty.
american negotiators had promised great britain that its citizens could collect debts contracted before the revolution.
the states however dragged their heels and several even passed laws obstructing the settlement of legitimate prewar claims.
congress was powerless to force compliance.
the british responded to this apparent provocation by refusing to evacuate troops from posts located in the northwest territory.
a strong national government would have driven the redcoats out but without adequate funds the weak congress could not provide soldiers for such a mission.
have we fought for this congresss postrevolutionary dealings with spain were equally humiliating.
that nation refused to accept the southern boundary of the united states established by the treaty of paris.
spain claimed sovereignty over much of the land located between georgia and the mississippi river and its agents schemed with indian tribes in this region to resist american expansion.
on july 21 1784 spain fueled the controversy by closing the lower mississippi river to citizens of the united states.
this unexpected decision devastated western farmers.
free use of the mississippi was essential to the economic development of the entire ohio valley.
because of the prohibitively high cost of transporting freight for long distances over land western settlers and southern planters eyeing future opportunities in this area demanded a secure water link with the worlds markets.
their spokesmen in congress denounced anyone who claimed that navigation of the mississippi was a negotiable issue.
in 1786 a spanish official don diego de gardoqui opened talks with john jay a new yorker appointed by congress to obtain rights to navigation of the mississippi.
jay soon discovered that gardoqui would not compromise.
after making little progress jay seized the initiative.
if gardoqui would allow american merchants to trade directly with spain thus opening up an important new market to ships from new england and the middle states then the united states might forgo navigation of the mississippi for twenty five years.
when southern delegates heard of jays concessions they were outraged.
it appeared to them as if representatives of northern commerce were ready to abandon the southern frontier.
angry congressmen accused new englanders of attempting to divide the united states into separate confederations for as one virginian exclaimed the proposed spanish treaty would weaken if not destroy the union by disaffecting the southern states.
to obtain a trivial commercial advantage congress wisely terminated the negotiations with spain.
by the mid 1780s the confederation could claim several notable achievements.
it designed an administrative system that lasted far longer than did the articles.
it also brought order out of the chaos of conflicting western land claims.
still as anyone could see the government was struggling.
congress met irregularly.
some states did not even bother to send delegates and pressing issues often had to be postponed for lack of a quorum.
the nation even lacked a permanent capital and congress drifted from philadelphia to princeton to annapolis to new york city prompting one humorist to suggest that the government purchase an air balloon.
this newly invented device he explained would allow the members of congress to float along from one end of the continent to the other and suddenly pop down into any of the states they please have we fought for this why did constitutional delegates compromise on representation and slavery.
by 1785 the country seemed to have lost direction.
the buoyant optimism that sustained revolutionary patriots had dissolved into pessimism and doubt.
many americans especially those who had provided leadership during the revolution agreed something had to be done.
in 1786 washington bitterly observed what astonishing changes a few years are capable of producing.
have we fought for this.
was it with these expectations that we launched into a sea of trouble and have bravely struggled through the most threatening dangers the genius of james madison the conviction of people such as washington that the nation was indeed in a state of crisis reflected tensions within republican thought.
to be sure they supported open elections and the right of individuals to advance their own economic well being but when these elements seemed to undermine social and political order they expressed the fear that perhaps liberty had been carried too far.
the situation had changed quite rapidly.
as recently as the 1770s men of republican persuasion had insisted that the greatest threat to the american people was concentration of power in the hands of unscrupulous rulers.
with this principle in mind they transformed state governors into mere figureheads and weakened the confederation in the name of popular liberties.
by the mid 1780s persons of property and standing saw the problem in a different light.
recent experience suggested to them that ordinary citizens did not in fact possess sufficient virtue to sustain a republic.
the states had been plagued not by executive tyranny but by an excess of democracy by a failure of the majority to preserve the property rights of the minority by an unrestrained individualism that promoted anarchy rather than good order.
as americans tried to interpret these experiences within a republican framework they were checked by the most widely accepted political wisdom of the age.
baron de montesquieu 1689 1755 a french political philosopher of immense international reputation and author of the spirit of the laws 1748 declared flatly that a republican government could not flourish in a large territory.
the reasons were clear.
if the people lost direct control over their representatives they would fall prey to tyrants.
large distances allowed rulers to hide their corruption physical separation presented aristocrats with opportunities to seize power.
in the united states most learned men treated montesquieus theories as self evident truths.
his writings seemed to demonstrate the importance of preserving the sovereignty of the states for however much these small republics abused the rights of property and ignored minority interests it was plainly unscientific to maintain that a republic consisting of thirteen states several million people and thousands of acres of territory could long survive.
james madison rejected montesquieus argument and in so doing he helped americans to think of republican government in radical new ways.
this soft spoken rather unprepossessing virginian was the most brilliant american political thinker of his generation.
one french official described madison as a man one must study a long time in order to make a fair appraisal those who listened carefully to what madison had to say however soon recognized his genius for translating theory into practice.
madison delved into the writings of a group of scottish philosophers the most prominent being david hume 1711 1776 and from their works he concluded that americans need not fear a greatly expanded republic.
madison perceived that inconveniences of popular states contrary to prevailing theory are in proportion not to the extent but to the narrowness of their limits chapter 6 the republican experiment indeed it was in small states such as rhode island that legislative majorities tyrannized the propertied minority.
in a large territory madison explained the society becomes broken into a greater variety of interest of pursuits of passions which check each other whilst those who may feel a common sentiment have less opportunity of communication and contact madison did not however advocate a modern interest group model of political behavior.
the contending parties were incapable of working for the common good.
they were too mired in their own local selfish concerns.
rather madison thought competing factions would neutralize each other leaving the business of running the central government to the ablest most virtuous persons the nation could produce.
in other words madisons federal system was not a small state writ large it was something entirely different a government based on the will of the people and yet detached from their narrowly based demands.
this thinking formed the foundation of madisons most famous political essay the federalist no.
constitutional reform a concerted movement to overhaul the articles of confederation began in 1786 when madison and his friends persuaded the virginia assembly to recommend a convention to explore the creation of a unified system of commercial regulations congress supported the idea.
in september delegates from five states arrived in annapolis maryland to discuss issues that extended far beyond commerce.
the small turnout was disappointing but the occasion provided strong nationalists with an opportunity to hatch an even bolder plan.
the annapolis delegates advised congress to hold a second meeting in philadelphia to take into consideration the situation of the united states to devise such further provisions as shall appear to them necessary to render the constitution of the federal government adequate to the exigencies of the union whether staunch states rights advocates in congress knew what was afoot is not clear.
in any case congress authorized a grand convention to gather in may 1787.
events played into madisons hands.
soon after the annapolis meeting an uprising known as shayss rebellion involving several thousand impoverished farmers shattered the peace of western massachusetts.
no matter how hard these men worked the soil they always found themselves in debt to eastern creditors.
they complained of high taxes of high interest rates and most of all of a state government insensitive to their problems.
in 1786 daniel shays a veteran of the battle of bunker hill and his armed neighbors closed a county courthouse where creditors were suing to foreclose farm mortgages.
at one point the rural insurgents threatened to seize the federal arsenal located at springfield.
congress did not have funds sufficient to support an army and the arsenal might have fallen had not a group of wealthy bostonians raised an army of four thousand troops to put down the insurrection.
the victors were in for a surprise.
at the next general election massachusetts voters selected representatives sympathetic to shayss demands and a new liberal assembly reformed debtor law.
nationalists throughout the united states were not so forgiving.
from their perspective shayss rebellion symbolized the breakdown of law and order that they had long predicted.
great commotions are prevailing in massachusetts madison wrote.
an appeal to the sword is exceedingly dreaded the time had come for sensible people to speak up for a strong national government.
the unrest in massachusetts persuaded persons who might otherwise have ignored the philadelphia meeting to participate in drafting a new constitution.
the philadelphia convention in the spring of 1787 fifty five men representing twelve states traveled to philadelphia.
rhode island refused to take part in the proceedings a decision that madison attributed to its wickedness and folly thomas jefferson described the convention as an assembly of demigods but this flattering depiction is misleading.
however much modern americans revere the constitution they should remember that the individuals who wrote it did not possess divine insight into the nature of government.
they were practical people lawyers merchants and planters many of whom had fought in the revolution and served in the congress of the confederation.
the majority were in their thirties or forties.
the gathering included george washington james madison george mason robert morris james wilson john dickinson benjamin franklin and alexander hamilton just to name some of the more prominent participants.
absent were john adams and thomas jefferson who were conducting diplomacy in europe patrick henry a localist suspicious of strong central government remained in virginia announcing he smelled a rat as soon as the constitutional convention opened on may 25 the delegates made several procedural decisions of the utmost importance.
first they voted that nothing spoken in the house be printed or communicated without leave the rule was stringently enforced.
sentries guarded the doorways to keep out uninvited visitors windows stayed shut in the sweltering heat to prevent sound from either entering or leaving the chamber and members were forbidden to copy the daily journal without official permission.
as madison explained the secrecy rule saved both the convention and the community from a thousand erroneous and perhaps mischievous reports it also has made it extremely difficult for modern lawyers and judges to determine exactly what the delegates had in mind when they wrote the constitution see the feature essay the elusive constitution search for original intent pp.
in a second procedural move the delegates decided to vote by state but in order to avoid the kinds of problems that had plagued the confederation they ruled that key proposals needed the support of only a majority instead of the nine states required under the articles.
inventing a federal republic madison understood that whoever sets the agenda controls the meeting.
even before all the delegates had arrived he drew up a framework for a new federal system known as the virginia plan.
madison wisely persuaded edmund randolph virginias popular governor to present this scheme to the convention on may 29.
randolph claimed that the virginia plan merely revised sections of the articles but everyone including madison knew better.
my ideas madison confessed strike.
deeply at the old confederation he was determined to restrain the state assemblies and in the original virginia plan madison gave the federal government power to veto state laws.
the virginia plan envisioned a national legislature consisting of two houses one elected directly by the people the other chosen by the first house from nominations made by the state assemblies.
representation in both houses was proportional to the states have we fought for this read the document military reports of shayss rebellion this 1787 woodcut portrays daniel shays with one of his chief officers jacob shattucks.
shays led farmers in western massachusetts in revolt against a state government that seemed insensitive to the needs of poor debtors.
their rebellion frightened conservative leaders who demanded a strong new federal government.
population.
the virginia plan also provided for an executive elected by congress.
since most delegates at the philadelphia convention sympathized with the nationalist position madisons blueprint for a strong federal government initially received broad support and the virginia plan was referred to further study and debate.
a group of men who allegedly had come together to reform the confederation found themselves discussing the details of a national government.
consisting of a supreme legislature executive and judiciary the virginia plan had been pushed through the convention so fast that opponents hardly had an opportunity to present their objections.
on june 15 they spoke up.
william paterson a new jersey lawyer advanced the so called new jersey plan a scheme that retained the unicameral legislature in which each state possessed one vote and that at the same time gave congress extensive new powers to tax and regulate trade.
paterson argued that these revisions while more modest than madisons plan would have greater appeal for the american people.
i believe he said that a little practical virtue is to be preferred to the finest theoretical principles which cannot be carried into effect the delegates listened politely and then soundly rejected the new jersey plan on june 19.
indeed only new jersey new york and delaware voted in favor of patersons scheme.
rejection of this framework did not resolve the most controversial issue before the convention.
paterson and others feared that under the virginia plan small states would lose their separate identities.
these delegates maintained that unless each state possessed an equal vote in congress the small states would find themselves at the mercy of their larger neighbors.
this argument outraged the delegates who favored a strong federal government.
it awarded too much power to the states.
for whom are we forming a government wilson cried.
is it for men or for the imaginary beings called states it seemed absurd to claim that the sixty eight thousand people of rhode island should have the same voice in congress as virginias seven hundred forty seven thousand inhabitants.
compromise saves the convention mediation clearly offered the only way to overcome what roger sherman a connecticut delegate called a full stop on july 2 a grand committee of one person from each state was elected by the convention to resolve persistent differences between the large and small states.
franklin at age 81 the oldest delegate served as chair.
the two fiercest supporters of proportional representation based on population madison and wilson were left off the grand committee a sure sign that the small states would salvage something from the compromise.
chapter 6 the republican experiment compromising on slavery read the document the new jersey plan 1787 william paterson 1745 1806 was a distinguished lawyer statesman and associate justice of the u s supreme court from new jersey.
while serving as a delegate to the constitutional convention in philadelphia in 1787 paterson proposed the new jersey plan for a unicameral legislative body with equal representation from each state.
patersons legislative proposal was rejected in favor of the great compromise which provided for two legislative bodies a senate with equal representation for each state and a house of representatives with representation based on population.
the committee recommended that the states be equally represented in the upper house of congress while representation was to be proportionate in the lower house.
only the lower house could initiate money bills.
franklins committee also decided that one member of the lower house should be selected for every thirty thousand inhabitants of a state.
southern delegates insisted that this number include slaves.
in the so called three fifths rule the committee agreed that for the purpose of determining representation in the lower house slaves would be counted but not as much as free persons.
for every five slaves a congressional district received credit for three free voters a deal that gave the south much greater power in the new government than it would have otherwise received.
as with most compromise solutions the one negotiated by franklins committee fully satisfied no one.
it did however overcome a major impasse and after the small states gained an assured voice in the upper house the senate they cooperated enthusiastically in creating a strong central government.
during the final days of august a deeply disturbing issue came before the convention.
it was a harbinger of the great sectional crisis of the nineteenth century.
many northern representatives detested the slave trade and wanted it to end immediately.
they despised the three fifths ruling that seemed to award slaveholders extra power in government simply because they owned slaves.
it seemed now to be pretty well understood madison jotted in his private notes that the real difference of interest lay not between the large and small but between the n and southn.
the institution of slavery and its consequences formed a line of discrimination whenever northern delegates and on this point they were by no means united pushed too aggressively southerners threatened to bolt the convention thereby destroying any hope of establishing a strong national government.
curiously even recalcitrant southerners avoided using the word slavery.
they seemed embarrassed to call the institution by its true name and in the constitution itself slaves were described as other persons such persons persons held to service or labour in other words as everything but slaves.
a few northern delegates such as roger sherman of connecticut sought at every turn to mollify the southerners especially the south carolinians who spoke so passionately about preserving slavery.
gouverneur morris a pennsylvania representative would have none of it.
he regularly reminded the convention that the inhabitant of georgia and s c who goes to the coast of africa and in defiance of the most sacred laws of humanity tears away his fellow creatures from their dearest connections and damns them to the most cruel bondage shall have more votes in a government instituted for the protection of the rights of mankind than the citizen of pa or n jersey largely ignoring morriss stinging attacks the delegates reached an uneasy compromise on the continuation of the slave trade.
southerners feared that the new congress would pass commercial regulations adversely affecting the planters taxes on the watch the video slavery and the constitution many scholars consider the original u s constitution to be a pro slavery document since its articles protected the international slave trade and through the 3 5s clause awarded states extra representation based on the number of slaves that they held.
have we fought for this revolution or reform.
the articles of confederation and the constitution compared political challenge mode of ratification or amendment number of houses in legislature mode of representation articles of confederation require confirmation by every state legislature one two to seven delegates represent each state each state holds only one vote in congress mode of election and term of office delegates appointed annually by state legislatures executive no separate executive delegates annually elect one of their number as president who possesses no veto no power to appoint officers or to conduct policy.
administrative functions of government theoretically carried out by committee of states practically by various single headed departments most adjudication left to state and local courts congress is final court of appeal in disputes between states states alone can levy taxes congress funds the common treasury by making requisitions for state contributions congress regulates foreign commerce by treaty but holds no check on conflicting state regulations judiciary taxation regulation of commerce export of rice and tobacco for example.
they demanded therefore that no trade laws be passed without a two thirds majority of the federal legislature.
they backed down on this point however in exchange for guarantees that congress would not interfere with the slave trade until 1808 see chapter 8.
the south even came away with a clause assuring the return of fugitive slaves.
we have obtained charles cotesworth pinckney told the planters of south carolina a right to recover our slaves in whatever part of america they may take refuge which is a right we had not before although these deals disappointed many northerners they conceded that establishing a strong national government was of greater immediate importance than ending the slave trade.
great as the evil is madison wrote a dismemberment of the union would be worse the last details on july 26 the convention formed a committee of detail a group that prepared a rough draft of the constitution.
after the committee completed its work writing a document that still after so constitution requires confirmation by three fourths of state conventions or legislatures two two senators represent each state in upper house each senator holds one vote.
one representative to lower house represents every thirty thousand people in 1788 in a state each representative holds one vote senators chosen by state legislatures for six year term direct election after 1913 representatives chosen by vote of citizens for two year term separate executive branch president elected by electoral college to four year term granted veto power to conduct policy and to appoint ambassadors judges and officers of executive departments established by legislation separate branch consisting of supreme court and inferior courts established by congress to enforce federal law federal government granted powers of taxation congress regulates foreign commerce by treaty all state regulations must obtain congressional consent many hours of debate preserved the fundamental points of the virginia plan the delegates reconsidered each article.
the task required the better part of a month.
during these sessions the members of the convention concluded that the president as they now called the executive should be selected by an electoral college a body of prominent men in each state chosen by local voters.
the number of electoral votes held by each state equaled its number of representatives and senators.
this awkward device guaranteed that the president would not be indebted to the congress for his office.
whoever received the second largest number of votes in the electoral college automatically became vice president.
in the event that no person received a majority of the votes the election would be decided by the lower house the house of representatives with each state casting a single vote.
delegates also armed the chief executive with veto power over legislation as well as the right to nominate judges.
both privileges of course would have been unthinkable a decade earlier but the state experiments revealed the importance of having an independent executive to maintain a balanced system of republican government.
complete the assignment the elusive constitution search for original intent on myhistorylab feature essay the elusive constitution search for original intent this nineteenth century engraving shows how the pennsylvania state house would have looked in 1776.
after the revolution and the drafting of the constitution the building became known as independence hall.
during the hot summer of 1787 delegates kept the windows closed so that no one on the street could hear the debates.
m any prominent national leaders alarmed at a perceived judicial imperialism in recent activist courts have urged that judges interpret the constitution strictly according to the intent of the framers arguing that a jurisprudence of original intent is the only legitimate basis for constitutional decision making intentionalists demand that judges measure decisions against a demonstrable consensus among the framers and ratifiers as to principles stated or implied in the constitution yet when one considers circumstances surrounding the constitutions framing demonstration of the founders intent proves elusive indeed.
delegates to the constitutional convention in philadelphia in 1787 deliberately veiled the purpose of the convention in secrecy to avoid pressure by local constituencies who harbored deep suspicions concerning strong central government.
newspapers barred from access to the convention printed only occasional rumors.
delegates refused to speak or correspond with outsiders concerning the proceedings.
the strictness with which delegates observed the rule of secrecy not only restricted contemporary knowledge of what transpired but has also limited the number of sources in which subsequent generations may search for original intent.
only three members preserved complete accounts of convention debates.
these records remained unpublished for more than thirty years forcing the first generation of lawyers and federal judges to rely on the words of the constitution alone for clues to the framers intent.
the publication of the three accounts did not necessarily make the delegates intent more accessible.
the journal acts and proceedings of the convention assemblies in philadelphia recorded by the convention secretary william jackson provided only a chronological listing of motions resolutions and vote tallies.
his unpublished manuscript of convention debates which could have fleshed out the published journals mere skeleton of the proceedings was lost.
the notes of new york delegate robert yates appeared in 1821 as secret proceedings and debates of the convention assembled at philadelphia but the circumstances of their publication rendered them thoroughly unreliable.
their editor the former french minister citizen edmond gent attained notoriety in the 1790s when he violated american neutrality in the anglo french war by commissioning american privateers against british shipping.
gent supported states rights and popular government and manipulated yatess notes to support his views.
a comparison of secret proceedings with the two surviving pages of yatess manuscript reveals that gent altered or deleted more than half the original text.
if the intent of the delegates survives anywhere madisons notes of debates in the federal convention of 1787 provides its likeliest repository.
the father of the constitution as contemporaries called him carefully preserved notes on convention proceedings and took every measure to ensure their accuracy.
recognizing his own limitations as a stenographer madison did not try to record everything said but sought manuscript copies of delegates speeches that he incorporated into his notes at the end of each day.
madison also waited until the end of each day to record his own speeches every one of which was extemporaneous from memory.
at the conventions end he obtained a manuscript copy of secretary jacksons notes which he used to supplement and correct his own.
though madison tinkered at times with his notes over the next thirty years recent analysis has demonstrated that none of these minor corrections impaired the faithfulness of the text.
yet in spite of the meticulous care that madison lavished on his notes they remain at best incomplete repositories of the framers original intent.
each days notes contain only a few minutes of oral discourse whereas actual delivery occupied between five and seven hours.
furthermore written manuscripts of speeches may have approximated only roughly what the debaters actually said.
madisons speech on the benefits of a large republic for example occupies two closely reasoned pages in his notes.
yet others who took notes seem to have recorded a much shorter and far less impressive oral version.
such discrepancies raise important questions.
how did the framers understand the actual speeches on the convention floor.
how did their understanding shape their intentions.
how much of their intent is lost in the vast omissions.
these questions take on even greater significance when one considers that the constitution was forged through a series of compromises among representatives whose interests and intentions differed widely.
no delegate was completely satisfied and the finished document permitted some functions none had intended.
madison himself complained for example that the principle of judicial review was never intended and can never be proper moreover he thought it would be a mistake to search for the original intent of convention delegates.
the delegates intent could never possibly determine constitutional interpretation he argued for the only authoritative intentions were those of the people of the states as expressed thro the conventions which ratified the constitution yet the works most commonly cited from the time of state ratification raise problems with the application of this principle as well.
stenographers who recorded the debates of the several state conventions on the adoption of the federal constitution did not possess skills adequate to their task and federalist partisans edited the speeches with abandon in order to promote their own views.
evidence also suggests that jonathan eliot the journalist who published the debates in 1836 altered them further.
given the limitations of sources most often cited by modern judges and lawyers the original intent of most framers remains as elusive today as it was for the first generation who had no access to those documents.
the constitutions often ambiguous wording which furnished the sole guide to the framers intent in their day remains the best recourse in our own.
questions for discussion 1.
why do some lawyers and politicians still emphasize the constitutions original meaning despite how the country has changed since 1787.
how could one try to determine the original meaning of the constitutions framers.
why did james madison believe that it would be a mistake to try to search for the original intent of the delegates to the constitutional convention.
chapter 6 the republican experiment as the meeting was concluding some delegates expressed concern about the absence in the constitution of a bill of rights.
such declarations had been included in most state constitutions and virginians such as george mason insisted that the states and their citizens needed explicit protection from possible excesses by the federal government.
while many delegates sympathized with masons appeal they noted that the hour was late and in any case that the proposed constitution provided sufficient security for individual rights.
during the hard battles over ratification the delegates to the convention may have regretted passing over the issue so lightly.
we the people the delegates adopted an ingenious procedure for ratification.
instead of submitting the constitution to the various state legislatures all of which had a vested interest in maintaining the status quo and most of which had two houses either of which could block approval they called for the election of thirteen state conventions especially chosen to review the new federal government.
the delegates may have picked up this idea from the massachusetts experiment of 1780.
moreover the constitution would take effect after the assent of only nine states.
there was no danger therefore that the proposed system would fail simply because a single state like rhode island withheld approval.
the convention asked gouverneur morris of pennsylvania a delegate noted for his urbanity to make final stylistic changes in the wording of the constitution.
when morris examined the working draft he discovered that it spoke of the collection of states forming a new government.
this wording presented problems.
ratification required only nine states.
no one knew whether all the states would accept the constitution and if not which nine would.
a strong possibility existed that several new england states would reject the document.
morriss brilliant phrase we the people of the united states eliminated this difficulty.
the new nation was a republic of the people not of the states.
on september 17 thirty nine men signed the constitution.
a few members of the convention like mason could not support the document.
others had already gone home.
for more than three months madison had served as the conventions driving intellectual force.
he now generously summarized the experience there never was an assembly of men charged with a great and arduous trust who were more pure in their motives or more exclusively or anxiously devoted to the object committed to them whose constitution.
struggle for ratification what issues separated federalists from antifederalists during debates over ratification.
supporters of the constitution recognized that ratification would not be easy.
after all the convention had been authorized only to revise the articles but instead it produced a new plan that fundamentally altered relations between the states and the central government.
the delegates dutifully dispatched copies of the constitution to the congress of confederation then meeting in new york city and that powerless body referred the document to the separate states without any specific recommendation.
the fight for ratification had begun.
federalists and antifederalists proponents of the constitution enjoyed great advantages over the unorganized opposition.
in the contest for ratification they took no chances.
their most astute move was the adoption of the label federalist.
the term cleverly suggested that they stood for a confederation of states rather than for the creation of a supreme national authority.
in fact they envisioned the creation of a strong centralized national government capable of fielding a formidable army.
critics of the constitution who tended to be somewhat poorer less urban and less well educated than their opponents cried foul but there was little they could do.
they were stuck with the name antifederalist a misleading term that made their cause seem a rejection of the very notion of a federation of the states.
the federalists recruited the most prominent public figures of the day.
in every state convention speakers favoring the constitution were more polished and more fully prepared than were their opponents.
in new york the campaign to win ratification sparked publication of the federalist a brilliant series of essays written by madison hamilton and jay during the fall and winter of 1787 and 1788.
the nations newspapers threw themselves overwhelmingly behind the new government.
in fact few journals even bothered to carry antifederalist writings.
in some states the federalists adopted tactics of questionable propriety in order to gain ratification.
in pennsylvania for example they achieved a legal quorum for a crucial vote by dragging several opposition delegates into the meeting from the streets.
in new york hamilton intimidated upstate antifederalists with threats that new york city would secede from the state unless the state ratified the constitution.
in these battles the antifederalists articulated a political philosophy that had broad popular appeal.
they spoke the language of the commonwealthmen see chapter 4.
like the extreme republicans who drafted the first state constitutions the antifederalists were deeply suspicious of political power.
during the debates over ratification they warned that public officials however selected would be constantly scheming to expand their authority.
the preservation of individual liberty required constant vigilance.
it seemed obvious that the larger the republic the greater the opportunity for political corruption.
local voters could not possibly know what their representatives in a distant national capital were doing.
the government outlined in the constitution invited precisely the kinds of problems that montesquieu had described in his famous essay the spirit of the laws.
in so extensive a republic one antifederalist declared the great officers of government would soon become above the control of the people and abuse their power antifederalists demanded direct personal contact with their representatives.
they argued that elected officials should reflect the character of their constituents as closely as possible.
it seemed unlikely that in large congressional districts the people would be able to preserve such close ties with their representatives.
according to the antifederalists the constitution favored persons wealthy enough to have forged a reputation that extended beyond a single community.
samuel chase told the members of the maryland whose constitution.
struggle for ratification read the document federalist paper no.
51 feb 6 1788 new hampshire 9th british north america canada lake superior june 21 1788 maine part of mass.
h ke la massachusetts lake michigan n uro new york r io e onta lak feb 16 1788 11th rhode island july 26 1788 ee l ak 13th may 29 1790 r ie connecticut pennsylvania 5th 2nd jan 9 1788 dec 12 1787 new jersey 3rd atlantic ocean dec 18 1787 delaware i oh 1st virginia.
or dec 8 1787 10th june 25 1788 maryland north carolina apr.
26 1788 7th spanish louisiana r 12th iss ipp i nov 21 1789 mi ss south carolina 300 miles 300 kilometers 8th may 23 1788 georgia majority for ratification 4th majority against ratification jan 2 1788 disputed with spain divided spani no returns sh f lor 1st ida order in which the states ratified ratification of the constitution advocates of the new constitution called themselves federalists and those who opposed its ratification were known as antifederalists.
ratifying convention that under the new system the distance between the people and their representatives will be so great that there is no probability of a farmer or planter being chosen.
only the gentry the rich and the well born will be elected federalist speakers mocked their opponents localist perspective.
the constitution deserved general support precisely because it ensured that future americans would be represented by natural aristocrats individuals possessing greater insights skills and training than did the ordinary citizen.
these talented leaders the federalists insisted could discern the interests of the entire population.
historians have generally accepted the federalist critique.
it would be a mistake however to see the antifederalists as losers or as persons who could not comprehend social and economic change.
although their rhetoric echoed an older moral view of political culture they accepted more easily than did many federalists a liberal marketplace in which ordinary citizens competed as equals with the rich and well born.
they believed the public good was best served by allowing individuals like themselves to pursue their own private interests.
that is what they had been doing on the local level during the 1780s and they resented the imposition of elite controls over their affairs.
although the antifederalists lost the battle over ratification their ideas about political economy later found many champions in the age of andrew jackson.
the constitution drew support from many different types of people.
in fact historians have been unable to discover sharp correlations between wealth and occupation on the one hand and attitudes toward the proposed system of central government on the other.
in general federalists lived in more commercialized areas than did their opponents.
in the cities artisans as well as chapter 6 the republican experiment merchants called for ratification while those farmers who were only marginally involved in commercial agriculture frequently voted antifederalist.
despite passionate pleas from patrick henry and other antifederalists most state conventions quickly adopted the constitution.
delaware acted first december 7 1787 and within eight months of the philadelphia meeting eight of the nine states required to launch the government had ratified the document.
the contests in virginia june 1788 and new york july 1788 generated bitter debate but they too joined the union leaving only north carolina and rhode island outside the united states.
eventually november 21 1789 and may 29 1790 even these states ratified the constitution.
still the vote had been very close.
the constitution was ratified in new york by a tally of 30 to 27 in massachusetts by 187 to 168 and in virginia by 89 to 79.
a swing of a few votes in several key states could have defeated the new government.
while the state conventions sparked angry rhetoric americans soon closed ranks behind the constitution.
an antifederalist who represented one massachusetts village explained that he had opposed the adoption of this constitution but that he had been overruled.
by a majority of wise and understanding men and that now he should endeavor to sow the seeds of union and peace among the people he represented read the document the bill of rights 1789 adding the bill of rights the first ten amendments to the constitution are the major legacy of the antifederalist argument.
in almost every state convention opponents of the constitution pointed to the need for greater protection n of individual liberties rights that people presumably had possessed in a state of nature.
it is necessary wrote one antifederalist that the sober and industrious part of the community should be defended from the rapacity and violence of the vicious and idle.
a bill of rights therefore ought to set forth the purposes for which the compact is made and serves to secure the minority against the usurpation and tyranny of the majority the list of fundamental rights varied from state to state but most antifederalists demanded specific guarantees for jury trial and freedom of religion.
they wanted prohibitions against cruel and unusual punishments.
there was also considerable though not universal support for freedom of speech and freedom of the press.
madison and others regarded the proposals with little enthusiasm.
in the federalist no.
84 hamilton bluntly reminded the american people that the constitution is itself.
a bill of rights but after the adoption of the constitution had been assured madison moderated his stand.
if nothing else passage of a bill of rights would appease able men such as george mason and edmund randolph who might otherwise remain alienated from the new federal system.
we have in this way something to gain madison concluded and if we proceed with caution nothing to lose the crucial consideration was caution.
a number of people throughout the nation advocated calling a second constitutional convention one that would take antifederalist criticism into account.
madison wanted to avoid such a meeting and he feared that some members of the first congress might use a bill of rights as an excuse to revise the entire constitution or to promote a second convention.
the first ten amendments of the u s constitution are known as the bill of rights.
proposed by james madison in 1789 the rights guaranteed in these amendments helped calm the fears of antifederalists who believed that the new constitution gave the central government too much power.
madison carefully reviewed these recommendations as well as the various declarations of rights that had appeared in the early state constitutions and on june 8 1789 he placed before the house of representatives a set of amendments designed to protect individual rights from government interference.
madison told the members of congress that the greatest dangers to popular liberties came from the majority operating against the minority a committee compressed and revised his original ideas into ten amendments that were ratified and became known collectively as the bill of rights.
for many modern americans these amendments are the most important section of the constitution.
madison had hoped that additions would be inserted into the text of the constitution at the appropriate places not tacked onto the end but he was overruled.
the bill of rights protected the freedoms of assembly speech religion and the press guaranteed speedy trial by an impartial jury preserved the peoples right to bear arms and prohibited unreasonable searches.
other amendments dealt with legal procedure.
some opponents of the constitution urged congress to provide greater safeguards for states rights but madison had no intention of backing away from a strong central government.
only the tenth amendment addressed the states relation to the federal system.
this crucial article designed to calm antifederalist fears specified that those powers not delegated to the united states by the study resources constitution nor prohibited by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people on september 25 1789 the bill of rights passed both houses of congress and by december 15 1791 the amendments had been ratified by three fourths of the states.
madison was justly proud of his achievement.
he had effectively secured individual rights without undermining the constitution.
when he asked his friend jefferson for his opinion of the bill of rights jefferson responded with typical republican candor i like it.
as far as it goes but i should have been for going further conclusion success depends on the people by 1789 one phase of american political experimentation had come to an end.
during these years the people gradually often haltingly learned that in a republican society they themselves were sovereign.
they could no longer blame the failure of government on inept monarchs or greedy aristocrats.
they bore a great responsibility.
americans had demanded a government of the people only to discover during the 1780s that in some situations the people could not be trusted with power majorities could tyrannize minorities and the best of governments could abuse individual rights.
contemporaries had difficulty deciding just what had been accomplished.
a writer in the pennsylvania packet thought the american people had preserved order.
the year 1776 is celebrated the newspaper observed for a revolution in favor of liberty.
the year 1787.
will be celebrated with equal joy for a revolution in favor of government but some aging patriots grumbled that perhaps order had been achieved at too high a price.
in 1788 richard henry lee remarked tis really astonishing that the same people who have just emerged from a long and cruel war in defense of liberty should now agree to fix an elective despotism upon themselves and their posterity but most americans probably would have accepted franklins optimistic assessment.
as he watched the delegates to the philadelphia convention come forward to sign the constitution he noted that there was a sun carved on the back of george washingtons chair.
i have the aged philosopher noted often in the course of the session.
looked at the sun behind the president without being able to tell whether it was rising or setting but now at length i have the happiness to know that it is a rising and not a setting sun study resources take the study plan for chapter 6 the republican experiment on myhistorylab time line 1776 second continental congress authorizes colonies to create republican governments may eight states draft new constitutions two others already enjoy republican government by virtue of former colonial charters congress accepts articles of confederation after long debate november massachusetts finally ratifies state constitution 1781 states ratify articles of confederation following settlement of virginias western land claims british army surrenders at yorktown october states fail to ratify proposed impost tax 1783 newburgh conspiracy thwarted march society of the cincinnati raises a storm of criticism treaty of peace signed with great britain september 1785 land ordinance for northwest territory passed by congress jay gardoqui negotiations over mississippi navigation anger southern states annapolis convention suggests second meeting to revise the articles of confederation september shayss rebellion frightens american leaders 1787 1788 the federal constitution is ratified by all states except north carolina and rhode island bill of rights first ten amendments to the constitution ratified by states chapter 6 chapter review chapter review living in the shadow of revolution during the 1780s why were americans so sensitive to the dangers of aristocratic display.
although some families had become newly wealthy during the revolutionary war most americans had also become fervent republicans who associated any traces of aristocratic display by the rich with the privileges that british noblemen had claimed during the colonial period.
they believed that a revolution waged against monarchy should not produce a new aristocracy that was legally or even visibly distinguished from its fellow citizens.
p 132 the states experiments in republicanism gre following independence why did the states insist on drafting written constitutions.
at strengthening federal authority pennsylvania 17 82 ceded by conn 1800 ceded by new york i oh y ork some americans worried that the scramble for material wealth would undermine republican values in the new nation.
disparities in wealth made some worry that a hereditary aristocracy might grow up to dominate government.
elites worried that democratic excesses would lead to men without property and the personal independence and stability that came with it rising to power.
enslaved african americans and most women were denied the rights to property and the independence required to become full citizens of a republican society.
or ew what were the limits of equality in the republican society of the new united states.
western lands.
only after virginia ceded its claims could congress draft the northwest ordinance which provided an orderly plan for settling the ohio valley.
the weak congress was not even able to force the british to live up to their obligations under the treaty of paris of 1783.
p 137 ed by n d c virginia what did the nationalists call for and how did they aim to achieve their initiatives.
territory of virginia d cumberland until 1792 gap kentucky ce defining republican culture north carolina in the early 1780s nationalists wanted to persuade the states to amend the articles of confederation to create a centralized fiscal system that would allow congress to levy import taxes and use the revenue to reduce the national debt.
extreme nationalists may even have contemplated using the army to force the states to amend the articles if necessary.
p 141 ceded by north carolina tennessee state of franklin south carolina d by georgia db s georgia i have we fought for this why did constitutional delegates compromise on representation and slavery.
james madisons virginia plan for the constitution called for representation in both houses of congress to be proportional to a states population.
small states objected that this would put them at the mercy of larger states.
southern states feared that more populous northern states might vote to outlaw slavery.
to prevent a breakdown the delegates compromised.
each state would have an equal number of representatives in the senate and slaves would be counted as three fifths of a person when determining representation for the federal government.
p 143 l americans believed that britains unwritten constitution had not protected the colonies against oppression.
after independence therefore they demanded that their state constitutions explicitly define the rights of the people and the power of their rulers.
p 136 wisconsin whose constitution.
struggle for ratification michigan stumbling toward a new national government why did many americans regard the articles of confederation as inadequate.
during the revolution americans showed little interest in establishing a strong national government.
under the articles of confederation 1777 an underfunded congress limped along without direction while the states competed over what issues separated federalists from antifederalists during debates over ratification.
during the debates of 1787 1788 federalists who favored stronger national government defended the constitution against antifederalists who opposed centralized authority.
by the end of 1791 enough state conventions had endorsed the constitution for ratification.
to appease the antifederalists congress in 1789 added a bill of rights to protect the freedoms of citizens against the power of the national government.
p 150 key terms and definitions republicanism concept that ultimate political authority is vested in the citizens of the nation.
p 132 african methodist episcopal church richard allen founded the african methodist episcopal church in 1816 as the first independent blackrun protestant church in the united states.
the ame church was active in the abolition movement and founded educational institutions for free blacks.
p 134 natural rights fundamental rights over which the government should exercise no control.
p 136 articles of confederation ratified in 1781 this document was the united states first constitution providing a framework for national government.
the articles limited central authority by denying the national government any taxation or coercive power.
p 138 northwest ordinance legislation in 1787 that established governments in americas northwest territories defined a procedure for their admission to the union as states and prohibited slavery north of the ohio river.
p 141 study resources shayss rebellion armed insurrection of farmers in western massachusetts led by daniel shays.
intended to prevent state courts from foreclosing on debtors unable to pay their taxes the rebellion was put down by the state militia.
nationalists used the event to call a constitutional convention to strengthen the national government.
p 144 virginia plan offered by james madison and the virginia delegation at the constitutional convention this proposal called for a strong executive office and two houses of congress each with representation proportional to a states population.
p 144 federalist p 150 supporter of the constitution who advocated its ratification.
antifederalists critics of the constitution who were concerned that it included no specific provisions to protect natural and civil rights.
p 150 bill of rights the first ten amendments to the constitution adopted in 1791 to preserve the rights and liberties of individuals.
p 152 three fifths rule constitutional provision that for every five slaves a state would receive credit for three free voters indetermining seats for the house of representatives.
p 146 critical thinking questions 1.
what factors kept african americans and women from achieving full political equality in the united states following the revolution.
during the revolution and immediately afterward why would so many americans have opposed the establishment of a strong national government.
why did thomas jefferson fear that the new constitution compromised the republican ideal of government by the people.
since the federalists and antifederalists both believed in a republican form of government why could they not agree on the new constitution.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 6 on myhistorylab living in the shadow of revolution read the document read the document the new jersey plan 1787 p 146 watch the video slavery and the constitution p 146 phillis wheatley religious and moral poems p 135 stumbling toward a new national government read the document the articles of confederation complete the assignment the elusive constitution search for original intent p 148 1777 p 138 whose constitution.
struggle for ratification read the document northwest ordinance july 3 1787 p 139 read the document view the map western land claims ceded by the states p 140 federalist paper no.
51 feb 6 1788 p 151 read the document the bill of rights 1789 p 152 have we fought for this indicates study plan media assignment read the document rebellion p 145 military reports of shayss democracy and dissent the violence of party politics 1788 1800 contents and learning objectives force of public opinion pg.
156 popular political culture pg.
169 how did the ideas of jeffersonians differ from that of the federalists.
why was it hard for americans to accept political dissent as a part of political activity.
principle and pragmatism establishing a new government pg.
158 the adams presidency pg.
171 why was george washington unable to overcome division within the new government.
conflicting visions jefferson and hamilton pg.
159 why did alexander hamilton and thomas jefferson find it so difficult to cooperate as members of washingtons cabinet.
hamiltons plan for prosperity and security pg.
161 why did many americans oppose alexander hamiltons blueprint for national prosperity.
why were some federalists willing to sacrifice political freedoms for party advantage.
the peaceful revolution the election of 1800 pg.
174 what did jefferson mean when he claimed in his first inaugural address that we are all republicans we are all federalists.
feature essay defense of superiority the impact of nationalism on perceptions of the environment charges of treason the battle over foreign affairs pg.
163 how did foreign affairs affect domestic politics during the 1790s.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 4 experience of empire constructing an anglo american identity the journal of william byrd william byrd ii 1674 1744 was a type of british american one would not have encountered during the earliest years of settlement.
this successful tidewater planter was a product of a new more cosmopolitan environment and as an adult byrd seemed as much at home in london as in his native virginia.
in 1728 at the height of his political influence in williamsburg the capital of colonial virginia byrd accepted a commission to help survey a disputed boundary between north carolina and virginia.
during his long journey into the distant backcountry byrd kept a detailed journal a satiric often bawdy chronicle of daily events that is now regarded as a classic of early american literature.
on his trip into the wilderness byrd met many different people.
no sooner had he departed a familiar world of tobacco plantations than he came across a selfstyled hermit an englishman who apparently preferred the freedom of the woods to the constraints of society.
he has no other habitation but a green bower or harbour byrd reported with a female domestick as wild as dirty as himself as the boundary commissioners pushed farther into the backcountry they encountered highly independent men and women of european descent small frontier families that byrd regarded as living no better than savages.
he attributed their uncivilized behavior to a diet of too much pork.
the truth of it is these people live so much upon swines flesh.
that it makes them.
extremely hoggish in their temper many of them seem to grunt rather than speak in their ordinary conversation the wilderness journey also brought byrds party of surveyors into regular contact with native americans whom he properly distinguished as catawba tuscarora usheree and sapponi indians.
yrds journal invites us to view the rapidly developing eighteenth century backcountry from a fresh perspective.
it was not a vast empty territory awaiting the arrival of european settlers.
maps often sustain this erroneous impression depicting cities and towns farms and plantations clustered along the atlantic coast they suggest a line of settlement steadily pushing outward into a huge blank area with no mark of civilization.
the people byrd met on his journey into the backcountry would not have understood b read the document william byrd ii diary an american gentleman william byrd ii.
byrds history of the dividing line run in the year 1728 contains a marvelously satirical account of the culture of poor country farmers in north carolina.
chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america such maps.
after all the empty space on the maps was their home.
they experienced the frontier as populous zones of many cultures stretching from the english and french settlements in the north all the way to the spanish borderlands in the far southwest.
the point is not to discount the significance of the older atlantic settlements.
during the eighteenth century britains thirteen mainland colonies underwent a profound transformation.
the population in the colonies grew at unprecedented rates.
german and scots irish immigrants arrived in huge numbers.
so too did african slaves.
wherever they lived colonial americans of this period were less isolated from one another than colonists had been during most of the seventeenth century.
indeed after 1690 men and women expanded their cultural horizons becoming part of a larger angloamerican empire.
the change was striking.
colonists whose parents or grandparents had come to the new world to confront a howling wilderness now purchased imported european manufactures read english journals participated in imperial wars and sought favors from a growing number of resident royal officials.
no one not even the inhabitants of the distant frontiers could escape the influence of britain.
the cultural economic and political links connecting the colonists to the imperial center in london grew stronger with time.
this surprising development raises a difficult question for the modern historian.
if the eighteenth century colonists were so powerfully attracted to great britain then why did they ever declare independence.
the answer may well be that as the colonists became more british they inevitably became more american as well.
this was a development of major significance for it helps to explain the appearance after midcentury of genuine nationalist sentiment.
political commercial and military links that brought the colonists into more frequent contact with great britain also made them more aware of other colonists.
it was within an expanding prosperous empire that they first began seriously to consider what it meant to be american.
growth and diversity what difficulties did native americans face in maintaining their cultural independence on the frontier.
the phenomenal growth of british america during the eighteenth century amazed benjamin franklin one of the first persons to bring mathematical rigor to the study of demography.
the population of the english colonies doubled approximately every twenty five years and according to calculations franklin made in 1751 if the expansion continued at such an extraordinary rate for another century or so the greatest number of englishmen will be on this side of the water accurate population data from the colonial period are extremely difficult to find.
the first national census did not occur until 1790.
still various sources surviving from prerevolutionary times indicate that the total white population of britains thirteen mainland colonies rose from about 250 000 in 1700 to 2 150 000 in 1770 an annual growth rate of 3 percent.
few societies in recorded history have expanded so rapidly and if the growth rate had not dropped substantially during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the current population of the united states would stand at well more than one billion people.
natural reproduction was responsible for most of the growth.
more families bore children who in turn lived long enough to have children of their own.
because of this sudden expansion the population of the late colonial period was strikingly young approximately one half of the populace at any given time was under age 16.
not only was the total population increasing at a very rapid rate it also was becoming more dispersed and heterogeneous.
each year witnessed the arrival of thousands of non english europeans.
unlike those seventeenth century english settlers in search of religious sanctuary or instant wealth see chapter 2 the newcomers generally transferred in the hope of obtaining their own land and setting up as independent farmers.
these people often traveled to the backcountry a region stretching approximately eight hundred miles from western pennsylvania to georgia.
although they planned to follow customs they had known in europe they found the challenge of surviving on the british frontier far more demanding than they had anticipated.
they plunged into a complex fluid often violent society that included large numbers of native americans and african americans as well as other europeans.
scots irish flee english oppression non english colonists poured into american ports throughout the eighteenth century creating rich ethnic diversity in areas originally settled by anglo saxons.
the largest group of newcomers consisted of scots irish.
the experiences of these people in great britain influenced not only their decision to move to the new world but also their behavior once they arrived.
during the seventeenth century english rulers thought they could thoroughly dominate catholic ireland by transporting thousands of lowland scottish presbyterians to the northern region of that war torn country.
the plan failed.
english officials who were members of the anglican church discriminated against the presbyterians.
they passed laws that placed the scots irish at a severe disadvantage when they traded in england they taxed them at exorbitant rates.
after several poor harvests many of the scots irish elected to emigrate to america where they hoped to find the freedom and prosperity that had been denied them in ireland.
i have seen some of their letters to their friends here ireland one british agent reported in 1729.
in which after they set forth and recommend the fruitfulness and commodities of the country america they tell them that if they will but carry over a little money with them they may for a small sum purchase considerable tracts of land often entire presbyterian congregations followed charismatic ministers to the new world intent on replicating a distinctive fiercely independent culture on the frontier.
it is estimated that one hundred fifty thousand scots irish migrated to the colonies before the revolution.
most scots irish immigrants landed initially in philadelphia but instead of remaining in that city they carved out farms on pennsylvanias western frontier.
the colonys proprietors welcomed the influx of new settlers for it seemed they would form an ideal barrier between the indians and the older coastal communities.
the penn family soon had second thoughts however.
the scotsirish squatted on whatever land looked best and when colony officials pointed out that large tracts had already been reserved the immigrants retorted that it was against the laws of god and nature that so much land should be idle when so many christians wanted it to labour on and to raise their bread wherever they located the scots irish challenged established authority.
growth and diversity read the document benjamin franklin observations concerning the increase of mankind african german dutch scots irish english scottish micmac e u r abenaki algonquin chippewa n h portsmouth boston providence iroquois newport hartford new haven r i susquehannock perth conn amboy new york n j philadelphia burlington miami penn.
new castle md.
annapolis shawnee va williamsburg shenandoah r james r mass.
n y io oh en an do ah r va ll ey great lakes maine part of mass.
st l aw re nc e b q e c chickasaw new bern s c sa va nn mis siss n c r ippi r ee ed pe sh cherokee charles town.
ah r ga atlantic ocean choctaw savannah creek proclamation line of 1763 seminole distribution of european and african immigrants in the thirteen colonies a flood of non english immigrants swept the british colonies between 1700 and 1775.
germans search for a better life a second large body of non english settlers more than one hundred thousand people came from the upper rhine valley the german palatinate.
some of the migrants especially those who relocated to america around the turn of the century belonged to small pietistic protestant sects whose religious views were somewhat similar to those of the quakers.
these germans moved to the new world primarily in the hope of finding religious toleration.
under the guidance of francis daniel pastorius 1651 1720 a group of mennonites established in pennsylvania a prosperous community known as germantown.
by midcentury however the characteristics of the german migration had begun to change.
large numbers of lutherans transferred to the middle colonies.
unlike members of the pietistic sects these men and women were not in search of religious freedom.
rather they traveled to the new world looking to better their material lives.
the lutheran church in germany initially tried to maintain control over the distant congregations but even though the migrants themselves fiercely preserved many aspects of traditional german culture they were eventually forced to accommodate to new social conditions.
henry melchior mhlenberg 1711 1787 a tireless leader helped german lutherans through a difficult cultural adjustment and in 1748 mhlenberg organized a meeting of local pastors and lay delegates that ordained ministers of their own choosing an act of spiritual independence that has been called the most important single event in american lutheran history the german migrants mistakenly called pennsylvania dutch because the english confused deutsch meaning german with dutch a person from holland began reaching philadelphia in large numbers after 1717 and by 1766 persons of german stock accounted for more than one third of pennsylvanias total population.
even their most vocal detractors admitted the germans were the best farmers in the colony.
ethnic differences in pennsylvania bred disputes.
the scots irish as well as the germans preferred to live with people of their own background and they sometimes fought to keep members of the other nationality out of their neighborhoods.
the english were suspicious of both groups.
they could not comprehend why the germans insisted on speaking german in america.
in 1753 for example franklin described these settlers as the most stupid of their nation he warned that unless the stream of german importation could be turned from this to other colonies.
they will soon outnumber us.
and all the advantages we have will in my opinion be not able to preserve our language and even our government will become precarious as franklins remarks suggest the pressure on non english colonists to accommodate to the dominant culture in other words to anglicize their manners and behavior was very great.
in comparison to some of his contemporaries franklin seemed a moderate critic of the german and scots irish settlers.
others threatened violence against the newcomers who refused to conform to english ways.
such prejudice may have persuaded members of both groups to search for new homes.
after 1730 germans and scots irish pushed south from western pennsylvania into the shenandoah valley thousands of them settling in the backcountry of virginia and the carolinas.
the germans usually remained wherever they found unclaimed fertile land.
by contrast the scots irish often moved two or three times acquiring a reputation as a rootless people.
wherever the newcomers settled they often found themselves living beyond the effective authority of the various colonial governments.
to be sure backcountry residents petitioned for assistance during wars against the indians but most of the time they preferred to be left alone.
these conditions heightened the importance of religious institutions within the small ethnic communities.
although the original stimulus for coming to america may have been a desire for economic independence and prosperity backcountry families especially the scots irish flocked to evangelical protestant preachers to presbyterian and later baptist and methodist ministers who not only fulfilled the settlers spiritual needs but also gave scattered backcountry communities a pronounced moral character that survived long after the colonial period.
convict settlers since the story of european migration tends to be upbeat men and women engaged in a largely successful quest for a better material life it often is forgotten that british courts compelled many chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america people to come to america.
indeed the african slaves were not the only large group of people coerced into moving to the new world.
in 1718 parliament passed the transportation act allowing judges in england scotland and ireland to send convicted felons to the american colonies.
between 1718 and 1775 the courts shipped approximately fifty thousand convicts across the atlantic.
some of these men and women may actually have been dangerous criminals but the majority seem to have committed minor crimes against property.
although transported convicts almost 75 percent of whom were young males escaped the hangman they found life difficult in the colonies.
eighty percent of them were sold in the chesapeake colonies as indentured servants.
at best they faced an uncertain future and it is probably not surprising that few former convicts prospered in america.
british authorities lavished praise on this system.
according to one writer transportation drained the nation of its offensive rubbish without taking away their lives although americans purchased the convict servants they expressed fear that these men and women would create a dangerous criminal class.
in one irate essay benjamin franklin asked his readers to consider just how the colonists might repay the leaders of great britain for shipping so many felons to america.
he suggested that rattlesnakes might be the appropriate gift.
i would propose to have them carefully distributed.
franklin wrote in the gardens of all the nobility and gentry throughout the nation but particularly in the gardens of the prime ministers the lords of trade and members of parliament the revolution forced the british courts to redirect the flow of convicts to another part of the world an indirect result of american independence was the founding of australia by transported felons.
native americans stake out a middle ground in some histories of the colonial period native americans make only a brief appearance usually during the earliest years of conquest and settlement.
after initial contact with the first european invaders the indians seem mysteriously to disappear from the central narrative of colonization and it is not until the nineteenth century that they turn up again this time to wage a last desperate battle against the encroachment of white society.
this obviously inadequate account slights one of the richer chapters of native american history.
during much of the seventeenth century various indian groups who contested the english settlers for control of coastal lands suffered terribly sometimes from war but more often from the spread of contagious diseases such as smallpox.
the two races found it very difficult to live in close proximity.
as one indian informed the members of the maryland assembly in 1666 your hogs cattle injure us you come too near us to live drive us from place to place.
we can fly no farther let us know where to live how to be secured for the future from the hogs cattle against such odds the indians managed to survive.
by the eighteenth century the site of the most intense and creative contact between the races had shifted to the cis mississippian west that is to the huge territory between the appalachian mountains and the mississippi river where several hundred thousand native americans made their homes.
tishcohan chief of the delaware tribe that lost much of its land in thomas penns walking purchase of 1737 is shown here in a 1735 portrait by gustavus hesselius.
although treaties and agreements with european settlers were often detrimental to native americans some alliances in the middle ground allowed the tribes to play the french against the british.
alliances were often signified by tokens such as certificates calumets ceremonial pipes wampum belts and medals.
many indians had only recently migrated to the area.
the delaware for example retreated to far western pennsylvania and the ohio valley to escape almost continuous confrontation with advancing european invaders.
other indians drifted west in less happy circumstances.
they were refugees the remnants of native american groups who had lost so many people that they could no longer sustain an independent cultural identity.
these survivors joined with other indians to establish new multiethnic communities.
in this respect the native american villages may not have seemed all that different from the mixed european settlements of the backcountry.
see the feature essay conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase pp.
stronger groups of indians such as the creek choctaw chickasaw cherokee and shawnee generally welcomed the refugees.
strangers were formally adopted to take the places of family members killed in battle or overcome by sickness and it should be appreciated that many seemingly traditional indian villages of the eighteenth century actually represented innovative responses to rapidly shifting external conditions.
as historian peter wood explained physically and linguistically diverse groups spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century moved to form loosely organized confederacies unions of mutual convenience that effectively restrained interethnic hostilities the concept of a middle ground a term that has only recently entered the interpretive vocabulary helps us more fully to comprehend how eighteenth century indians held their own in the backcountry beyond the appalachian mountains.
the native americans never intended to isolate themselves completely from european contact.
they relied on white traders french as well as english to provide essential metal goods and weapons.
the goal of the indian confederacies was rather to maintain a strong independent voice in these commercial exchanges whenever possible playing the french against the british and so long as they had sufficient military strength that is large numbers of healthy armed warriors they compelled everyone who came to negotiate in the middle ground to give them proper respect.
it would be incorrect therefore to characterize their relations with the europeans as a stark choice between resistance or accommodation between total war or abject surrender.
native americans took advantage of rivals when possible they compromised when necessary.
it is best to imagine the indians middle ground as an open dynamic process of creative interaction.
however desirable they may have appeared european goods subtly eroded traditional structures of native american authority.
during the period of earliest encounter with white men indian leaders reinforced their own power by controlling the character and flow of commercial exchange.
if a trader wanted a rich supply of animal skins for example he soon learned that he had better negotiate directly with a chief or tribal elder.
but as the number of european traders operating within the middle ground expanded ordinary indians began to bargain on their own account obtaining colorful and durable manufactured items without first consulting a native american leader.
independent commercial dealings of this sort tended further to weaken the indians ability to resist organized white aggression.
as john stuart a superintendent of indian affairs explained in 1761 a modern indian cannot subsist without europeans and would handle a flint ax or any other rude utensil used by his ancestors very awkwardly so that what was only convenience at first is now become necessity the survival of the middle ground depended ultimately on factors over which the native americans had little control.
imperial competition between france and great britain enhanced the indians bargaining position but after the british defeated the french in 1763 the indians no longer received the same solicitous attention as they had in earlier times.
keeping old allies happy seemed to the british a needless expense.
moreover contagious disease continued to take a fearful toll.
in the southern backcountry between 1685 and 1790 the indian population dropped an astounding 72 percent.
in the ohio valley the numbers suggest similar rates of decline.
in fact there is some evidence that british military officers practiced germ warfare against the native americans giving them blankets contaminated by smallpox.
based on experience the officers knew that personal belongings such as blankets taken from the sick were contaminated and thus that giving these items to the indians would put them at risk.
by the time the united states took control of this region the middle ground itself had become a casualty of history.
spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century why was the spanish empire unable to control its northern frontier.
in many traditional histories of north america the spanish make only a brief appearance usually as fifteenth century conquistadors.
but as soon as they have conquered mexico they are dropped from the story as if they had no serious part to play in the ongoing development of the continent.
this is of course a skewed perspective that masks the roots of ethnic diversity in the united states.
as anyone who visits the modern american southwest quickly discovers spanish administrators and priests not to mention ordinary settlers left a lasting imprint on the cultural landscape of this country.
until 1821 when mexico declared independence from madrid spanish authorities struggled to control a vast northern frontier.
during the eighteenth century the spanish empire in north america included widely dispersed settlements such as san francisco san diego santa fe san antonio and st augustine.
in these borderland communities european colonists mixed with peoples of other races and backgrounds forming multicultural societies.
according to historian ramn a gutirrez the spanish provinces present a story of the baroque style eighteenth century spanish mission at san xavier del bac in present day arizona.
spanish missions dotted the frontier of northern new spain from florida to california.
complete the assignment conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase on myhistorylab feature essay conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase william penns treaty with the indians painted by benjamin west in 1771 presents an idealized picture of relations between the pennsylvania government and its indian neighbors.
here the pious william penn offers the indians trade goods for their lands.
source courtesy of the pennsylvania academy of the fine arts philadelphia.
gift of mrs sarah harrison the joseph harrison jr collection.
e uropean conquest of native americans represents a black mark on the history of the new world.
violent dispossession murder and near genocide of americas native inhabitants has always fit uneasily into a history of national progress.
colonial writers sought to cover up these disturbing histories by creating myths of good settlers who allegedly respected native american rights and chose to buy indian lands rather than seize them through force.
but such reworkings of history overlook the threats of violence that often surrounded these supposedly fair negotiations.
pennsylvanias infamous walking purchase of 1737 offers a dramatic example of how the myth of a fair deal could cover english self interest and intimidation.
when he died in 1718 william penn the quaker founder of pennsylvania left his sons a legacy of peaceful co existence between english and indian.
he also burdened them with an imposing debt.
during the 1720s anxious to restore their finances the penn heirs began to sell off lands between pennsylvania and new jersey in a region known as the forks.
settlers coveted the abundant lumber iron ore and fertile soil found along the delaware river and were willing to pay good prices.
only one obstacle stood in the way of their plan to trade frontier lands for english currency.
the penns did not actually own the lands that they were selling.
these lands belonged to the regions native american nation the delawares who referred to themselves as the lenapes and they refused to sell.
the penns next move surprised the delawares.
thomas penn william penns eldest son produced what he claimed to be an old deed for lands in the forks purchased by his father in 1686.
the document granted to pennsylvania a tract of land extending along the delaware river and containing as much land as a man could walk in a day and half a very imprecise measure of distance.
since the original deed was incomplete it had not been signed and did not even list all of the terms of the purchase penn had a new copy drawn up.
he presented this document to the delawares as proof of a legally binding contract transferring the indian lands in the forks to pennsylvania.
the delawares were not fooled.
nutimus leader of the delawares who lived in the forks region challenged the penns version of history.
the elders among his people remembered that although a land transfer had been discussed no contract had ever been signed and william penn and his agents had never delivered payment.
the new deed was a clumsy forgery.
cries of fraud did not discourage thomas penn.
he struck up an understanding with the powerful iroquois confederacy an alliance of six native american nations centered around the great lakes.
the government of pennsylvania promised to support the iroquois in pressing land claims against native tribes to the south and west.
the iroquois in turn pledged to support pennsylvania in its dealings with the delawares.
as one historian has put it the delawares found themselves caught between an iroquois hammer and a pennsylvania anvil not powerful enough to challenge both the pennsylvanians and their iroquois allies nutimus and three other delaware leaders put their marks on the fraudulent deed.
the walking of the boundary occurred on september 19 1737.
the whole episode was a farce.
thomas penn had taken the initiative to have a path cleared through the trees for his walkers.
previously when william penn had purchased lands from the delawares the parties that walked off the boundaries had traveled at a normal travelers pace winding through the forest and stopping along the way to take meals.
now the three walkers who took off into the pennsylvania woods set an exhausting pace each promised a handsome reward if he should be the one that walked the farthest in the allotted day and a half.
one dropped out by days end.
a second collapsed the next morning and died from exhaustion a week later.
the final walker covered more than 60 miles of wilderness in the 18 hours of daylight allotted for his task.
the delawares protested this injustice grumbling about what they named the hurry walk but could do little about it.
in 1740 they filed a complaint with the pennsylvania superior court warning that if this practice must hold why we are no more brothers and friends but much more like open enemies the governor of pennsylvania dismissed the delawares complaint.
when the delawares refused to concede their claims in the forks the pennsylvania government turned to its iroquois allies.
at a council held in 1742 the iroquois headman canasatego told nutimus and the delawares you ought to be taken by the hair of the head and skakd severely till you recover your senses.
we conquered you we made women of you.
this land that you claim is gone canastego ordered the delawares to remove north to the wyoming or susquehanna valleys.
swindled by the pennsylvanians betrayed by the iroquois who they had once called their cousins and pressed on every side by encroaching white settlers nutimus and his delawares abandoned the delaware valley and withdrew to the west.
peaceful complaints had proven ineffectual.
all the delawares could do now was nurse their grievances and wait.
the waiting ended in 1755 with the beginning of the french and indian war.
the war began in catastrophe for the british and their iroquois allies in north america providing what one delaware described as a favourable opportunity for taking revenge still seething over the injustice of the walking purchase delaware warriors and their shawnee allies fell upon the pennsylvania settlements along the outskirts of the walking purchase lands.
led by nutimus nephew teedyuscung these warriors burned homes and fields and took over one hundred english lives.
the war soon turned in britains favor.
as british and iroquois troops routed their french and indian enemies in canada and the ohio territory the delawares realized that they would have to sue for peace.
in 1766 the delawares signed a treaty that relinquished the remainder of their pennsylvania lands and removed permanently towards the west.
in 1771 thomas penn commissioned the great early american artist benjamin west to create a painting commemorating his fathers compassion and fair treatment of pennsylvanias indian peoples.
the image shows william penn meeting with indian leaders bargaining with them to purchase land where english settlers might farm and raise families.
wests painting presents a highly flattering image of pennsylvania history and of the penn family.
it looks past the violence of 1755 and the underhanded dealings of 1737.
it takes as its subject the much revered elder penn who had once admonished his children to let justice have its impartial course.
fly to no deceits to support or cover injustice in the end thomas penn betrayed his fathers advice.
in allowing his greed for land to overpower his sense of propriety and respect for the rights of the delaware indians thomas penn set an example emulated far too often throughout american history.
questions for discussion 1.
why did thomas penn invent a phony deed for delaware lands.
why did the delawares side with the french during the french and indian war.
chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america complex web of interactions between men and women young and old rich and poor slave and free spaniard and indian all of whom fundamentally depended on the other for their own self definition with which florida is painted the governor of cuba complained in 1673.
only hoodlums and the mischievous go there from cuba california never figured prominently in spains plans for the new world.
early explorers reported finding only impoverished indians living along the pacific coast.
adventurers saw no natural resources worth mentioning and since the area proved extremely difficult to reach from mexico city the overland trip could take months california received little attention.
fear that the russians might seize the entire region belatedly sparked spanish activity however and after 1769 two indomitable servants of empire fra junpero serra and don gaspar de portol organized permanent missions and presidios forts at san diego monterey san francisco and santa barbara.
conquering the northern frontier not until late in the sixteenth century did spanish settlers led by juan de oate establish european communities north of the rio grande.
the pueblo indians resisted the invasion of colonists soldiers and missionaries and in a major rebellion in 1680 led by el pop the native peoples drove the whites completely out of new mexico.
the heathen have conceived a mortal hatred for our holy faith and enmity for the spanish nation concluded one imperial bureaucrat.
not until 1692 were the spanish able to reconquer this fiercely contested area.
by then native american hostility coupled with the settlers failure to find precious metal had cooled spains enthusiasm for the northern frontier.
concern over french encroachment in the southeast led spain to colonize st augustine florida in 1565.
although the enterprise never flourished it claims attention as the first permanent european settlement established in what would become the united states predating the founding of jamestown and plymouth by several decades.
pedro menndez de avils brought some fifteen hundred soldiers and settlers to st augustine where they constructed an impressive fort but the colony failed to attract additional spanish migrants.
it is hard to get anyone to go to st augustine because of the horror read the document peoples of the spanish borderlands in sharp contrast to the english frontier settlements of the eighteenth century the spanish outposts in north america grew very slowly.
a few catholic priests and imperial administrators traveled to the northern provinces but the danger of indian attack as well as a harsh physical environment discouraged ordinary colonists.
the european migrants were overwhelmingly male most of them soldiers in the pay of the empire.
although some colonists came directly from spain most had been born in other spanish colonies such as minorca the canaries or new spain and because european women rarely appeared on the frontier spanish males formed relationships with indian women fathering large numbers of mestizos children of mixed race.
testimony by pedro naranjo to spanish authorities spain s north american empire m iss is si p pi 500 miles 500 kilometers r california san francisco 1776 miwok monterey 1770 san jos 1777 alta st louis san antonio de padua 1771 ute san luis obispo 1772 chumash santa barbara 1782 los angeles 1781 san gabriel 1771 san juan capistrano 1776 ipai r io oh navajo pueblo new mexico san diego 1769 atlantic ocean wichita santa fe quapaw louisiana comanche lipn apache pima coahuiltecan monterrey choctaw lower creek tonkawa hasinai texas san antonio pacific ocean creek chickasaw st augustine new orleans florida gulf of mexico the spanish borderlands ca.
1770 in the late eighteenth century spains north american empire extended across what is now the southern united states from florida through texas and new mexico to california.
the impact of european ideas on american culture as in other european frontiers of the eighteenth century encounters with spanish soldiers priests and traders altered native american cultures.
the experience here was quite different from that of the whites and indians in the british backcountry.
the spanish exploited native american labor reducing entire indian villages to servitude.
many indians moved to the spanish towns and although they lived in close proximity to the europeans something rare in british america they were consigned to the lowest social class objects of european contempt.
however much their material conditions changed the indians of the southwest resisted strenuous efforts to convert them to catholicism.
the pueblo maintained their own religious forms often at great personal risk and they sometimes murdered priests who became too intrusive.
angry pueblo indians at taos reportedly fed the hated spanish friars corn tortillas containing urine and mouse meat.
the spanish empire never had the resources necessary to secure the northern frontier fully.
the small military posts were intended primarily to discourage other european powers such as france great britain and russia from taking possession of territory claimed by spain.
it would be misleading however to overemphasize the fragility of spanish colonization.
the urban design and public architecture of many southwestern cities still reflect the vision of the early spanish settlers and to a large extent the old borderlands remain spanish speaking to this day.
the impact of european ideas on american culture of the mother country.
they sponsored concerts and plays they learned to dance.
women as well as men picked up the new fashions quickly and even though most of them had never been outside the colony of their birth they sometimes appeared to be the products of londons best families.
it was in the cities also that wealthy merchants transformed commercial profits into architectural splendor for in their desire to outdo one another they built grand homes of enduring beauty.
most of these buildings are described as georgian because they were constructed during the reign of britains early hanoverian kings who all happened to be named george.
actually these homes were provincial copies of grand country houses of great britain.
they drew their inspiration from the great italian renaissance architect andrea palladio 1508 1580 who had incorporated classical themes into a rigidly symmetrical form.
palladios ideas were popularized in the colonies by james gibbs an englishman whose book of architecture 1728 provided blueprints for the most spectacular homes of mid eighteenth century america.
their owners filled the houses with fine furniture.
each city patronized certain skilled craftsmen but the artisans of philadelphia were known for producing magnificent copies of the works of thomas chippendale great britains most famous furniture designer.
these developments gave american cities an elegance they had not possessed in the previous century.
one foreign visitor noted of philadelphia in 1748 that its natural advantages trade riches and power are by no means inferior to any even of the most ancient towns of europe as this traveler understood the cultural impact of the cities went far beyond the number of people who actually lived there.
how did european ideas affect eighteenth century american life.
ben franklin and american enlightenment the character of the older more established british colonies changed almost as rapidly as that of the backcountry.
the rapid growth of an urban cosmopolitan culture impressed eighteenth century commentators and even though most americans still lived on scattered farms they had begun to participate aggressively in an exciting consumer marketplace that expanded their imaginative horizons.
european historians often refer to the eighteenth century as an age of reason.
during this period a body of new often radical ideas swept through the salons and universities altering the way that educated europeans thought about god nature and society.
this intellectual revolution called the enlightenment involved the work of europes greatest minds men such as newton and locke voltaire and hume.
enlightenment thinkers shared basic assumptions.
philosophers of the enlightenment replaced the concept of original sin with a much more optimistic view of human nature.
a benevolent god having set the universe in motion gave human beings the power of reason to enable them to comprehend the orderly workings of his creation.
everything even human society operated according to these mechanical rules.
the responsibility of right thinking men and women therefore was to make certain that institutions such as church and state conformed to self evident natural laws.
it was possible or so some philosophers claimed to achieve perfection in this world.
in fact human suffering had come about only because people had lost touch with the fundamental insights of reason.
the writings of these thinkers eventually reached the colonies where they received a mixed reception.
on the whole the american enlightenment was a rather tame affair compared to its european counterpart for while the colonists welcomed experimental science they defended the tenets of traditional christianity.
for many americans the appeal of the enlightenment was its focus on a search for useful knowledge ideas and inventions provincial cities considering the rate of population growth it is surprising to discover how few eighteenth century americans lived in cities.
boston newport new york philadelphia and charles town the five largest cities contained only about 5 percent of the colonial population.
in 1775 none had more than forty thousand persons.
the explanation for the relatively slow development of colonial american cities lies in their highly specialized commercial character.
colonial port towns served as entrepts intermediary trade and shipping centers where bulk cargoes were broken up for inland distribution and where agricultural products were gathered for export.
they did not support large scale manufacturing.
indeed the pool of free urban laborers was quite small since the type of person who was forced to work for wages in europe usually became a farmer in america.
yet despite the limited urban population cities profoundly influenced colonial culture.
it was in the cities that americans were exposed to and welcomed the latest english ideas.
wealthy colonists merchants and lawyers tried to emulate the culture chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america minister described as full freighted with nonesense unmannerliness railery prophaneness immorality a r ro g an c e c a lu m n i e s lyes contradictions and what not all tending to quarrels and divisions and to debauch and corrupt the minds and manners of new england franklin got the point he left massachusetts in 1723 in search of a less hostile intellectual environment.
after he had moved to philadelphia leaving behind an irritable brother as well as new england puritanism franklin devoted himself to the pursuit of useful knowledge ideas that would increase the happiness of his fellow americans.
franklin never denied the existence of god.
rather he pushed the lord aside making room for the this 1743 map of boston depicts the port city as an active commercial and cultural center with many wharves buildings free exercise of human reachurches and meeting halls.
franklin tinkered experimented and reformed.
almost that would improve the quality of human life.
what mattered was everything he encountered in his daily life aroused his curiosity.
his practical experimentation.
a speech delivered in 1767 before the investigation of electricity brought him world fame but franklin members of the american society in philadelphia reflected the was never satisfied with his work in this field until it yielded practical new utilitarian spirit knowledge is of little use when confined application.
in 1756 he invented the lightning rod.
he also designed to mere speculation the colonist explained but when specua marvelously efficient stove that is still used today.
in modern lative truths are reduced to practice when theories grounded america franklin has become exactly what he would have wanted upon experiments.
and the arts of living made more easy and to be a symbol of material progress through human ingenuity.
comfortable.
knowledge then becomes really useful franklin energetically promoted the spread of reason.
in the enlightenment spawned scores of earnest scientific philadelphia he organized groups that discussed the latest european tinkerers people who dutifully recorded changes in temperaliterature philosophy and science.
in 1727 for example he formd ture the appearance of strange plants and animals and the details most of my ingenious acquaintances into a club for mutual of astronomic phenomena.
while these eighteenth century improvement which we calld the junto four years later franklin americans made few earth shattering discoveries they did encourtook a leading part in the formation of the library company a volage their countrymen especially those who attended college to untary association that for the first time allowed people like him to apply reason to the solution of social and political problems.
pursue useful knowledge the members of these societies combenjamin franklin 1706 1790 absorbed the new cosmopolitan municated with americans living in other colonies providing them culture.
european thinkers regarded him as a genuine philosophe a not only with new information but also with models for their own person of reason and science a role that he self consciously cultivated clubs and associations.
such efforts broadened the intellectual horiwhen he visited england and france in later life.
franklin had little zons of many colonists especially those who lived in cities.
formal education but as a young man working in his brothers print shop he managed to keep up with the latest intellectual currents.
economic transformation in 1721 franklin and his brother founded the new england courant a weekly newspaper that satirized bostons political the colonial economy kept pace with the stunning growth in and religious leaders in the manner of the contemporary british population.
during the first three quarters of the eighteenth cenpress.
writing under the name silence dogood young franklin tury the population increased at least tenfold and yet even with so asked his readers whether a commonwealth suffers more by many additional people to feed and clothe the per capita income hypocritical pretenders to religion or by the openly profane did not decline.
indeed with the exception of poor urban dwellers proper bostonians were not prepared for a journal that one such as sailors whose employment varied with the season white the impact of european ideas on american culture americans did quite well.
an abundance of land and the extensive growth of agriculture accounted for their economic success.
new farmers were able not only to provide for their families well being but also to sell their crops in european and west indian markets.
each year more americans produced more tobacco wheat or rice to cite just the major export crops and by this means they maintained a high level of individual prosperity without developing an industrial base.
at midcentury colonial exports flowed along well established routes.
more than half of american goods produced for export went to great britain.
the navigation acts see chapter 3 were still in effect and enumerated items such as tobacco had to be landed first at a british port.
furs were added to the restricted list in 1722.
the white pines acts passed in 1711 1722 and 1729 forbade americans from cutting white pine trees without a license.
the purpose of this legislation was to reserve the best trees for the use of the royal navy.
the molasses act of 1733 also called the sugar act placed a heavy duty on molasses imported from foreign ports the hat and felt act of 1732 and the iron act of 1750 attempted to limit the production of colonial goods that competed with british exports.
these statutes might have created tensions between the colonists and the mother country had they been rigorously enforced.
crown officials however generally ignored the new laws.
new england merchants imported molasses from french caribbean islands without paying the full customs ironmasters in the middle colonies continued to produce iron.
even without the navigation acts however a majority of colonial exports would have been sold on the english market.
the emerging consumer society in great britain was beginning to create a new generation of buyers who possessed enough income to purchase american goods especially sugar and tobacco.
this rising demand was the major market force shaping the colonial economy.
colonial merchants operating out of boston newport and philadelphia also carried substantial tonnage to the west indies.
in 1768 this market accounted for 27 percent of all american exports.
if there was a triangular trade that included the west coast of africa it does not seem to have been economically significant.
colonial ships carrying food sailed for the caribbean and returned immediately to the middle colonies or new england with cargoes of molasses sugar and rum.
in fact recent research indicates that during the eighteenth century trade with africa involved less than 1 percent of all american exports.
slaves were transported directly to colonial ports where they were sold for cash or credit.
the west indies played a vital role in preserving american credit in europe.
without this source of income colonists would not have been able to pay for the manufactured items they purchased in the mother country.
to be sure they exported american products in great quantity to great britain but the value of the exports seldom equaled the cost of british goods shipped back to the colonists.
to cover this small but recurrent deficit colonial merchants relied on profits made in the west indies.
birth of a consumer society after midcentury however the balance of trade turned dramatically against the colonists.
the reasons for this change were complex but in simplest terms americans began buying more english goods than their parents or grandparents had done.
between 1740 and 1770 english exports to the american colonies increased by an astounding 360 percent a veritable consumer revolution in the colonies.
in part this shift reflected a fundamental transformation in the british economy.
although the industrial revolution was still far in the future the pace of the british economy picked up dramatically after 1690.
small factories produced certain goods more efficiently and more cheaply than the colonists could.
the availability of these products altered the lives of most americans even those with modest incomes.
staffordshire china replaced crude earthenware imported cloth replaced homespun.
franklin noted in his autobiography how changing consumer habits affected his life.
for years he had eaten his breakfast in an earthenware bowl with a pewter spoon but one morning it was served in a china bowl with a spoon of silver franklin observed that this was the first appearance of plate and china in our house which afterwards in the course of years as our wealth increased augmented gradually to several hundred pounds in value in this manner british industrialization undercut american handicraft and folk art.
to help americans purchase manufactured goods british merchants offered generous credit.
colonists deferred settlement by agreeing to pay interest on their debts.
the temptation to acquire english finery blinded many people to hard economic realities.
they gambled on the future hoping bumper farm crops would reduce their dependence on the large merchant houses of london and glasgow.
obviously some persons lived within their means but the aggregate american debt continued to grow.
colonial leaders tried various expedients to remain solvent issuing paper money for example and while these efforts delayed a crisis the balance of payments problem was clearly very serious.
the eighteenth century also saw a substantial increase in intercoastal trade.
southern planters sent tobacco and rice to new england and the middle colonies where these staples were exchanged for meat and wheat as well as goods imported from great britain.
by 1760 approximately 30 percent of the colonists total tonnage capacity was involved in this extensive coastwise commerce.
in addition backcountry farmers in western pennsylvania and the shenandoah valley carried their grain to market along an old iroquois trail that became known as the great wagon road a rough hilly highway that by the time of the revolution stretched 735 miles along the blue ridge mountains to camden south carolina.
most of their produce was carried in long gracefully designed conestoga wagons.
these vehicles sometimes called the wagons of empire had been invented by german immigrants living in the conestoga river valley in lancaster county pennsylvania.
the shifting patterns of trade had immense effects on the development of an american culture.
first the flood of british imports eroded local and regional identities.
commerce helped to anglicize american culture by exposing colonial consumers to a common range of british manufactured goods.
deep sectional differences remained of course but americans from new hampshire to georgia were increasingly drawn into a sophisticated economic network centered in london.
second the expanding coastal and overland trade brought colonists of chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america susquehanna r the great awakening new jersey pennsylvania lancaster philadelphia io r.
york po to m ac oh delaware r winchester s mo bl hen un ue an ta do ins ah va lle ri y dg e maryland staunton james r ap pa la ch i an virginia salem salisbury roa no ke r.
north carolina great wagon road atlantic ocean camden south carolina s av an n ah r 200 miles 200 kilometers the great wagon road by the mid eighteenth century the great wagon road had become the major highway for the settlers in the virginia and carolina backcountry.
different backgrounds into more frequent contact.
ships that sailed between new england and south carolina and between virginia and pennsylvania provided dispersed americans with a means to exchange ideas and experiences on a more regular basis.
mid eighteenth century printers for example established several dozen new journals these were weekly newspapers that carried information not only about the mother country and world commerce but also about events in other colonies.
religious revivals in provincial societies how did the great awakening transform the religious culture of colonial america.
a sudden spontaneous series of protestant revivals known as the great awakening had a profound impact on the lives of ordinary people.
this unprecedented evangelical outpouring altered the course of american history.
in our own time of course the force of religious revival has been witnessed in different regions throughout the world.
it is no exaggeration to claim that a similar populist movement took place in mid eighteenth century america and the new highly personal appeal to a new birth in christ caused men and women of all backgrounds to rethink basic assumptions about church and state institutions and society.
only with hindsight does the great awakening seem a unified religious movement.
revivals occurred in different places at different times the intensity of the events varied from region to region.
the first signs of a spiritual awakening appeared in new england during the 1730s but within a decade the revivals in this area had burned themselves out.
it was not until the 1750s and 1760s that the awakening made more than a superficial impact on the people of virginia.
the revivals were most important in massachusetts connecticut rhode island pennsylvania new jersey and virginia.
their effect on religion in new york delaware and the carolinas was marginal.
no single religious denomination or sect monopolized the awakening.
in new england revivals shattered congregational churches and in the south especially in virginia they had an impact on presbyterians methodists and baptists.
moreover there was nothing peculiarly american about the great awakening.
mid eighteenth century europe experienced a similar burst of religious emotionalism.
whatever their origins the seeds of revival were generally sown on fertile ground.
in the early decades of the century many americans but especially new englanders complained that organized religion had lost vitality.
they looked back at winthrops generation with nostalgia assuming that common people at that time must have possessed greater piety than did later more worldly colonists.
congregational ministers seemed obsessed with dull scholastic matters they no longer touched the heart.
and in the southern colonies there were simply not enough ordained ministers to tend to the religious needs of the population.
the great awakening arrived unexpectedly in northampton a small farm community in western massachusetts sparked by jonathan edwards the local congregational minister.
edwards accepted the traditional teachings of calvinism see chapter 1 reminding his parishioners that their eternal fate had been determined by an omnipotent god there was nothing they could do to save themselves and they were totally dependent on the lords will.
he thought his fellow ministers had grown soft.
they left men and women with the mistaken impression that sinners might somehow avoid eternal damnation simply by performing good works.
how dismal will it be edwards told his complacent congregation when you are under these racking torments to know assuredly that you never never shall be delivered from them why this uncompromising message set off several religious revivals during the mid 1730s is not known.
whatever the explanation for the popular response to edwardss preaching young people began flocking to the church.
they experienced a searing conversion a sense of new birth and utter dependence on god.
surely edwards pronounced this is the lords doing and it is marvelous in our eyes the excitement spread and evangelical ministers concluded that god must be preparing americans his chosen people for the millennium.
what is now seen in america and especially in new england edwards explained may prove the dawn of that glorious day the voice of evangelical religion edwards was an outstanding theologian but he did not possess the dynamic personality required to sustain the revival.
that responsibility fell to george whitefield a young inspiring preacher religious revivals in provincial societies read the document jonathan edwards sinners in the hands of an angry god the reverend jonathan edwards 1703 1858 was an influential author and theologian whose preaching contributed to the great awakening.
from england who toured the colonies from new hampshire to georgia.
while whitefield was not an original thinker he was an extraordinarily effective public speaker.
and like his friend benjamin franklin he came to symbolize the powerful cultural forces that were transforming the atlantic world.
according to edwardss wife sarah it was wonderful to witness what a spell whitefield casts over an audience.
i have seen upwards of a thousand people hang on his words with breathless silence broken only by an occasional half suppressed sob whitefields audiences came from all groups of american society rich and poor young and old rural and urban.
while whitefield described himself as a calvinist he welcomed all protestants.
he spoke from any pulpit that was available.
dont tell me you are a baptist an independent a presbyterian a dissenter he thundered tell me you are a christian that is all i want whitefield was a brilliant entrepreneur.
like franklin with whom he published many popular volumes the itinerant minister possessed an almost intuitive sense of how this burgeoning consumer society could be turned to his own advantage and he embraced the latest merchandising techniques.
he appreciated for example the power of the press in selling the revival and he regularly promoted his own work in advertisements placed in british and american newspapers.
the crowds flocked to hear whitefield while his critics grumbled about the commercialization of religion.
one anonymous writer in massachusetts noted that there was a very wholesome law of the province to discourage pedlars in trade and it seemed high time to enact something for the discouragement of pedlars in divinity also other american born itinerant preachers followed whitefields example.
the most famous was gilbert tennent a presbyterian of scots irish background who had been educated in the middle colonies.
his sermon on the danger of an unconverted ministry printed in 1741 set off a storm of protest from established ministers who were understandably insulted.
lesser known revivalists traveled from town to town colony to colony challenging local clergymen who seemed hostile to evangelical religion.
men and women who thronged to hear the itinerants were called new lights and during the 1740s and 1750s many congregations split between defenders of the new emotional preaching and those who regarded the entire movement as dangerous nonsense.
despite whitefields successes many ministers remained suspicious of the itinerants and their methods.
some complaints may have amounted to little more than sour grapes.
one old light spokesman labeled tennent a monster.
impudent and noisy he claimed tennent told anxious christians that they were damned.
this charmed them and in the most dreadful winter i ever saw people wallowed in snow night and day for the benefit of his beastly brayings and many ended their days under these fatigues charles chauncy minister of the prestigious first church of boston raised much more troubling issues.
how could the revivalists be certain god had sparked the great awakening.
perhaps the itinerants had relied too much on emotion.
let us esteem those as friends of religion chauncy advised.
who warn us of the danger of enthusiasm and would put us on our guard that we may not be led aside by it despite occasional anti intellectual outbursts the new lights founded several important centers of higher learning.
they wanted to train young men who would carry on the good works of edwards whitefield and tennent.
in 1746 new light presbyterians established the college of new jersey which later became princeton university.
just before his death edwards was appointed its president.
the evangelical minister eleazar wheelock launched dartmouth 1769 other revivalists founded brown 1764 and rutgers 1766.
the great awakening also encouraged men and women who had been taught to remain silent before traditional figures of authority to speak up to take an active role in their salvation.
they could no longer rely on ministers or institutions.
the individual alone stood before god.
knowing this new lights made religious choices that shattered the old harmony among protestant sects and in its place they introduced a noisy often bitterly fought competition.
as one new jersey presbyterian explained there are so many particular sects and parties among professed christians.
that we know not.
in which of these different paths to steer our course for heaven expressive evangelicalism struck a particularly responsive chord among african americans.
itinerant ministers frequently chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america read the document benjamin franklin on george whitefield 1771 course the new lights did not sound much different than the mildly rationalist american spokesmen of the enlightenment.
both groups prepared the way for the development of a revolutionary mentality in colonial america.
clash of political cultures why were eighteenth century colonial assemblies not fully democratic.
the political history of this period illuminates a growing tension within the empire.
americans of all regions repeatedly stated their desire to replicate british political institutions.
parliament they claimed provided a model for the american assemblies.
they revered the english constitution.
however the more the colonists studied british political theory and practice in other words the more they attempted to become british the more aware they became of major differences.
by trying to copy great britain they unwittingly discovered something about being american.
the english constitution the fervor of the great awakening was intensified by the eloquence of itinerant preachers such as george whitefield the most popular evangelical of the mid eighteenth century.
preached to large sympathetic audiences of slaves.
richard allen 1760 1831 founder of the african methodist episcopal church reported he owed his freedom in part to a traveling methodist minister who persuaded allens master of the sinfulness of slavery.
allen himself was converted as were thousands of other black colonists.
according to one historian evangelical preaching shared enough with traditional african styles and beliefs such as spirit possession and ecstatic expression.
to allow for an interpenetration of african and christian religious beliefs with religious contention came an awareness of a larger community a union of fellow believers that extended beyond the boundaries of town and colony.
in fact evangelical religion was one of several forces at work during the mid eighteenth century that brought scattered colonists into contact with one another for the first time.
in this sense the great awakening was a national event long before a nation actually existed.
people who had been touched by the great awakening shared an optimism about the future of america.
with gods help social and political progress was possible and from this perspective of during the eighteenth century political discussion began with the british constitution.
it was the object of universal admiration.
unlike the u s constitution of 1788 the british constitution was not a formal written document.
it was something much more elusive.
the english constitution found expression in a growing body of law court decisions and statutes a sense of traditional political arrangements that people of all classes believed had evolved from the past preserving life liberty and property.
in theory the english constitution contained three distinct parts.
the monarch was at the top advised by handpicked court favorites.
next came the house of lords a body of 180 aristocrats who served with 26 anglican bishops as the upper house of parliament.
and third was the house of commons composed of 558 members elected by various constituencies scattered throughout the realm.
political theorists waxed eloquent on workings of the british constitution.
each of the three parts of government it seemed represented a separate socioeconomic interest king nobility and common people.
acting alone each body would run to excess even tyranny but operating within a mixed system they automatically checked each others ambitions for the common good.
herein consists the excellence of the english government explained the famed eighteenth century jurist sir william blackstone that all parts of it form a mutual check upon each other unlike the delegates who wrote the constitution of the united states eighteenthcentury englishmen did not perceive their constitution as a balance of executive legislative and judicial branches.
the reality of british politics the reality of daily political life in great britain however bore little relation to theory.
the three elements of the constitution did not in fact represent distinct socioeconomic groups.
men elected to the house of commons often came from the same social background as clash of political cultures read the document english bill of rights 1689 this political cartoon published in london in 1727 denounces corruption in the british electoral system.
it warns that if politicians gave into the temptation to use their offices for their own self interest one of the chief concerns of whig ideology then men will be corrupted and liberty sold those who served in the house of lords.
all represented the interests of britains landed elite.
moreover there was no attempt to maintain strict constitutional separation.
the king for example organized parliamentary associations loose groups of political followers who sat in the house of commons and who openly supported the monarchs policies in exchange for patronage or pension.
the claim that the members of the house of commons represented all the people of england also seemed far fetched.
as of 1715 no more than 20 percent of britains adult males had the right to vote.
property qualifications or other restrictions often greatly reduced the number of eligible voters.
in addition the size of the electoral districts varied throughout the kingdom.
in some boroughs representatives to parliament were chosen by several thousand voters.
in many districts however a handful of electors controlled the result.
these tiny or rotten boroughs were an embarrassment.
the methodist leader john wesley complained that old sarum an almost uninhabited borough in spite of common sense without house or inhabitant still sends two members to the parliament since these districts were so small a wealthy lord or ambitious politician could easily bribe or otherwise influence the entire constituency something done regularly throughout the century.
before 1760 few people spoke out against these constitutional abuses.
the main exception was a group of radical publicists whom historians have labeled the commonwealthmen.
these writers decried the corruption of political life noting that a nation that compromised civic virtue that failed to stand vigilant against fawning courtiers and would be despots deserved to lose its liberty and property.
the most famous commonwealthmen were john trenchard and thomas gordon who penned a series of essays titled catos letters between 1720 and 1723.
if englands rulers were corrupt they warned then the people could not expect the balanced constitution to save them from tyranny.
in one typical article trenchard and gordon observed the appitites.
of men especially of great men are carefully to be observed and stayed or else they will never stay themselves.
the experience of every age convinces us that we must not judge of men by what they ought to do but by what they will do but however shrilly these writers protested they won little support for political reforms.
most eighteenthcentury englishmen admitted there was more than a grain of truth in the commonwealth critique but they were not willing to tamper with a system of government that had so recently survived a civil war and a glorious revolution.
americans however took trenchard and gordon to heart.
governing the colonies the american experience the colonists assumed perhaps naively that their own governments were modeled on the balanced constitution of great britain.
they argued that within their political systems the governor corresponded to the king and the governors council to the house of lords.
the colonial assemblies were perceived as american reproductions of the house of commons and were expected to preserve the interests of the people against those of the monarch and aristocracy.
as the colonists discovered however general theories about a mixed constitution were even less relevant in america than they were in britain.
by midcentury a majority of the mainland colonies had royal governors appointed by the crown.
many were career army officers who through luck charm or family connection had gained the ear of someone close to the king.
these patronage posts did not generate income sufficient to interest the most powerful or talented personalities of the period but they did draw middle level bureaucrats who were ambitious desperate or both.
it is perhaps not surprising that most governors decided simply not to consider any thing further than how to sit easy chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america george clinton who served as new yorks governor from 1743 to 1753 was probably typical of the men who hoped to sit easy before coming to the colonies clinton had compiled an extraordinary record of ineptitude as a naval officer.
he gained the governorship more as a means to get him out of england than as a sign of respect.
when he arrived in new york city clinton ignored the colonists.
in a province given to hospitality wrote one critic he clinton erred by immuring himself in the fort or retiring to a grotto in the country where his time was spent with his bottle and a little trifling circle whatever their demerits royal governors in america possessed enormous powers.
in fact royal governors could do certain things in america that a king could not do in eighteenth century britain.
among these were the right to veto legislation and dismiss judges.
the governors also served as military commanders in each province.
political practice in america differed from the british model in another crucial respect.
royal governors were advised by a council usually a body of about twelve wealthy colonists selected by the board of trade in london upon the recommendation of the governor.
during the seventeenth century the council had played an important role in colonial government but its ability to exercise independent authority declined steadily over the course of the eighteenth century.
its members certainly did not represent a distinct aristocracy within american society.
if royal governors did not look like kings nor american councils like the house of lords colonial assemblies bore little resemblance to the eighteenth century house of commons.
the major difference was the size of the american franchise.
in most colonies adult white males who owned a small amount of land could vote in colonywide elections.
one historian estimates that 95 percent of this group in massachusetts were eligible to participate in elections.
the number in virginia was about 85 percent.
these figures much higher than those in contemporary england have led some scholars to view the colonies as middle class democracies societies run by moderately prosperous yeomen farmers who in politics at least exercised independent judgment.
there were too many of them to bribe no rotten boroughs and when these people moved west colonial assemblies usually created new electoral districts.
colonial governments were not democracies in the modern sense of that term.
possessing the right to vote was one thing exercising it quite another.
americans participated in elections when major issues were at stake the formation of banks in mideighteenth century massachusetts for example but most of the time they were content to let members of the rural and urban gentry represent them in the assemblies.
to be sure unlike modern democracies these colonial politics excluded women and nonwhites from voting.
the point to remember however is that the power to expel legislative rascals was always present in america and it was this political reality that kept autocratic gentlemen from straying too far from the will of the people.
colonial assemblies elected members of the colonial assemblies believed that they had a special obligation to preserve colonial liberties.
they perceived any attack on the legislature as an assault on the rights of americans.
the elected representatives brooked no criticism and several colonial printers landed in jail because they criticized actions taken by a lower house.
so aggressive were these bodies in seizing privileges determining procedures and controlling money bills that some historians have described the political development of eighteenth century america as the rise of the assemblies no doubt this is exaggerated but the long series of imperial wars against the french demanding large public expenditures transformed the small amateurish assemblies of the seventeenth century into the more professional vigilant legislatures of the eighteenth.
this political system seemed designed to generate hostility.
there was simply no reason for the colonial legislators to cooperate with appointed royal governors.
alexander spotswood virginias governor from 1710 to 1722 for example attempted to institute a bold new land program backed by the crown.
he tried persuasion and gifts and when these failed chicanery.
but the members of the house of burgesses refused to support a plan that did not suit their own interests.
before leaving office spotswood gave up trying to carry out royal policy in america.
instead he allied himself with the local virginia gentry who controlled the house as well as the council and because they awarded their new friend with large tracts of land he became a wealthy man.
a major source of shared political information was the weekly journal a new and vigorous institution in american life.
in new york and massachusetts especially weekly newspapers urged readers to preserve civic virtue to exercise extreme vigilance against the spread of privileged power.
in the first issue of the independent reflector published in new york november 30 1752 the editor announced defiantly that no discouragement shall deter me from vindicating the civil and religious rights of my fellow creatures from exposing the peculiar deformity of publick vice and corruption and displaying the amiable charms of liberty with the detestable nature of slavery and oppression through such journals a pattern of political rhetoric that in britain had gained only marginal respectability became after 1765 americas normal form of political discourse.
the rise of the assemblies shaped american culture in other subtler ways.
over the course of the century the language of the law became increasingly anglicized.
the board of trade the privy council and parliament scrutinized court decisions and legislative actions from all thirteen mainland colonies.
as a result varying local legal practices that had been widespread during the seventeenth century became standardized.
indeed according to one historian the colonial legal system by 1750 was substantially that of the mother country not surprisingly many men who served in colonial assemblies were either lawyers or persons who had received legal training.
when americans from different regions met as they frequently did in the years before the revolution they discovered that they shared a commitment to the preservation of the english common law.
as eighteenth century political developments drew the colonists closer to the mother country they also brought americans a greater awareness of each other.
as their horizons widened they learned they operated within the same general imperial system and the problems confronting the massachusetts house of century of imperial war representatives were not too different from those facing virginias house of burgesses or south carolinas commons house.
like the revivalists and merchants people who crossed old boundaries colonial legislators laid the foundation for a larger cultural identity.
century of imperial war why did colonial americans support great britains wars against france.
on paper at least the british colonies enjoyed military superiority over the settlements of new france.
louis xiv r 1643 1715 possessed an impressive army of 100 000 well armed troops but he dispatched few of them to the new world.
he left the defense of canada and the mississippi valley to the companies engaged in the fur trade.
meeting this challenge seemed almost impossible for the french outposts strung out along the st lawrence river and the great lakes.
in 1754 new france contained only 75 000 inhabitants as compared to 1 2 million people living in britains mainland colonies.
for most of the century the theoretical advantages enjoyed by the english colonists did them little good.
while the british settlements possessed a larger and more prosperous population they were divided into separate governments that sometimes seemed more suspicious of each other than of the french.
when war came french officers and indian allies exploited these jealousies with considerable skill.
moreover although the population of new france was comparatively small it was concentrated along the st lawrence so that while the french found it difficult to mount effective offensive operations against the english they could easily mass the forces needed to defend montreal and quebec.
king williams and queen annes wars colonial involvement in imperial war began in 1689 when englands new king william iii declared war on louis xiv.
europeans called this struggle the war of the league of augsburg but to the americans it was simply king williams war.
canadians commanded by the comte de frontenac raided the northern frontiers of new york and new england and while they made no territorial gains they caused considerable suffering among the civilian populations of massachusetts and new york.
the war ended with the treaty of ryswick 1697 but the colonists were drawn almost immediately into a new conflict.
queen annes war known in europe as the war of the spanish succession 1702 1713 was fought across a large geographic area.
the bloody combat along the american frontier ended in 1713 when great britain and france signed the treaty of utrecht.
european negotiators showed little interest in the military situation in the new world.
their major concern was preserving a balance of power among the european states.
more than two decades of intense fighting had taken a heavy toll in north america but neither french nor english colonists had much to show for their sacrifice.
both sides viewed this great contest in conspiratorial terms.
from south carolina to massachusetts bay colonists believed the french planned to encircle the english settlements to confine the english to a narrow strip of land along the atlantic coast.
the english noted that in 1682 la salle had claimed for the king of france a territory louisiana that included all the people and resources located on streams and rivers flowing into the mississippi river.
to make good on their claim the french constructed forts on the chicago and illinois rivers.
in 1717 they established a military post two hundred miles up the alabama river well within striking distance of the carolina frontier and in 1718 they settled new orleans.
one new yorker declared in 1715 that it is impossible that we and the french can both inhabit this continent in peace but that one nation must at last give way to the other on their part the french suspected their rivals intended to seize all of north america.
land speculators and frontier traders pushed aggressively into territory claimed by the french and owned by the native americans.
in 1716 one frenchman urged his government to hasten the development of louisiana since it is not difficult to guess that their the british purpose is to drive us entirely out.
of north america to their great sorrow and eventual destruction the original inhabitants of the frontier the native americans were swept up in this undeclared war.
the indians maneuvered to hold their own in the middle ground the iroquois favored the british the algonquian peoples generally supported the french.
but regardless of the groups to which they belonged indian warriors acting independently and for their own strategic reasons found themselves enmeshed in imperial policies set by distant european kings.
king georges war and its aftermath in 1743 the americans were dragged once again into the imperial conflict.
during king georges war 1743 1748 known in europe as the war of the austrian succession the colonists scored a magnificent victory over the french.
louisbourg a gigantic fortress on cape breton island the easternmost promontory of canada guarded the approaches to the gulf of st lawrence and quebec.
it was described as the gibraltar of the new world.
an army of new england troops under the command of william pepperrell captured louisbourg in june 1745 a feat that demonstrated the british colonists were able to fight and to mount effective joint operations.
the americans however were in for a shock.
when the war ended with the signing of the treaty of aix la chapelle in 1748 the british government handed louisbourg back to the french in exchange for concessions elsewhere.
such decisions exposed the deep and continuing ambivalence the colonists felt about participation in imperial wars.
they were proud to support great britain of course but the americans seldom fully understood why the wars were being fought why certain tactics had been adopted and why the british accepted treaty terms that so blatantly ignored colonial interests.
the french were not prepared to surrender an inch.
but as they recognized time was running against them.
not only were the english colonies growing more populous but they also possessed a seemingly inexhaustible supply of manufactured goods to trade with the indians.
the french decided in the early 1750s therefore to seize the ohio valley before the virginians could do so.
they established forts throughout the region the most formidable being fort duquesne located at the strategic fork in the ohio river and later renamed pittsburgh.
chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america this mid eighteenth century lithograph portrays colonial assault troops under the command of william pepperrell establishing a beachhead at freshwater cove near louisbourg.
pepperrells troops went on to capture the french fortress at louisbourg.
although france and england had not officially declared war british officials advised the governor of virginia to repell force by force the virginians needed little encouragement.
they were eager to make good their claim to the ohio valley and in 1754 militia companies under the command of a promising young officer george washington constructed fort necessity not far from fort duquesne.
the plan failed.
french and indian troops overran the badly exposed outpost july 3 1754.
among other things the humiliating setback revealed that a single colony could not defeat the french.
albany congress and braddocks defeat benjamin franklin for one appreciated the need for intercolonial cooperation.
when british officials invited representatives from virginia and maryland as well as the northern colonies to albany june 1754 to discuss relations with the iroquois franklin used the occasion to present a bold blueprint for colonial union.
his socalled albany plan envisioned the formation of a grand council made up of elected delegates from the various colonies to oversee matters of common defense western expansion and indian affairs.
a president general appointed by the king would preside.
franklins most daring suggestion involved taxation.
he insisted the council be authorized to collect taxes to cover military expenditures.
first reaction to the albany plan was enthusiastic.
to take effect however it required the support of the separate colonial assemblies as well as parliament.
it received neither.
the assemblies were jealous of their fiscal authority and the english thought the scheme undermined the crowns power over american affairs.
in 1755 the ohio valley again became the scene of fierce fighting.
even though there was still no formal declaration of war the british resolved to destroy fort duquesne and to that end they dispatched units of the regular army to america.
in command was major general edward braddock an obese humorless veteran who inspired neither fear nor respect.
one colonist described braddock as very indolent slave to his passions women wine as great an epicure as could be in his eating tho a brave man on july 9 braddock led a joint force of twenty five hundred british redcoats and colonists to humiliating defeat.
the french and indians opened fire as braddocks army waded across the monongahela river about eight miles from fort duquesne.
along a narrow road already congested with heavy wagons and confused men braddock ordered a counterattack described by one of his officers as without any form or order but that of a parcell of school boys coming out of s c hool nearly 70 percent of braddocks troops were killed or wounded in western pennsylvania.
the general himself died in battle.
the french who suffered only light casualties remained in firm control of the ohio valley.
century of imperial war view the map european claims in america c 1750 russian america hudson bay ur misso st louisiana oh st pierre miquelon fr.
e quebec montreal louisbourg.
io r british colonies new orleans new ai sp gulf of mexico n pa c i f i c ocean french fishing rights.
mississ ippi r di sp ute d ir e nc rar.
l ne aw w ren f c grant to hudson s bay company cuba jamaica at l a n t i c ocean st domingue fr.
puerto rico guadeloupe sp.
martinique fr.
caribbean sea guiana dutch british claims new granada french claims spanish claims russian claims 1000 miles brazil port.
500 1000 kilometers north america 1750 by 1750 the french had established a chain of settlements southward through the heart of the continent from quebec to new orleans.
the british saw this development as a threat to their own seaboard colonies which were expanding westward.
the entire affair profoundly angered washington who fumed we have been most scandalously beaten by a trifling body of men the british thought their allies the iroquois might desert them after the embarrassing defeat.
the indians however took the news in stride observing that they were not at all surprised to hear it as they braddocks redcoats were men who had crossed the great water and were unacquainted with the arts of war among the americans seven years war britains imperial war effort had hit bottom.
no one in england or america seemed to possess the leadership necessary to drive the french from the mississippi valley.
the cabinet of george ii r 1727 1760 lacked the will to organize and finance a sustained military campaign in the new world and colonial assemblies balked every time britain asked them to raise men and money.
on may 18 1756 the british officially declared war on the french a conflict called the french and indian war in america and the seven years war in europe.
had it not been for william pitt the most powerful minister in georges cabinet the military stalemate might have continued.
this supremely self confident englishman believed he was the only person capable of saving the british empire an opinion he publicly expressed.
when he became effective head of the ministry in december 1756 pitt had an opportunity to demonstrate his talents.
in the past warfare on the european continent had worked mainly to frances advantage.
pitt saw no point in continuing to concentrate on europe and in 1757 he advanced a bold new imperial policy one based on commercial assumptions.
in pitts judgment the critical confrontation would take place in north america where britain and france were struggling to control colonial markets and raw materials.
indeed according to pitt america was where england and europe are to be fought for he was determined therefore to expel the french from the continent however great the cost.
chapt er 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america read the document albany plan of union 1754 the first political cartoon to appear in an american newspaper was created by benjamin franklin in 1754 to emphasize the importance of the albany plan.
to effect this ambitious scheme pitt took personal command of the army and navy.
he mapped strategy.
he even promoted young promising officers over the heads of their superiors.
he also recognized that the success of the war effort could not depend on the generosity of the colonial assemblies.
great britain would have to foot most of the bill.
pitts military expenditures of course created an enormous national debt that would soon haunt both britain and its colonies but at the time no one foresaw the fiscal consequences of victory in america.
to direct the grand campaign pitt selected two relatively obscure officers jeffrey amherst and james wolfe.
it was a masterful choice one that a less self assured man than pitt would never have risked.
both officers were young talented and ambitious and on july 26 1758 forces under their direction captured louisbourg the same fortress the colonists had taken a decade earlier.
this victory cut the canadians main supply line with france.
the small population of new france could no longer meet the military demands placed on it.
as the situation became increasingly desperate the french forts of the ohio valley and the great lakes began to fall.
duquesne was simply abandoned late in 1758 as french and indian troops under the marquis a century of conflict major wars 1689 1763 european name war of the league of augsburg american name king williams war 1702 1713 war of the spanish succession queen annes war 1743 1748 war of the austrian succession war of jenkins ear king georges war 1756 1763 seven years war french and indian war dates 1689 1697 major allies britain holland spain their colonies and native american allies against france its colonies and native american allies britain holland their colonies and native american allies against france spain their colonies and native american allies britain its colonies and native american allies and austria against france spain their native american allies and prussia britain its colonies and native american allies against france its colonies and native american allies issues opposition to french bid for control of europe austria and france hold rival claims to spanish throne struggle among britain spain and france for control of new world territory among france prussia and austria for control of central europe struggle among britain spain and france for worldwide control of colonial markets and raw materials major american battle new england troops assault quebec under sir william phips 1690 attack on deerfield 1704 treaty treaty of ryswick 1697 treaty of utrecht 1713 new england treaty of forces capture of aix la chapelle louisbourg under 1748 william pepperrell 1745 british and peace of paris continental forces 1763 capture quebec under major general james wolfe 1759 w o century of imperial war lfe grant to hudson s bay company louisbourg besieged june 8 july 26 1758 halifax a m h ce en wr ft st frederic crown point abandoned july 31 1759 ocean n h british colonies hudson r albany n y ke at l a n t i c ft carillon ticonderoga abandoned july 26 1759 ft niagara besieged july 6 25 1759 la e l champlain st er lake ontario ie er amh maine part of mass.
st l a montreal surrendered sept 8 1760 rs t disputed r new france wolfe fr o g re a t b m r i tai n acadia plains of abraham quebec sept 13 1759 ft frontenac surrendered aug 27 1758 n j boston french claims mass.
british claims british troop movements conn r i british victories french victories new york pa ft duquesne abandoned nov 25 1758 great meadows may 28 1754 braddock s defeat july 9 1755 philadelphia md.
necessity july 3 4 1754 del.
the seven years war 1756 1763 200 miles 200 kilometers major battle sites.
the conflict ended with great britain driving the french from mainland north america.
de montcalm retreated toward quebec and montreal.
during the summer of 1759 the french surrendered key forts at ticonderoga crown point and niagara.
the climax to a century of war came dramatically in september 1759.
wolfe now a major general assaulted quebec with nine thousand men.
but it was not simply force of arms that brought victory.
wolfe proceeded as if he were preparing to attack the city directly but under cover of darkness his troops scaled a cliff to dominate a less well defended position.
at dawn on september 13 1759 they took the french from the rear by surprise.
the decisive action occurred on the plains of abraham a bluff high above the st lawrence river.
both wolfe and montcalm were mortally wounded.
when an aide informed wolfe the french had been routed he sighed now god be praised i will die in peace on september 8 1760 amherst accepted the final surrender of the french army at montreal.
the peace of paris of 1763 signed on february 10 almost fulfilled pitts grandiose dreams.
great britain took possession of an empire that stretched around the globe.
only guadeloupe and martinique the caribbean sugar islands were given back to the french.
after a century long struggle the french had been driven from the mainland of north america.
even louisiana passed out of frances control into spanish hands.
the treaty gave britain title to canada florida and all the land east of the mississippi river.
moreover with the stroke of a diplomats pen eighty thousand french speaking canadians most of them catholics became the subjects of george iii.
the americans were overjoyed.
it was a time of good feelings and national pride.
together the english and their colonial allies had thwarted the gallic peril samuel davies a presbyterian who had brought the great awakening to virginia announced confidently that the long awaited victory would inaugurate a new heaven and a new earth perceptions of war the seven years war made a deep impression on american society.
even though franklins albany plan had failed the military struggle had forced the colonists to cooperate on an unprecedented scale.
it also drew them into closer contact with britain.
they became aware of being part of a great empire military and commercial but in the very process of waging war they acquired a more intimate sense of an america that lay beyond the plantation and the village.
confl ict had carried thousands of young men across colonial boundaries exposing them to a vast territory full of opportunities for a booming population.
moreover the war trained a corps of american officers people like george washington who learned from firsthand experience that the british were not invincible.
chapter 4 experience of empire eighteenth century america view the closer look european claims in north america 1750 and 1763 russian america hudson bay french fishing rights hudson s bay company ce.
ec r eb u q spanish a louisiana ne w pa c i f i c ocean mississip pi r r st pierre miquelon fr.
t la wr en la ke s s ind ian re se rv e ri missou grea t.
io r oh proclamation line of 1763 british colonies at l a n t i c ocean st domingue fr.
ai sp g lf off gulf mexico puerto rico sp.
n cuba guadeloupe fr.
martinique fr.
jamaica st lucia fr.
caribbean sea guiana dutch new granada british claims french claims spanish claims russian claims 1000 miles brazil port.
1000 kilometers north america after 1763 the peace of paris 1763 redrew the map of north america.
great britain received all the french holdings except a few islands in the atlantic and some sugar producing islands in the caribbean.
british officials later accused the americans of ingratitude.
england they claimed had sent troops and provided funds to liberate the colonists from the threat of french attack.
the americans appreciative of the aid from england cheered on the british but dragged their feet at every stage refusing to pay the bills.
these charges were later incorporated into a general argument justifying parliamentary taxation in america.
the british had a point.
the colonists were in fact slow in providing the men and materials needed to fight the french.
nevertheless they did make a significant contribution to the war effort and it was perfectly reasonable for americans to regard themselves at the very least as junior partners in the empire.
after all they had supplied almost twenty thousand soldiers and spent well over 2 million.
in a single year in fact massachusetts enlisted five thousand men out of an adult male population of about fifty thousand a commitment that in the words of one military historian meant the war was being waged on a scale comparable to the great wars of modern times after making such a sacrifice indeed after demonstrating their loyalty to the mother country the colonists would surely have been disturbed to learn that general james conclusion rule britannia.
wolfe the hero of quebec had stated the americans are in general the dirtiest the most contemptible cowardly dogs that you can conceive.
there is no depending upon them in action.
they fall down in their own dirt and desert in battalions officers and all conclusion rule britannia.
james thomson an englishman understood the hold of empire on the popular imagination of the eighteenth century.
in 1740 he composed words that british patriots have proudly sung for more than two centuries rule britannia rule the waves britons never will be slaves.
colonial americans at least those of british background joined the chorus.
by midcentury they took their political and cultural cues from great britain.
they fought its wars purchased its consumer goods flocked to hear its evangelical preachers and read its many publications.
without question the empire provided the colonists with a compelling source of identity.
an editor justified the establishment of new hampshires first newspaper in precisely these terms.
by this means the publisher observed the spirited englishman the mountainous welshman the brave scotchman and irishman and the loyal american may be firmly united and mutually resolved to guard the glorious throne of britannia.
as british brothers in defending the common cause even new immigrants the germans scots irish and africans who felt no political loyalty to great britain and no affinity to english culture had to assimilate to some degree to the dominant english culture of the colonies.
americans hailed britannia.
in 1763 they were the victors the conquerors of the backcountry.
in their moment of glory the colonists assumed that britains rulers saw the americans as brothers as equal partners in the business of empire.
only slowly would they learn the british had a different perception.
for them american was a way of saying not quite english chapter 4 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 4 experience of empire on myhistorylab time line 1680 el pop leads pueblo revolt against the spanish in new mexico 1689 william and mary accede to the english throne 1706 birth of benjamin franklin 1714 george i of hanover becomes monarch of great britain 1732 colony of georgia is established birth of george washington 1734 1736 first expression of the great awakening at northampton massachusetts 1740 george whitefield electrifies listeners at boston 1745 colonial troops capture louisbourg 1748 american lutheran ministers ordained in philadelphia albany congress meets braddock is defeated by the french and indians in western pennsylvania seven years war is formally declared british are victorious at quebec wolfe and montcalm are killed in battle george iii becomes king of great britain peace of paris ending french and indian war is signed junpero serra begins to build missions in california mexico declares independence from spain chapter review growth and diversity what difficulties did native americans face in maintaining their cultural independence on the frontier.
religious revivals in provincial societies how did the great awakening transform the religious culture of colonial america.
britains american colonies experienced extraordinary growth during the eighteenth century.
german and scots irish migrants poured into the backcountry where they clashed with native americans.
the indians played off french and british imperial ambitions in the middle ground but disease and encroachment by european settlers undermined the indians ability to resist.
p 80 the great awakening brought a new form of evangelical religion to ordinary americans.
it emphasized personal salvation through a new birth and membership in a large community of believers.
itinerant preachers such as george whitefield drew huge crowds throughout the colonies.
other ministers followed whitefield inviting ordinary americans to question traditional religious authorities.
p 90 spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century clash of political cultures why was the spanish empire unable to control its northern frontier.
why were eighteenth century colonial assemblies not fully democratic.
during the late 1600s and early 1700s the spanish empire expanded its authority north of mexico.
new settlements were established in the southwest and california.
although the spanish constructed missions and forts a lack of settlers and troops made it impossible for them to impose effective imperial authority.
much of the territory they claimed remained under the control of indian peoples.
p 83 most eighteenth century colonial governments were comprised of a royal governor an appointed governors council and an elected assembly.
although these representative assemblies did not allow women blacks or the poor to vote they did enfranchise most of the white adult male population.
assemblies guarded their privileges and powers often conflicting with royal governors who tried to expand their authority.
p 92 the impact of european ideas on american culture century of imperial war how did european ideas affect eighteenthcentury american life.
during the enlightenment educated europeans and american colonists like benjamin franklin brought scientific reason to the study of religion nature and society.
by midcentury economic growth sparked a consumer revolution that introduced colonists to an unprecedented array of imported manufactured items.
new ideas and goods helped integrate the american colonies into mainstream british culture.
p 87 why did colonial americans support great britains wars against france.
france and britain waged almost constant war in north america.
by 1750 britains american colonists believed the french in canada planned to encircle their settlements cutting them off from the rich lands of the ohio valley.
the seven years war drove the french from canada a victory that generated unprecedented enthusiasm for the british empire in the colonies.
p 95 study resources key terms and definitions backcountry in the eighteenth century the edge of settlement extending from western pennsylvania to georgia.
this region formed the second frontier as settlers moved west from the atlantic coast into the interior.
p 80 middle ground a geographical area where two distinct cultures meet and merge with neither holding a clear upper hand.
p 83 enlightenment philosophical and intellectual movement that began in europe during the eighteenth century.
it stressed the use of reason to solve social and scientific problems.
p 87 consumer revolution period between 1740 and 1770 when english exports to the american colonies increased by 360 percent to satisfy americans demand for consumer goods.
p 89 great awakening a sudden spontaneous and fervent series of protestant evangelical revivals beginning in the 1730s and through the 1740s and 1750s that occurred throughout the colonies.
the great awakening encouraged men and women to take an active role in their salvation and helped connect scattered colonists together with a unifying belief that with gods assistance social and political progress was possible in colonial america.
p 90 itinerant preachers these charismatic preachers spread revivalism throughout america during the great awakening.
p 91 albany plan plan of intercolonial cooperation proposed by prominent colonists including benjamin franklin at a conference in albany new york in 1754.
the plan called for a grand council of elected delegates from the colonies that would have powers to tax and provide for the common defense.
although rejected by the colonial and british governments it was a prototype for colonial union.
p 96 seven years war worldwide conflict 1756 1763 that pitted britain against france.
with help from the american colonists the british won the war and eliminated france as a power on the north american continent.
also known as the french and indian war.
p 97 peace of paris of 1763 treaty ending the french and indian war by which france ceded canada to britain.
p 99 critical thinking questions 1.
what factors ultimately served to undermine the middle ground.
what are the similarities and differences between the impact of the enlightenment and the great awakening on colonial society.
what impact did the spanish empire have on the culture of 5.
why did colonists place greater political trust in their elected the borderlands.
assemblies than in their royally appointed governors.
what impact did enlightenment ideas and commercial goods have on american politics.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 4 on myhistorylab growth and diversity read the document gentleman p 79 clash of political cultures william byrd ii diary an american read the document benjamin franklin observations concerning the increase of mankind p 81 read the document english bill of rights 1689 p 93 century of imperial war view the map european claims in america c 1750 p 97 spanish borderlands of the eighteenth century conquest by other means the pennsylvania walking purchase p 84 read the document testimony by pedro naranjo to spanish authorities p 86 religious revivals in provincial societies read the document complete the assignment read the document jonathan edwards sinners in the hands of an angry god p 91 read the document whitfield 1771 p 92 benjamin franklin on george albany plan of union 1754 p 98 view the closer look european claims in north america 1750 and 1763 p 100 indicates study plan media assignment the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 contents and learning objectives structure of colonial society pg.
106 the loyalist dilemma pg.
126 why did americans resist parliamentary taxation.
why did so many loyalists decide to leave the united states during the revolution.
eroding the bonds of empire pg.
108 what events eroded the bonds of empire during the 1760s.
winning the peace pg.
127 steps toward independence pg.
116 how did benjamin franklin john adams and john jay secure a better peace treaty than congress could have expected.
what events in 1775 and 1776 led to the colonists decision to declare independence.
fighting for independence pg.
119 why did it take eight years of warfare for the americans to gain independence.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab feature essay spains contribution to american independence chapter 5 the american revolution moment of decision commitment and sacrifice even as the british army poured into boston in 1774 demanding complete obedience to king and parliament few americans welcomed the possibility of revolutionary violence.
for many colonial families it would have been easier certainly safer to accede to imperial demands for taxes enacted without their representation.
but they did not do so.
for the patten family the time of reckoning arrived in the spring of 1775.
matthew patten had been born in ulster a protestant irishman and with scots irish friends and relatives he migrated to new hampshire where they founded a settlement of fifty six families known as bedford.
matthew farmed the unpromising rocky soil that he his wife elizabeth and their children called home.
in time distant decisions about taxes and representation shattered the peace of bedford and the patterns found themselves drawn into a war not of their own making but which nevertheless compelled them to sacrifice the security of everyday life for liberty.
on april 20 1775 accounts of lexington and concord reached bedford.
matthew noted in his diary i received the melancholy news in the morning that general gages troops had fired on our countrymen at concord yesterday his son john marched with neighbors in support of the massachusetts soldiers.
the departure was tense.
the entire family helped john prepare.
our girls sit up all night baking bread and fitting things for him matthew wrote.
the demands of war had only just begun.
in late 1775 john volunteered for an american march on british canada.
on the long trek over impossible terrain the boy died.
the father recorded his emotions in the diary.
john was shot through his left arm at bunker hill fight and now was lead after suffering much fategue to the place where he now lyes in defending the just rights of america to whose end he came in the prime of life by means of that wicked tyrannical brute nea worse than brute of great britain george iii.
he was twenty four years and 31 days old the initial stimulus for rebellion came from the gentry from the rich and wellborn who resented parliaments efforts to curtail their rights within the british empire.
patten family farmstead in bedford new hampshire.
but as these influential planters wealthy merchants and prominent clergymen discovered the revolutionary movement generated a momentum that they could not control.
as relations with britain deteriorated particularly after 1765 the traditional leaders of colonial society encouraged the ordinary folk to join the protest as rioters as petitioners and finally as soldiers.
newspapers sermons and pamphlets helped transform what had begun as a squabble among the gentry into a mass movement and once the people had become involved in shaping the nations destiny they could never again be excluded.
had it not been for ordinary militiamen like john patten in the various colonies the british would have easily crushed american resistance.
although some accounts of the revolution downplay the military side of the story leaving the impression that a few famous founding fathers effortlessly carried the nation to independence a more persuasive explanation must recognize the centrality of armed violence in achieving nationhood.
the american revolution involved a massive military commitment.
if common american soldiers had not been willing to stand up to seasoned british troops to face chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 the terror of the bayonet charge independence would have remained a dream of intellectuals.
proportionate to the population a greater percentage of americans died in military service during the revolution than in any war in american history with the exception of the civil war.
he concept of liberty so magnificently expressed in revolutionary pamphlets was not therefore simply an abstraction an exclusive concern of political theorists such as thomas jefferson and john adams.
it also motivated ordinary folk the patten family for example to take up weapons and risk death.
those who survived the ordeal were never quite the same for the very experience of fighting of assuming responsibility in battle and perhaps even of taking the lives of british officers gave dramatic new meaning to the idea of social equality.
t structure of colonial society why did americans resist parliamentary taxation.
colonists who were alive during the 1760s did not anticipate the coming of national independence.
it is only from a modern perspective that we see how the events of this period would lead to the formation of the united states.
the colonists of course did not know what the future would bring.
they would probably have characterized these years as postwar as a time of heightened economic and political expectation following the successful conclusion of the seven years war see chapter 4.
for many americans the period generated optimism.
the population continued to grow.
indeed in 1776 approximately 2 5 million people black and white were living in great britains thirteen mainland colonies.
the striking ethnic and racial diversity of these men and women amazed european visitors who apparently rated homogeneity more highly than did the americans.
in 1775 for example a traveler corrected the impression in london that the colonists are the offspring of englishmen to be sure many families traced their roots to great britain but one also encountered french dutch germans innumerable indians africans and a multitude of felons he then asked rhetorically is it possible to tell which are the most turbulent amongst such a mixture of people the american population on the eve of independence was also extraordinarily young a fact of great importance in understanding the development of effective political resistance.
nearly 60 percent of the american people were under age 21.
this is a fact of considerable significance.
at any given time most people in this society were small children and many of the young men who fought the british during the revolution either had not been born or had been infants during the stamp act crisis.
any explanation for the coming of independence therefore must take into account the continuing political mobilization of so many young people.
postwar americans also experienced a high level of prosperity.
to be sure some major port cities went through a difficult period as colonists who had been employed during the fighting were thrown out of work.
sailors and ship workers for example were especially vulnerable to layoffs of this sort.
in general however white americans did very well.
the quality of their material lives was not substantially lower than that of the english.
in 1774 the per capita wealth of the americans this figure includes blacks as well as whites was 37 4.
this sum exceeds the per capita wealth of many developing countries today.
on the eve of revolution 37 4 would have purchased about 310 bushels of wheat 1 600 pounds of rice 11 cows or 6 horses.
a typical white family of five a father mother and three dependent children not only would have been able to afford decent food clothing and housing but also would have had money left over with which to purchase consumer goods.
even the poorest colonists seem to have benefited from a rising standard of living and although they may not have done as well as their wealthier neighbors they too wanted to preserve gains they had made.
wealth however was not evenly distributed in this society.
regional variations were striking.
the southern colonies enjoyed the highest levels of personal wealth in america which can be explained in part by the ownership of slaves.
more than 90 percent of americas unfree workers lived in the south and they represented a huge capital investment.
even without including the slaves in these wealth estimates the south did quite well.
in terms of aggregate wealth the middle colonies also scored impressively.
in fact only new england lagged noticeably behind a reflection of its relative inability to produce large amounts of exports for a growing world market.
breakdown of political trust ultimate responsibility for preserving the empire fell to george iii.
when he became king of england in 1760 he was only 22 years of age.
the new monarch was determined to play an aggressive role in government.
this decision caused considerable dismay among englands political leaders.
for decades a powerful though loosely associated group of men who called themselves whigs had set policy and controlled patronage.
george ii had accepted this situation and so long as the whigs in parliament did not meddle with his beloved army the king had let them rule the nation.
in one stroke george iii destroyed this cozy relationship.
he selected as his chief minister the earl of bute a scot whose chief qualification for office appeared to be his friendship with the young king.
the whigs who dominated parliament were outraged.
bute had no ties with the members of the house of commons he owed them no favors.
it seemed to the whigs that with the appointment of bute george was trying to turn back the clock to the time before the glorious revolution in other words attempting to reestablish a personal stuart monarchy free from traditional constitutional restraints.
the whigs blamed bute for every wrong real or imagined.
george did not in fact harbor such arbitrary ambitions but his actions threw customary political practices into doubt.
by 1763 bute despairing of public life left office.
his departure however neither restored the whigs to preeminence nor dampened the kings enthusiasm for domestic politics.
everyone agreed george had the right to select whomever he desired for cabinet posts but until 1770 no one seemed able to please the monarch.
ministers came and went often for no other reason than georges personal distaste.
because of this chronic instability subministers minor bureaucrats who directed routine structure of colonial society colonial affairs did not know what was expected of them.
in the absence of clear long range policy some ministers made narrowly based decisions others did nothing.
most devoted their energies to finding a political patron capable of satisfying the fickle king.
talent played little part in the scramble for office and incompetent hacks were advanced as frequently as were men of vision.
with such turbulence surrounding him the king showed little interest in the american colonies.
the king however does not bear the sole responsibility for englands loss of empire.
the members of parliament who actually drafted the statutes that gradually drove a wedge between the colonies and britain must share the blame for they failed to provide innovative answers to the explosive constitutional issues of the day.
the problem was not stupidity or even obstinacy qualities found in equal measure among all peoples.
in part the impasse resulted from sheer ignorance.
few englishmen active in government had ever visited america.
for those who attempted to follow colonial affairs accurate information proved extremely difficult to obtain.
packet boats carrying passengers and mail sailed regularly between london and the various colonial ports but the voyage across the atlantic required at least four weeks.
furthermore all correspondence was laboriously copied in longhand by overworked clerks serving in understaffed offices.
one could not expect to receive from america an answer to a specific question in less than three months.
as a result of the lag in communication between england and america rumors sometimes passed for true accounts and misunderstanding influenced the formulation of colonial policy.
but failure of communication alone was not to blame for the widening gap between the colonies and england.
even when complete information was available the two sides were often unable to understand each others positions.
the central element in this anglo american debate was a concept known as parliamentary sovereignty.
the english ruling classes viewed the role of parliament from a historical perspective that most colonists never shared.
they insisted that parliament was the dominant element within the constitution.
indeed this elective body protected rights and property from an arbitrary monarch.
during the reign of the stuarts especially under charles i r 1625 1649 the authority of parliament had been challenged and it was not until the glorious revolution of 1688 that the english crown formally recognized parliaments supreme authority in matters such as taxation.
almost no one including george iii would have dissented from a speech made in 1766 before the house of commons in which a representative declared the parliament hath and must have from the nature and essence of the constitution has had and ever will have a sovereign supreme power and jurisdiction over every part of the dominions of the state to make laws in all cases whatsoever the logic of this argument seemed self evident to the british.
in fact parliamentary leaders could never quite understand why the colonists were so difficult to persuade.
in frustration lord hillsborough the british secretary of state admonished the colonial agent for connecticut it is essential to the constitution to preserve the supremacy of parliament inviolate and tell your friends in america.
that it is as much their interest to support the constitution and preserve the supremacy of parliament as it is ours cartoons became a popular means of criticizing government during this period.
here king george iii watches as the kilted lord bute slaughters the goose america.
a cabinet member holds a basket of golden eggs at rear.
at front left a dog relieves itself on a map of north america.
no taxation without representation the american perspective americans most emphatically did not see it in their interest to maintain the supremacy of parliament the crisis in imperial relations forced the colonists fi rst to defi ne and then to defend principles deeply rooted in their own political culture.
for more than a century their ideas about the colonies role within the british empire had remained a vague untested bundle of assumptions about personal liberties property rights and representative institutions.
by 1763 however certain fundamental american beliefs had become clear.
from massachusetts to georgia colonists aggressively defended the powers of the provincial assemblies.
they drew on a rich legislative history of their own.
over the course of the century the american assemblies had steadily expanded their authority over taxation and expenditure.
since no one in britain bothered to clip their legislative wings these provincial bodies assumed a major role in policy making and routine administration.
in other words by midcentury the assemblies looked like american copies of parliament.
it seemed unreasonable therefore for the british suddenly to insist on the supremacy of parliament for as the legislators of massachusetts observed in 1770 this house has the same inherent rights in this province as the house of commons in great britain the constitutional debate turned ultimately on the meaning of representation itself.
in 1764 a british official informed the colonists that even though they had not elected members to parliament indeed even though they had had no direct contact chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 with the current members they were nevertheless virtually represented by that august body.
the members of parliament he declared represented the political interests of everyone who lived in the british empire.
it did not really matter whether everyone had cast a vote.
the colonists ridiculed this notion of virtual representation.
the only representatives the americans recognized as legitimate were those actually chosen by the people for whom they spoke.
on this crucial point they would not compromise.
as john adams insisted a representative assembly should actually mirror its constituents it should think feel reason and act like them since the members of parliament could not possibly think like americans it followed logically they could not represent them.
and if they were not genuine representatives the members of parliament pretensions to sovereignty notwithstanding had no business taxing the american people.
thus in 1764 the connecticut assembly declared in bold letters no law can be made or abrogated without the consent of the people by their representatives ideas about power and virtue americans expressed their political beliefs in a language they had borrowed from english writers.
the person most frequently cited was john locke the influential seventeenth century philosopher whose two treatises of government first published in 1690 seemed to colonial readers at least a brilliant description of what was in fact american political practice.
locke claimed that all people possessed natural and inalienable rights.
to preserve these god given rights of life liberty and property for example free men the status of women in lockes work was less clear formed contracts.
these agreements were the foundation of human society as well as civil government and they required the consent of the people who were actually governed.
there could be no coercion.
locke justified rebellion against arbitrary forms of government that were by their very nature unreasonable.
americans delighted in lockes ability to unite traditional religious values with a spirited defense of popular government and even when they did not fully understand his technical writings they seldom missed a chance to quote from the works of the great mr locke colonial americans also enthusiastically subscribed to the so called commonwealthman tradition a body of political assumptions generally identified with two eighteenth century english publicists john trenchard and thomas gordon see chapter 4.
the writings of such figures most of whom spent their lives in political opposition helped persuade the colonists that power was extremely dangerous a force that would surely destroy liberty unless it was countered by virtue.
persons who shared this highly charged moral outlook regarded bad policy as not simply the result of human error.
rather it was an indication of sin and corruption.
insistence on public virtue sacrifice of self interest to the public good became the dominant theme of revolutionary political writing.
american pamphleteers seldom took a dispassionate legalistic approach to their analysis of power and liberty.
more commonly they exposed plots hatched by corrupt courtiers such as the earl of bute.
none of them or their readers had any doubt that americans were more virtuous than were the people of england.
during the 1760s however popular writers were not certain how long the colonists could hold out against arbitrary taxation standing armies anglican bishops in other words against a host of external threats designed to crush american liberty.
in 1774 for example the people of farmington connecticut declared that the present ministry being instigated by the devil and led by their wicked and corrupt hearts have a design to take away our liberties and properties and to enslave us forever indeed these connecticut farmers described britains leaders as pimps and parasites this highly emotional conspiratorial rhetoric sometimes shocks modern readers who assume that americas revolutionary leaders were products of the enlightenment persons who relied solely on reason to solve social and political problems.
whatever the origins of their ideas may have been the colonial pamphleteers successfully roused ordinary men and women to resist britain with force of arms.
colonial newspapers spread these ideas through a large dispersed population.
a majority of adult white males especially those in the northern colonies were literate and it is not surprising that the number of journals published in this country increased dramatically during the revolutionary period.
for the first time in american history persons living in various parts of the continent could closely follow events that occurred in distant american cities.
because of the availability of newspapers the details of bostonians confrontations with british authorities were known throughout the colonies and these shared political experiences drew americans more closely together making it possible in the words of john adams for thirteen clocks.
to strike together a perfection of mechanism which no artist had ever before effected eroding the bonds of empire what events eroded the bonds of empire during the 1760s.
the seven years war saddled great britain with a national debt so huge that more than half the annual national budget went to pay the interest on it.
almost everyone in government assumed that with the cessation of hostilities the troops would be disbanded thus saving a lot of money.
george iii had other plans.
he insisted on keeping the largest peacetime army in british history on active duty supposedly to protect indians from predatory frontiersmen and to preserve order in the newly conquered territories of florida and quebec.
maintaining such a force so far distant from the mother country fueled the budgetary crisis.
the growing financial burden weighed heavily on restive english taxpayers and sent government leaders scurrying in search of new sources of revenue.
for their part colonists doubted the value of this expensive army.
britain did not leave enough troops in america to maintain peace on the frontier effectively.
the weakness of the army was dramatically demonstrated during the spring of 1763.
the native peoples of the backcountry the seneca ottawa miami creek and cherokee had begun discussing how they might turn back the tide of white settlement.
the powerful spiritual leader neolin known as the delaware prophet and claiming vision from the master of life helped these indians articulate their fear and anger.
he urged them to restore their cultures to the original state that eroding the bonds of empire they were in before the white people found out their country if moral regeneration required violence so be it.
neolin converted pontiac an ottawa warrior to the cause and he in turn coordinated an uprising among the western indians who had been french allies and who hated all british people even those sent to protect them from land grabbing colonists.
the formidable native american resistance was known as pontiacs rebellion.
in may pontiac attacked detroit other indians harassed the pennsylvania and virginia frontiers.
at the end of the year after his followers began deserting pontiac sued for peace.
during even this brief outbreak the british army proved unable to defend exposed colonial settlements and several thousand people lost their lives.
from the perspective of the native americans who inhabited the ohio valley this was a period of almost unmitigated disaster.
in fact more than any other group the indians suffered as a direct result of imperial reorganization.
the defeat of the french made it impossible for native peoples to play off one imperial power against european rivals see chapter 4 and the victorious british made it clear that they regarded their former indian allies as little more than a nuisance.
diplomatic gifts stopped humiliating restrictions were placed on trade.
but even worse pontiacs rising unloosed vicious racism along the colonial frontier and american colonists often used any excuse to attack local indians peaceful or not.
late in 1763 a group of vigilantes known as the paxton boys murdered a score of christian indians women and children living near lancaster pennsylvania.
white neighbors treated the killers as heroes and the atrocity ended only after the paxton boys threatened to march on philadelphia in search of administrators who dared to criticize such cold blooded crimes.
one of the administrators benjamin franklin observed sadly it grieves me to hear that our frontier people are yet greater barbarians than the indians and continue to murder them in time of peace whatever happened to the indians the colonists fully intended to settle the fertile region west of the appalachian mountains.
after the british government issued the proclamation of 1763 which prohibited governors from granting land beyond the headwaters of rivers flowing into the atlantic disappointed americans viewed the army as an obstruction to legitimate economic development a domestic police force that cost too much money.
paying off the national debt the task of reducing englands debt fell to george grenville the rigid somewhat unimaginative chancellor of the exchequer who replaced bute in 1763 as the kings first minister.
after carefully reviewing the state of britains finances grenville concluded that the colonists would have to contribute to the maintenance of the army.
the first bill he steered through parliament was the revenue act of 1764 known as the sugar act.
this legislation placed a new burden on the navigation acts that had governed the flow of colonial commerce for almost a century see chapter 3.
those acts had forced americans to trade almost exclusively with britain.
the statutes were not however primarily intended as a means to raise money for the british government.
the sugar act and the acts that soon followed redefined the relationship between america and great britain.
parliament now expected the colonies to generate revenue.
the preamble of the sugar act proclaimed explicitly it is just and necessary that read the document james otis the rights of the british colonies asserted and proved james otis jr 1725 1783 of massachusetts was a brilliant lawyer a prolific writer and a strong supporter of colonial rights.
he is credited with being one of the first patriots to declare that taxation without representation is tyranny a revenue be raised.
in america for defraying the expenses of defending protecting and securing the same the purpose of the sugar act was to discourage smuggling bribery and other illegalities that prevented the navigation acts from being profitable.
parliament reduced the duty on molasses set originally by the molasses act of 1733 from 6 to 3 pence per gallon.
at so low a rate grenville reasoned colonial merchants would have little incentive to bribe customs collectors.
much needed revenue would be diverted from the pockets of corrupt officials into the treasury so that it might be used to maintain the army.
grenville had been too clever by half.
the americans immediately saw through his unconstitutional scheme.
according to the members of the rhode island assembly the sugar act taxed the colonists in a manner inconsistent with their rights and privileges as british subjects james otis a fiery orator from massachusetts exclaimed the legislation deprived americans of the right of assessing their own taxes chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 the act generated no violence.
in fact ordinary men and women were only marginally involved in the drafting of formal petitions.
the protest was still confined to the members of the colonial assemblies to the merchants and to the well to do americans who had personal interests in commerce.
word of the stamp act reached america in may and it was soon clear that barr had gauged the colonists response correctly.
the most dramatic incident occurred in virginias house of burgesses.
patrick henry young and eloquent whom contemporaries compared in fervor to evangelical preachers introduced five resolutions protesting the stamp act on the floor of the assembly.
he timed his move carefully.
it was late in the session many of the more conservative burgesses had already departed for their plantations.
even then henrys resolves declaring that virginians had the right to tax themselves as they alone saw fit passed by narrow margins.
the fifth resolution stricken almost immediately from the legislative records announced that any attempt to collect stamp revenues in america was illegal unconstitutional and unjust and has a manifest tendency to destroy british as well as american liberty henry was carried away by the force of his own rhetoric.
he reminded his fellow virginians that caesar had had his brutus charles i his cromwell and he hoped that some good american would stand up for his country but an astonished speaker of the house cut henry off in mid sentence accusing him of treason.
the virginia resolves might have remained a local matter had it not been for the colonial press.
newspapers throughout america printed henrys resolutions but perhaps because editors did not really know what had happened in williamsburg they reported that all five resolutions had received the burgesses full support.
several journals even carried two resolves that henry had not dared to introduce.
a result of this misunderstanding of course was that the virginians appeared to have taken an extremely radical popular protest passage of the stamp act of 1765 transformed a debate among gentlemen into a mass political movement.
the imperial crisis might have been avoided.
colonial agents had presented grenville with alternative schemes for raising money in america.
but grenville was a stubborn man and he had little fear of parliamentary opposition.
the majority of the house of commons assumed that parliament possessed the right to tax the colonists and when the chancellor of the exchequer announced a plan to squeeze 60 000 annually out of the americans by requiring them to purchase special seals or stamps to validate legal documents the members responded with enthusiasm.
the stamp act was scheduled to go into effect on november 1 1765 and in anticipation of brisk sales grenville appointed stamp distributors for every colony.
during discussion in parliament several members warned that the act would raise a storm of protest in the colonies.
colonel isaac barr a veteran of the seven years war reminded his colleagues that the americans were sons of liberty and would not surrender their rights without a fight.
but barrs appeal fell on deaf ears.
maine part of mass.
great britain lake huron lumber france skins lake o n h ntario beef cattle n y sheep hogs skins line of l am ati on va hemp corn cuba hogs wheat norfolk beef cattle naval stores beef cattle lumber hogs caribbean sea slav es rice and indigo fishing gol d pep per tobacco ironworks ru m hispaniola jamaica west indies wheat and corn charles town savannah corn spain portugal at l a n t i c ocean n c.
naval lumber stores beef cattle naval s c stores beef cattle ga atlantic ocean a ol m r ar ha g su ruit f eat lumber ur m wheat charles town europe in um gra rice meat r manufactures wine flo skins philadelphia sugar molasses slaves oc pr lumber del.
skins cod res sto res actu manuf pa md.
boston l ava o n dig n i kins ctures co s ufa tobac man boston mass.
newport whales new york conn newport beef cattle philadelphia r i norfolk n j new york rie ee lak beef cattle north america s dw ses oo d 200 miles 200 kilometers south america shipbuilding rum distilleries colonial products and trade although the american colonists produced many agricultural staples that were valuable to britain they were dependent on british manufactures such as cloth metal goods and ceramics.
africa eroding the bonds of empire by november 1 1765 stamp distributors in almost every american port had publicly read the document benjamin franklin testimony against resigned and without distributors the hated revthe stamp act 1766 enue stamps could not be sold.
the courts soon reopened most newspapers were published.
daily life in the colonies was undisturbed with one exception the sons of liberty persuaded some said coerced colonial merchants to boycott british goods until parliament repealed the stamp act.
the merchants showed little enthusiasm for such tactics but the threat of tar and feathers stimulated cooperation.
the boycott movement was in itself a masterful political innovation.
never before had a resistance movement organized itself so centrally around the market decisions of ordinary consumers.
the colonists depended on british imports the stamp act placed a tax on documents and printed matter newspapers marriage licenses wills cloth metal goods and ceramics and each year deeds even playing cards and dice.
the stamps like those shown here varied in denomination.
a tax they imported more consumer goods than they stamp affixed to a legal document or bill of sale signified that the required tax had been paid.
could possibly afford.
in this highly charged moral atmosphere one in which ordinary people position on the issue of the supremacy of parliament one that other talked constantly of conspiracy and corruption it is not surprising americans now trumpeted before their own assemblies.
no wonthat americans of different classes and backgrounds advocated a der francis bernard royal governor of massachusetts called the radical change in buying habits.
private acts suddenly became part virginia resolves an alarm bell of the public sphere.
personal excess threatened to contaminate not to be outdone by virginia massachusetts called a general the entire political community.
this logic explains the power of an meeting to protest grenvilles policy.
nine colonies sent representaappeal made in a boston newspaper save your money and you can tives to the stamp act congress that convened in new york city save your country in october 1765.
it was the first intercolonial gathering held since the boycotts mobilized colonial women.
they were excluded the abortive albany congress of 1754 if nothing else the new confrom voting and civil office but such legal discrimination did not gress provided leaders from different regions with an opportunity mean that women were not part of the broader political culture.
to discuss common problems.
the delegates drafted petitions to the since wives and mothers spent their days involved with household king and parliament that restated the colonists belief that no taxes chores they assumed special responsibility to reform consumption should be imposed on them but with their own consent given perto root out luxury and to promote frugality.
indeed in this realm sonally or by their representatives the tone of the meeting was they possessed real power they monitored the ideological commitrestrained even conciliatory.
the congress studiously avoided any ment of the entire family.
throughout the colonies women altered mention of independence or disloyalty to the crown.
styles of dress made homespun cloth and shunned imported items resistance to the stamp act soon spread from the assemblies to on which parliament had placed a tax.
the streets.
by taxing deeds marriage licenses and playing cards the stamp act touched the lives of ordinary women and men.
anonymous failed attempts to save the empire artisans and seamen angered by parliaments apparent insensitivity and fearful that the statute would increase unemployment and povwhat most americans did not yet know after all communicaerty organized mass protests in the major colonial ports.
tion with britain required months was that in july grenville imperial politics played out on the streets of american cities had fallen from power.
this unexpected shift came about not as traditional rivalries between neighborhood youths and antibecause the king thought grenvilles policies inept but rather catholic sentiment suddenly was redirected against alleged parbecause george did not like the man.
his replacement as first lord liamentary oppression.
in boston the sons of liberty burned of the treasury lord rockingham was young inexperienced in effigy the local stamp distributor andrew oliver and when and terrified of public speaking a serious handicap to launchthat action failed to bring about his resignation they tore down ing a brilliant parliamentary career.
the rockinghamites as his one of his office buildings.
even after he resigned the mob nearly followers were called envisioned a prosperous empire founded demolished the elegant home of olivers close associate lieutenant on an expanding commerce and local government under the governor thomas hutchinson.
the violence frightened colonial gentle guidance of parliament.
rockingham wanted to repeal leaders yet evidence suggests that they encouraged the lower the stamp act but because of the shakiness of his own politiclasses to intimidate royal officials.
popular participation in these cal coalition he could not announce such a decision until it protests was an exciting experience for people who had traditionenjoyed broad national support.
he therefore urged merchants ally deferred to their social betters.
after 1765 it was impossible and manufacturers throughout england to petition parliament for either royal governors or patriot leaders to take for granted the for repeal of the act claiming that the american boycott support of ordinary men and women.
would soon drive them into bankruptcy and spark urban riots.
chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 on march 18 1766 the house of commons voted 275 to 167 to rescind the stamp act.
lest its retreat on the stamp act be interpreted as weakness the house of commons passed the declaratory act march 1766 a shrill defense of parliamentary supremacy over the americans in all cases whatsoever the colonists insistence on no taxation without representation failed to impress british rulers.
englands merchants supposedly americas allies claimed sole responsibility for the stamp act repeal.
the colonists had only complicated the task the merchants lectured and if the americans knew what was good for them they would keep quiet.
to george mason a leading political figure in virginia such advice sounded patronizing.
the british merchants seemed to be saying we have with infinite difficulty and fatigue got you excused this one time pray be a good boy for the future do what your papa and mama bid you and hasten to return them your most grateful acknowledgements for condescending to let you keep what is your own this mason snapped was ridiculous the stamp act crisis also eroded the colonists respect for imperial officeholders in america.
suddenly these men royal governors customs collectors military personnel appeared alien as if their interests were not those of the people over whom they exercised authority.
one person who had been forced to resign the post of stamp distributor for south carolina noted several years later the stamp act had introducd so much party rage faction and debate that the ancient harmony generosity and urbanity for which these people were celebrated is destroyed and at an end similar reports came from other colonies and it is testimony to the americans lingering loyalty to the british crown and constitution that rebellion did not occur in 1765.
listen to the audio file the liberty song fueling the crisis rockinghams ministry soon gave way to a government headed once again by william pitt who was now the earl of chatham.
the aging pitt suffered horribly from gout and during his long absences from london charles townshend his chancellor of the exchequer made important policy decisions.
townshend was an impetuous man whose mouth often outran his mind.
during a parliamentary debate in january 1767 he surprised everyone by blithely announcing that he knew a way to obtain revenue from the americans.
the members of the house of commons were so pleased with the news that they promptly voted to lower english land taxes an action that threatened fiscal chaos.
a budgetary crisis forced townshend to make good on his extraordinary boast.
his scheme turned out to be a grab bag of duties on american imports of paper glass paint lead and tea which collectively were known as the townshend revenue acts june july 1767.
he hoped to generate sufficient funds to pay the salaries of royal governors and other imperial officers thus freeing them from dependence on the colonial assemblies.
the chancellor recognized that without tough instruments of enforcement his duties would not produce the promised revenues.
therefore he created an american board of customs commissioners a body based in boston and supported by reorganized vice admiralty courts located in boston philadelphia the boycott movement drew many colonial women into popular politics.
in this 1774 woodcut a daughter of liberty stands ready to resist british oppression.
and charles town.
and for good measure townshend induced parliament to order the governor of new york to veto all bills passed by that colonys assembly until it supplied resident british troops in accordance with the quartering act may 1765 that required the colonies to house soldiers in barracks taverns and vacant buildings and to provide the army with firewood candles and beer among other items.
many americans regarded this as more taxation without representation and in new york at least colonists refused to pay.
colonists showed no more willingness to pay townshends duties than they had to buy grenvilles stamps.
no congress was called none was necessary.
recent events had taught people how to coordinate protest and they moved to resist the unconstitutional revenue acts.
in major ports the sons of liberty organized boycotts of british goods.
protest often involved what one historian has termed rituals of nonconsumption in some large towns these were moments of public moral reaffirmation.
men and women took oaths before neighbors promising not to purchase certain goods until parliament repealed unconstitutional eroding the bonds of empire taxation.
in boston ordinary people were encouraged to sign and artisans.
work was already in short supply and the streets subscription rolls the selectmen strongly recommend this crackled with tension.
measure to persons of all ranks announced the boston gazette when colonists questioned why the army had been sent to a as the most honorable and effectual way of giving public peaceful city pamphleteers responded that it was there to further testimony of their love to their country and of endeavouring a conspiracy originally conceived by bute to oppress americans to to save it from ruin take away their liberties and to collect illegal revenues.
grenville on february 11 1768 the massachusetts house of hillsborough townshend they were all supposedly part of the representatives drafted a circular letter a provocative appeal plot.
today such rhetoric may sound excessive but to americans which it sent directly to the other colonial assemblies.
the letwho had absorbed the political theories of the commonwealthmen ter requested suggestions on how best to thwart the townshend a pattern of tyranny seemed obvious.
acts not surprisingly legislators in other parts of america busy colonists had no difficulty interpreting the violence that with local matters simply ignored this general appeal.
but not erupted in boston on march 5 1770.
in the gathering dusk of that lord hillsborough englands secretary for american affairs.
this afternoon young boys and street toughs threw rocks and snowballs rather mild attempt to create a united colonial front struck him as at soldiers in a small isolated patrol outside the offices of the hated gross treason and he ordered the massachusetts representatives customs commissioners in king street.
the details of this incident to rescind their seditious paper after considering hillsboroughs are obscure but it appears that as the mob grew and became more demand the legislators voted 92 to 17 to defy him.
threatening the soldiers panicked.
in the confusion the troops suddenly the circular letter became a cause clbre.
the fired leaving five americans dead.
royal governor of massachusetts hastily dissolved the house pamphleteers promptly labeled the incident a massacre.
of representatives.
that decision compelled the other colothe victims of this boston massacre were seen as martyrs and nies to demonstrate their support for massachusetts.
assembly were memorialized in extravagant terms.
in one eulogy joseph after assembly now felt obligated to take up the circular letter warren addressed the dead mens widows and children dramatan action hillsborough had specifically forbidden.
assemblies ically re creating the gruesome scene in king street.
behold in other colonies were dissolved creating a much broader crisis of representative government.
throughout america the number 92 read the document boston gazette description of the the number of legislators who voted against boston massacre hillsborough immediately became a symbol of patriotism.
in fact parliaments challenge had brought about the very results it most wanted to avoid a foundation for intercolonial communication and a strengthening of conviction among the colonists of the righteousness of their position.
fatal show of force in october 1768 british rulers made another mistake one that raised tensions almost to the pitch they had reached during the stamp act riots.
the issue at the heart of the trouble was the army.
in part to save money and in part to intimidate colonial trouble makers the ministry transferred four thousand regular troops from nova scotia and ireland to boston.
most of the army had already been withdrawn from the frontier to the seacoast to save revenue thereby raising more acutely than ever the issue of why troops were in america at all.
the armed strangers camped on the boston common and when citizens passed the site redcoats shouted obscenities.
sometimes in accordance with martial law an errant soldier was whipped within an inch of his life a bloody sight that sickened boston civilians.
to make relations worse redcoats men who were ill treated and underpaid competed in their spare time for jobs with local dockworkers outrage over the boston massacre was fanned by propaganda such as this etching by paul revere which showed british redcoats firing on ordinary citizens.
in subsequent editions the blood spurting from the dying americans became more conspicuous.
chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 thy murdered husband gasping on the ground warren cried.
take heed ye orphan babes lest whilst your streaming eyes are fixed upon the ghastly corpse your feet slide on the stones bespattered with your fathers brains apparently to propagandists like warren it mattered little that the five civilians had been bachelors.
paul reveres engraving of the massacre appropriately splattered with blood became an instant best seller.
confronted with such intense reaction and with the possibility of massive armed resistance crown officials wisely moved the army to an island in boston harbor.
at this critical moment the kings new first minister restored a measure of tranquility.
lord north congenial well meaning but not very talented became chancellor of the exchequer following townshends death in 1767.
north was appointed the first minister in 1770 and for the next twelve years indeed throughout most of the american crisis he managed to retain his office.
his secret formula seems to have been an ability to get along with george iii and to build an effective majority in parliament.
one of norths first recommendations to parliament was the repeal of the townshend duties.
not only had these ill conceived duties unnecessarily angered the colonists but they also hurt english manufacturers.
by taxing british exports such as glass and paint parliament had only encouraged the americans to develop their own industries thus without much prodding the house of commons dropped all the townshend duties with the notable exception of tea.
the tax on tea was retained not for revenue purposes north insisted but as a reminder that englands rulers still subscribed to the principles of the declaratory act.
they would not compromise the supremacy of parliament.
in mid 1770 however the matter of tea seemed trivial to most americans.
the colonists had drawn back from the precipice a little frightened by the events of the past two years and desperately hoped to head off future confrontation with the british.
last days of imperial rule 1770 1773 for a short while american colonists and british officials put aside their recent animosities.
like englands rulers some colonial gentry were beginning to pull back from protest especially violent confrontation with established authority in fear that the lower orders were becoming too assertive.
it was probably in this period that loyalist americans emerged as an identifiable group.
colonial merchants returned to familiar patterns of trade pleased no doubt to end the local boycotts that had depressed the american economy.
british goods flooded into colonial ports the level of american indebtedness soared to new highs.
in this period of apparent reconciliation the people of massachusetts even of boston decided they could accept their new governor thomas hutchinson.
after all he was one of their own an american.
but appearances were deceiving.
the bonds of imperial loyalty remained fragile and even as lord north attempted to win the colonists trust crown officials in america created new strains.
customs commissioners whom townshend had appointed to collect his duties remained in the colonies long after his revenue acts had been repealed.
if they had been honest unobtrusive administrators perhaps no one would have taken notice of their behavior.
but the customs commissioners regularly abused their powers of search and seizure and in the process lined their own pockets.
in massachusetts rhode island and south carolina to cite the most notorious cases these officials drove local citizens to distraction by enforcing the navigation acts with such rigor that a small boat could not cross narragansett bay with a load of firewood without first obtaining a sheaf of legal documents.
one slip no matter how minor could bring confiscation of ship and cargo.
the commissioners were not only corrupt they were also shortsighted.
if they had restricted their extortion to the common folk they might have avoided becoming a major american grievance.
but they could not control their greed.
some customs officers harassed the wealthiest most powerful men around men such as john hancock of boston and henry laurens of charles town.
the commissioners actions drove some members of the colonial ruling class into opposition to the kings government.
when in the summer of 1772 a group of disguised rhode islanders burned a customs vessel the gaspee americans cheered.
a special royal commission sent to arrest the culprits discovered that not a single rhode islander had the slightest idea how the ship could have come to such an end.
samuel adams 1722 1803 refused to accept the notion that the repeal of the townshend duties had secured american liberty.
during the early 1770s while colonial leaders turned to other matters adams kept the cause alive with a drumfire of publicity.
he reminded the people of boston that the tax on tea remained in force.
he organized public anniversaries commemorating the repeal of the stamp act and the boston massacre.
adams was a genuine revolutionary an ideologue filled with a burning sense of indignation at the real and alleged wrongs suffered by his countrymen.
to his contemporaries this man resembled a figure out of new englands puritan past.
he seemed obsessed with the preservation of public virtue.
the american goal he declared was the creation of a christian sparta an ideal commonwealth in which vigilant citizens would constantly guard against the spread of corruption degeneracy and luxury.
with each new attempt by parliament to assert its supremacy over the colonists more and more bostonians listened to what adams had to say.
he observed ominously that the british intended to use the tea revenue to pay judicial salaries thus freeing the judges from dependence on the assembly.
when in november 1772 adams suggested the formation of a committee of correspondence to communicate grievances to villagers throughout massachusetts he received broad support.
americans living in other colonies soon copied his idea.
it was a brilliant stroke.
adams developed a structure of political cooperation completely independent of royal government.
the final provocation the boston tea party in may 1773 parliament passed the tea act legislation the americans might have welcomed.
after all it lowered the price for their favorite beverage.
parliament wanted to save one of britains largest businesses the east india company from possible bankruptcy.
this commercial giant imported asian tea into england where it was resold to wholesalers.
the tea was also eroding the bonds of empire read the document george r t hewes a retrospect on the boston tea party colonists toss chests of tea overboard while disguised as mohawk indians in a historic depiction of the boston tea party of december 16 1773.
at right a bottle of tea leaves preserved from the protest suggests that one participant or onlooker was mindful of the historical importance of the event.
subject to heavy duties.
the company tried to pass these charges on to the consumers but american tea drinkers preferred the cheaper leaves that were smuggled in from holland.
the tea act changed the rules.
parliament not only allowed the company to sell directly to american retailers thus cutting out intermediaries but also eliminated the duties paid in england.
if all had gone according to plan the agents of the east india company in america would have undersold their competitors including the dutch smugglers and with the new profits would have saved the business.
but parliaments logic was flawed.
first since the tax on tea collected in american ports remained in effect this new act seemed a devious scheme to win popular support for parliaments right to tax the colonists without representation.
second the act threatened to undercut powerful colonial merchants who did a good business trading in smuggled dutch tea.
considering the american reaction the british government might have been well advised to devise another plan to rescue the ailing company.
at philadelphia and then at new york city colonists turned back the tea ships before they could unload.
in boston however the issue was not so easily resolved.
governor hutchinson a strong willed man would not permit the vessels to return to england.
local patriots would not let them unload.
and so crammed with the east india companys tea the ships sat in boston harbor waiting for the colonists to make up their minds.
on the night of december 16 1773 they did so in dramatic style.
a group of men disguised as mohawk indians boarded the ships and pitched 340 chests of tea worth 10 000 over the side.
whether samuel adams organized the famed boston tea party is not known.
no doubt he and his allies were not taken by surprise.
even at the time john adams samuels distant cousin sensed the event would have far reaching significance.
this destruction of the tea he scribbled in his diary is so bold so daring so firm intrepid and inflexible and it must have so important consequences and so lasting that i cant but consider it as an epocha in history when news of the tea party reached london in january 1774 the north ministry was stunned.
the people of boston had treated parliamentary supremacy with utter contempt and british rulers saw no humor whatsoever in the destruction of private property by subjects of the crown dressed in costume.
to quell such rebelliousness parliament passed a series of laws called the coercive acts.
in america they were referred to as the intolerable acts.
the legislation 1 closed the port of boston until the city fully compensated the east india company for the lost tea 2 restructured the massachusetts government by transforming the upper house from an elective to an appointed body and restricting the number of legal town meetings to one a year 3 allowed the royal governor to transfer british officials arrested for offenses committed in the line of duty to england where there was little likelihood they would be convicted and 4 authorized the army to quarter troops wherever they were needed even if this required the compulsory requisition of uninhabited private buildings.
george iii enthusiastically supported this tough policy he appointed chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 chronicle of colonial british tension legislation sugar act date april 5 1764 stamp act march 22 1765 repealed march 18 1766 quartering act may 1765 declaratory act march 18 1766 townshend revenue acts june 26 29 july 2 1767 all repealed except duty on tea march 1770 may 10 1773 tea act coercive acts intolerable acts march june 1774 prohibitory act december 22 1775 provisions revised duties on sugar coffee tea wine other imports expanded jurisdiction of vice admiralty courts printed documents deeds newspapers marriage licenses etc.
issued only on special stamped paper purchased from stamp distributors colonists must supply british troops with housing other items candles firewood etc.
parliament declares its sovereignty over the colonies in all cases whatsoever new duties on glass lead paper paints tea customs collections tightened in america parliament gives east india company right to sell tea directly to americans some duties on tea reduced closes port of boston restructures massachusetts government restricts town meetings troops quartered in boston british officials accused of crimes sent to england or canada for trial declares british intention to coerce americans into submission embargo on american goods american ships seized general thomas gage to serve as the colonys new royal governor.
gage apparently won the kings favor by announcing that in america nothing can be done but by forcible means the sweeping denial of constitutional liberties confirmed the colonists worst fears.
to men like samuel adams it seemed as if britain really intended to enslave the american people.
colonial moderates found their position shaken by the vindictiveness of the coercive acts.
edmund burke one of americas last friends in parliament noted sadly on the floor of commons that this is the day then that you wish to go to war with all america in order to conciliate that country to this if in 1774 the house of commons thought it could isolate boston from the rest of america it was in for a rude surprise.
colonists living in other parts of the continent recognized immediately that the principles at stake in boston affected all americans.
as one virginian explained there were no heats and troubles in virginia till the blockade of boston few persons advocated independence but they could not remain passive while boston was destroyed.
they sent food and money and during the fall of 1774 reflected more deeply than ever on what it meant to be a colonist in the british empire.
colonial reaction several assemblies protest taxation for revenue riots in cities collectors forced to resign stamp act congress october 1765 protest in assemblies new york assembly punished for failure to comply 1767 ignored in celebration over repeal of the stamp act nonimportation of british goods assemblies protest newspapers attack british policy protests against favoritism shown to monopolistic company tea destroyed in boston december 16 1773 boycott of british goods first continental congress convenes september 1774 drives continental congress closer to decision for independence the sticking point remained as it had been in 1765 the sovereignty of parliament.
no one in britain could think of a way around this constitutional impasse.
in 1773 benjamin franklin had offered a suggestion.
the parliament he observed has no right to make any law whatever binding on the colonies.
the king and not the king lords and commons collectively is their sovereign but so long as it still seemed possible to coerce the americans into obedience to punish these errant children britains rulers had little incentive to accept such a humiliating compromise.
steps toward independence what events in 1775 and 1776 led to the colonists decision to declare independence.
during the summer of 1774 committees of correspondence analyzed the perilous situation in whic h the colonists found themselves.
something of course had to be done.
would the southern colonies support resistance in new england.
would pennsylvanians stand up to parliament.
not surprisingly the committees endorsed a steps toward independence call for a continental congress a gathering of fifty five elected delegates from twelve colonies georgia sent none but agreed to support the action taken.
this first continental congress convened in philadelphia on september 5.
it included some of americas most articulate respected leaders among them were john adams samuel adams patrick henry richard henry lee christopher gadsden and george washington.
the delegates were strangers to one another.
they knew little about the customs and values the geography and economy of britains other provinces.
as john adams explained on september 18 it has taken us much time to get acquainted with the tempers views characters and designs of persons and to let them into the circumstances of our province during the early sessions of the congress the delegates eyed each other closely trying to gain a sense of the strength and integrity of the men with whom they might commit treason.
differences of opinion soon surfaced.
delegates from the middle colonies joseph galloway of pennsylvania for example wanted to proceed with caution but samuel adams and other more radical members pushed the moderates toward confrontation.
bostons master politician engineered congressional commendation of the suffolk resolves a bold statement drawn up in suffolk county massachusetts that encouraged forcible resistance of the coercive acts.
after this decision the tone of the meeting was established.
moderate spokesmen introduced conciliatory measures which received polite discussion but failed to win a majority vote.
just before returning to their homes september 1774 the delegates created the association an intercolonial agreement to halt all commerce with britain until parliament repealed the intolerable acts.
this was a totally revolutionary decision.
the association authorized a vast network of local committees to enforce nonimportation.
violators were exposed shamed forced either to apologize publicly for their actions or to be shunned by all their patriot neighbors.
in many of the communities the committees were the government distinguishing in the words of james madison friends from foes george iii sneered at these activities.
i am not sorry he confided that the line of conduct seems now chalked out.
the new england governments are in a state of rebellion blows must decide whether they are to be subject to this country or independent shots heard around the world the king was correct.
before congress reconvened blows fell at lexington and concord two small farm villages in eastern massachusetts.
on the evening of april 18 1775 general gage dispatched troops from boston to seize rebel supplies.
paul revere a renowned silversmith and active patriot warned the colonists that the redcoats were coming.
the militia of lexington a collection of ill trained farmers boys as well as old men decided to stand on the village green on the following morning april 19 as the british soldiers passed on the road to concord.
no one planned to fight but in a moment of confusion someone probably a colonist fired the redcoats discharged a volley and eight americans lay dead.
word of the incident spread rapidly and by the time the british force reached its destination the countryside swarmed with minutemen special companies of massachusetts militia prepared to respond instantly to military emergencies.
the redcoats found nothing of significance in concord and so returned.
the long march back to boston turned into a rout.
lord percy a british officer who brought up reinforcements remarked more in surprise than bitterness that whoever looks upon them the american soldiers as an irregular mob will find himself much mistaken on june 17 colonial militiamen again held their own against seasoned troops at the battle of bunker hill actually breeds hill.
the british finally took the hill but after this costly victory in which he suffered 40 percent casualties gage complained that the americans had displayed a conduct and spirit against us they never showed against the french beginning the world over again members of the second continental congress gathered in philadelphia in may 1775.
they faced an awesome responsibility.
british government in the mainland colonies had almost ceased to function and with americans fighting redcoats the country desperately needed strong central leadership.
slowly often reluctantly congress took control of the war.
the delegates formed a continental army and appointed george washington its commander in part because he seemed to have greater military experience than anyone else available and in part because he looked like he should be commander in chief.
the delegates were also eager to select someone who did not come from massachusetts a colony that seemed already to possess too much power in national councils.
the members of congress purchased military supplies and to pay for them issued paper money.
but while they were assuming the powers of a sovereign government the congressmen refused to declare independence.
they debated and fretted listened to the appeals of moderates who played on the colonists remaining loyalty to britain and then did nothing.
the british government appeared intent on transforming colonial moderates into angry rebels.
in december 1775 parliament passed the prohibitory act declaring war on american commerce.
until the colonists begged for pardon they could not trade with the rest of the world.
the british navy blockaded their ports and seized american ships on the high seas.
lord north also hired german mercenaries the russians drove too hard a bargain to put down the rebellion.
and in america virginias royal governor lord dunmore further undermined the possibility of reconciliation by urging the colonys slaves to take up arms against their masters.
few did so but the effort to stir up black rebellion infuriated the virginia gentry.
thomas paine 1737 1809 pushed the colonists even closer to independence.
nothing in this mans background suggested he would write the most important pamphlet in american history.
in england paine had tried and failed in a number of jobs and exactly why he elected to move to america in 1774 is not clear.
while still in england paine had the good fortune to meet benjamin franklin who presented him with letters of introduction to the leading patriots of pennsylvania.
at the urging of his new american friends paine produced common sense an essay that became an instant best seller.
in only three months it sold more than 120 000 copies.
chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 common sense systematically stripped kingship of historical and theological justification.
for centuries the english had maintained the fiction that the monarch could do no wrong.
when the government oppressed the people the royal counselors received the blame.
the crown was above suspicion.
to this paine cried nonsense.
monarchs ruled by force.
george iii was simply a royal brute who by his arbitrary behavior had surrendered his claim to the colonists obedience.
the pamphlet also attacked the whole idea of a mixed and balanced constitution.
indeed common sense was a powerful democratic manifesto.
paines greatest contribution to the revolutionary cause was persuading ordinary folk to sever their ties with great britain.
it was not reasonable he argued to regard england as the mother country.
europe and not england he explained is the parent country of america.
this new world hath been the asylum for the persecuted lovers of civil and religious liberty from every part of europe no doubt that message made a deep impression on pennsylvanias german population.
the time had come for the colonists to form an independent republic.
we have it in our power paine wrote in one of his most moving statements to begin the world over again.
the birthday of a new world is at hand read the document on july 2 1776 after a long and tedious debate congress finally voted for independence.
the motion passed twelve states for none against with new york abstaining.
thomas jefferson a young virginia lawyer and planter who enjoyed a reputation as a graceful writer drafted a formal declaration that was accepted with alterations two days later.
much of the declaration of independence consisted of a list of specific grievances against george iii and his government.
like the skilled lawyer he was jefferson presented the evidence for independence.
the document did not become famous for those passages.
long after the establishment of the new republic the declaration challenged americans to make good on the principle that all men are created equal john adams nicely expressed the patriots fervor when he wrote on july 3 yesterday the greatest question was decided which ever was debated in america and a greater perhaps never was or will be decided among men many revolutionary leaders throughout the modern world in europe as in asia have echoed adamss assessment.
of all the documents written during this period including the constitution the declaration of independence remains the most powerful and radical invitation to americans of all backgrounds to demand their equality and full rights as human beings.
thomas paine a freelance writer urges his readers to use common sense the message of thomas paines pamphlet common sense title page shown was clear and direct.
paines powerful argument called for the free and independent states of america he assured ordinary americans not only that they could live without a king but also that they would win the war.
fighting for independence watch the video the american revolution as different americans saw it congress voting independence oil painting by robert edge pine and edward savage 1785.
the committee appointed by congress to draft a declaration of independence included center standing john adams roger sherman robert livingston thomas jefferson and center foreground seated benjamin franklin.
the committee members are shown submitting jeffersons draft to the speaker.
fighting for independence why did it take eight years of warfare for the americans to gain independence.
only fools and visionaries expressed optimism about americas prospects of winning independence in 1776.
the americans had taken on a formidable military power.
the population of britain was perhaps four times that of its former colonies.
england also possessed a strong manufacturing base a well trained regular army supplemented by thousands of hired german troops hessians and a navy that dominated the worlds oceans.
many british officers had battlefield experience.
they already knew what the americans would slowly learn waging war requires discipline money and sacrifice.
as later events demonstrated however britain had become involved in an impossible military situation in some ways analogous to that in which the united states would find itself in vietnam some two hundred years later.
three separate elements neutralized advantages held by the larger power over its adversary.
first the british had to transport men and supplies across the atlantic a logistic challenge of unprecedented complexity.
unreliable lines of communication broke down under the strain of war.
second america was too vast to be conquered by conventional military methods.
redcoats might gain control over the major port cities but as long as the continental army remained intact the rebellion continued.
as washington explained the possession of our towns while we have an army in the field will avail them little.
it is our arms not defenceless towns they have to subdue even if england had recruited enough soldiers to occupy the entire country it would still have lost the war.
as one loyalist instructed the king if all america becomes a garrison she is not worth your attention britain could only win by crushing the american will to resist.
and third british strategists never appreciated the depth of the americans commitment to a political ideology.
in the wars of eighteenth century europe such beliefs had seldom mattered.
european troops before the french revolution served because they were paid or because the military was a vocation but most certainly not because they hoped to advance a set of constitutional principles.
americans were different.
to be sure some young men were drawn to the military by bounty money or by the desire to escape unhappy families.
a few were drafted.
but taking such people into account one still encounters among the american troops a remarkable commitment to republican ideals.
one french officer reported from the united chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 states it is incredible that soldiers composed of men of every age even of children of fifteen of whites and blacks almost naked unpaid and rather poorly fed can march so well and withstand fire so steadfastly building a professional army during the earliest months of rebellion american soldiers especially those of new england suffered no lack of confidence.
indeed they interpreted their courageous stands at concord and bunker hill as evidence that brave yeomen farmers could lick british regulars on any battlefield.
george washington spent the first years of the war disabusing the colonists of this foolishness for as he had learned during the french and indian war military success depended on endless drill careful planning and tough discipline rigorous preparation that did not characterize the minutemens methods.
washington insisted on organizing a regular well trained field army.
some advisers urged the commander in chief to wage a guerrilla war one in which small partisan bands would sap britains will to rule americans.
but washington rejected that course.
he recognized that the continental army served not only as a fighting force but also as a symbol of the republican cause.
its very existence would sustain american hopes and so long as the army survived american agents could plausibly solicit foreign aid.
this thinking shaped washingtons wartime strategy he studiously avoided general actions in which the continental army might be destroyed.
critics complained about washingtons caution but as they soon discovered he understood better than they what independence required.
if the commander in chief was correct about the army however he failed to comprehend the political importance of the militia.
these scattered almost amateur military units seldom altered the outcome of battle but they did maintain control over large areas of the country not directly affected by the british army.
throughout the war they compelled men and women who would rather have remained neutral to actively support the american effort.
in 1777 for example the militia of farmington connecticut visited a group of suspected tories as loyalists people who sided with the king and parliament during the revolution were called and after educating these people in the fundamentals of republican ideology a militia spokesman announced they were indeed grossly ignorant of the true grounds of the present war with great britain.
but they appeared to be penitent of their former conduct and professed themselves convinced.
that there was no such thing as remaining neuters without local political coercion washingtons task would have been considerably more difficult.
for the half million african american colonists most of them slaves the fight for independence took on special poignancy.
after all they wanted to achieve personal as well as political freedom and many african americans supported those who seemed most likely to deliver them from bondage.
as one historian explained the black soldier was likely to join the side that made him the quickest and best offer in terms of those unalienable rights of which mr jefferson had spoken it is estimated that some five thousand african americans took up arms to fight against the british.
the continental army included two all black units one from massachusetts and the other from rhode island.
in 1778 the legislature of rhode island voted to free any slave who volunteered to serve since according to the lawmakers history taught that the wisest the freest and bravest nations.
liberated their slaves and enlisted them as soldiers to fight in defence of their country in the south especially in georgia and south carolina more than ten thousand african americans supported the british and after the patriots had won the war these men and women left the united states relocating to nova scotia florida and jamaica with some eventually resettling in africa.
testing the american will after the embarrassing defeats in massachusetts the king appointed general sir william howe to replace the ill fated gage.
british rulers now understood that a simple police action would not be sufficient to crush the american rebellion.
parliament authorized sending more than fifty thousand troops to the mainland colonies and after evacuating boston an untenable strategic position the british forces stormed ashore at staten island in new york harbor on july 3 1776.
from this more central location howe believed he could cut the new englanders off from the rest of america.
he enjoyed the powerful support of the british navy under the command of his brother admiral lord richard howe.
when washington learned the british were planning to occupy new york city he transferred many of his inexperienced soldiers to long island where they suffered a major defeat august 27 1776.
in a series of engagements disastrous for the americans howe drove the continental army across the hudson river into new jersey.
because of his failure to take full advantage of the situation however general howe lost what seemed in retrospect an excellent opportunity to annihilate washingtons entire army.
nevertheless the americans were on the run and in the fall of 1776 contemporaries predicted the rebels would soon capitulate.
times that try mens souls swift victories in new york and new jersey persuaded general howe that few americans enthusiastically supported independence.
he issued a general pardon therefore to anyone who would swear allegiance to george iii.
the results were encouraging.
more than three thousand men and women who lived in areas occupied by the british army took the oath.
this group included one intimidated signer of the declaration of independence.
howe perceived that a lasting peace in america would require his troops to treat our enemies as if they might one day become our friends a member of lord norths cabinet grumbled that this was a sentimental manner of making war a shortsighted view considering englands experience in attempting to pacify the irish.
the pardon plan eventually failed not because howe lacked toughness but because his soldiers and officers regarded loyal americans as inferior provincials an attitude that did little to promote good relations.
in any case as soon as the redcoats left a pardoned region the rebel militia retaliated against those who had deserted the patriot cause.
in december 1776 washingtons bedraggled army retreated across the delaware river into pennsylvania.
american prospects appeared bleaker than at any other time during the war.
the continental army lacked basic supplies and many men who had signed up for short term enlistments prepared to go home.
these are the times that try mens souls paine wrote in a pamphlet titled american crisis.
the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will in this crisis shrink from the service of their fighting for independence view the map the american revolution quebec dec 31 1775 retreat of montgomery and arnold may 7 1776 carleton three rivers june 7 1776 montgomery r io arnold oriskany aug 6 1777 gates n h bennington aug 16 1777 newburyport mass.
concord siege of boston british retreat to nova scotia july 1775 march 1776 march 17 1776 we 1 ho h 17 am rc washington s illi ma white plains retreat ir w lifax oct 28 1776 s ha is.
m ng morristown fro brooklyn heights new york lo winter quarters 1777 aug 27 1776 o we germantown admiral h oct 4 1777 aug 17 from england valley forge monmouth winter quarters court house 1777 1778 june 28 1778 penn.
brandywine n j princeton sept 11 1777 jan 3 1777 trenton dec 26 1776 md.
philadelphia washington and captured rochambeau sept 26 1777 r i conn ie m fro e how ves lin cla m at io n te et virginia pr o yorktown aug 30 oct.
19 1781 g ra ss camden aug 16 1780 wilmington co d an om n fr nto 80 cli h1 c r ma co r n wallis eutaw springs sept 8 1781 rn n wa ew ll yo i s rk gree n e e mo rg co an rn wa llis de cornwallis allis e georgia north carolina cor nw green s c ninety six abandoned by british june 1781 at l a n t i c ocean battles of the virginia capes sept 5 9 1781 americans hoped to defeat british by forcing cornwallis to divide his troops cowpens jan 17 1781 clinton town july 1776 y lafa howe guilford courthouse mar.
15 1781 kings mountain oct 7 1780 rles cha ho od and gra er e of 763 ke lexington apr.
19 1775 bunker hill june 17 1775 howe albany new york la saratoga burgoyne surrenders oct 17 1777 bemis heights oct 7 1777 ar no ld st er eg l burgoyne lake hu ron ft halifax british north america canada o n ta british launch invasions to detach new england lake arnold montreal nov 13 1775 charles town may 12 1780 savannah fell to british 1778 100 miles 100 kilometers american troop movements british troop movements french troop movements british attempt to push through carolinas and virginia the american revolution 1775 1781 american victories british victories mixed results the war for independence ranged over a huge area.
battles were fought in the colonies on the western frontier and along the gulf of mexico.
the major engagements of the first years of the war from the spontaneous rising at concord in 1775 to washingtons well coordinated attack on trenton in december 1776 were fought in the northern colonies.
in the middle theater of war burgoynes attempt in 1777 to cut off new england from the rest of the colonies failed when his army was defeated at saratoga.
action in the final years of the war from the battles at camden kings mountain cowpens and guilford courthouse to the fina l victory at yorktown occurred in the southern theater of war.
complete the assignment spains contribution to american independence on myhistorylab feature essay spains contribution to american independence s pain made a significant although much underappreciated contribution to the winning of american independence.
the decision to support american resistance against great britain came in 1779.
after an american army had won a stunning victory at the battle of saratoga in 1778 spain joined its ally france in a global contest against britain that stretched from the banks of the mississippi river to the islands of the caribbean and the straits of gibraltar.
spain had little interest in advancing the revolutionary principles of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness after all as a traditional monarchy it was not enthusiastic about championing a radical cause associated with popular rights.
rather the declaration of war against britain reflected spains desire for revenge against a long standing enemy that had seized gibraltar in 1713 and florida in 1763.
sensing that british military forces around the world were stretched too thin spain and france prepared for a conflict designed to regain lost possessions and restore imperial glory.
british leaders appreciated immediately the seriousness of the danger.
they knew that it was one thing to fight the insurgent armies of george washington quite another to take on two major european powers.
confronting the new threat lord george germain the british secretary of state assured the british people that his government would pursue the war in north america with the utmost vigor he faced a very difficult challenge.
war with france and spain forced britain to reallocate key military resources in ways that took pressure off the struggling american army.
germain ordered half of the 16 000 troops then occupying philadelphia diverted to other vulnerable regions.
approximately 5 000 were transferred to the west indies where they guarded against the possibility of french and spanish attacks against britains lucrative sugar trade.
another 3 000 were posted in florida spains former colony.
in fact worried that french and spanish warships might attack vital supply lines british leaders finally abandoned philadelphia altogether a move that allowed washington to retake the city without having to fire a shot.
anxious to recapture florida the spanish launched a bold campaign against british forts located along the coast of the gulf of mexico.
their success owed a lot to the energy and courage of bernardo de glvez the spanish governor of louisiana.
before taking this post he had compiled an impressive military record having fought against spains enemies in africa and the borderlands of northern mexico.
in fact he received the governorship of louisiana as a reward for his extraordinary service.
glvez was determined to restore spains honor in north america.
as he announced the king of spain has determined that the principal object of his arms in america during the present war will be to drive the british from the mexican gulf and the neighborhood of louisiana even before spain had officially entered the war glvez began sending vital military supplies from st louis then governed by spain to american forces operating in the west.
these materials helped george rogers clark win a string of strategic victories against british forces in the illinois territory in 1778.
if clark had failed the united states could not have creditably claimed all the land east of the mississippi river during the peace negotiations with great britain that ended the revolution.
in 1779 glvez moved decisively to drive the british from the region north of new orleans and in quick succession he captured manchac natchez and baton rouge.
glvez then turned his attention to regaining florida.
the first obstacle was mobile.
in march 1780 after a two week siege the british garrison surrendered to glvezs troops.
pensacola presented a much greater military challenge.
it served as britains administrative and commercial center for west florida.
moreover it was well defended.
glvezs courage and amazing luck allowed the spanish to carry the day.
a spanish fleet sailing out of cuba joined ships transporting glvezs soldiers in the waters off pensacola.
the admiral of the cuban fleet was reluctant to enter the port.
he feared that his vessels might run aground on sandbars.
glvez would have none of it.
he sailed his own ship boldly into the harbor and inspired by his example the captains of the other ships followed his lead.
in march 1781 they landed over 7 000 soldiers.
the battle of pensacola was hard fought.
the spanish siege lasted for over two months and just as their ammunition was running out a lucky shot hit the british powder magazine setting off a huge explosion that destroyed much of the fort.
the british force an army made up of british regulars native americans and american loyalists surrendered on may 10.
glvezs successful campaign had a major impact on the final year of the american revolution.
the growing military presence of spain and france in the west indies compelled the british to station troops in the area that could have been employed against the continental army in yorktown and new york.
moreover the fall of west florida made it harder for the british to supply their soldiers and indian allies operating in the southern mainland colonies.
although spain was unable to retake gibraltar glvez realized his goal of reclaiming florida.
he had overcome the humiliation of spains previous defeats.
in 1783 the spanish crown invited him to serve on the committee that would draw up the peace of paris ending the american revolution.
even at this moment of triumph though spain refused to recognize the sovereignty of the united states.
it was not long before spain had second thoughts about its victory over great britain.
an aggressive new enemy appeared.
every year brought a flood of american settlers into florida and the mississippi valley.
they showed not the slightest respect for spanish authority.
in 1787 the spanish governor of florida reported that the american backwoodsmen were distinguished from savages only in their color language and the superiority of their depraved cunning and untrustworthiness he believed the frontiersmen migrated to florida to escape all legal authority another spanish official warned a new and independent power has arisen on our continent he was correct.
in 1819 spain was forced to transfer florida to the united states.
questions for discussion 1.
why did spain decide to enter the revolutionary war.
why did the spanish government have misgivings about american independence.
chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 country but he that stands it now deserves.
love and thanks.
before winter washington determined to attempt one last desperate stroke.
howe played into washingtons hands.
the british forces were dispersed in small garrisons across the state of new jersey and while the americans could not possibly have defeated the combined british army they did possess the capacity with luck to capture an exposed post.
on the night of december 25 continental soldiers slipped over the ice filled delaware river and at trenton took nine hundred sleeping hessian mercenaries by complete surprise.
cheered by success washington returned a second time to trenton but on this occasion the continental army was not so fortunate.
a large british force under lord cornwallis trapped the americans.
instead of standing and fighting really an impossible challenge washington secretly by night marched his little army around cornwalliss left flank.
on january 3 1777 the americans surprised a british garrison at princeton.
washington then went into winter quarters.
the british fearful of losing more outposts consolidated their troops thus leaving much of the state in the hands of the patriot militia.
victory in a year of defeat in 1777 englands chief military strategist lord george germain still perceived the war in conventional european terms.
a large field army would somehow maneuver washingtons continental troops into a decisive battle in which the british would enjoy a clear advantage.
complete victory over the americans certainly seemed within englands grasp.
unfortunately for the men who advocated this plan the continental forces proved extremely elusive and while one british army vainly tried to corner washington in pennsylvania another was forced to surrender in the forests of upstate new york.
in the summer of 1777 general john burgoyne a dashing though overbearing officer descended from canada with a force of more than seven thousand troops.
they intended to clear the hudson valley of rebel resistance join howes army which was to come up to albany and thereby cut new england off from the other states.
burgoyne fought in a grand style.
accompanied by a german band thirty carts filled with the generals liquor and belongings and two thousand dependents and camp followers the british set out to thrash the americans.
the campaign was a disaster.
military units mostly from new england cut the enemy force apart in the deep woods north of albany.
at the battle of bennington august 16 the new hampshire militia under brigadier general john stark overwhelmed a thousand german mercenaries.
after this setback burgoynes forces struggled forward desperately hoping that howe would rush to their rescue but when it became clear that their situation at saratoga was hopeless the haughty burgoyne was forced to surrender fifty eight hundred men to the american general horatio gates october 17.
soon after burgoyne left canada general howe unexpectedly decided to move his main army from new york city to philadelphia.
exactly what he hoped to achieve was not clear even to britains rulers and of course when burgoyne called for assistance howe was sitting in the new nations capital still trying to devise a way to destroy the continental army.
howes campaign began in late july.
the british forces sailed to the head of the chesapeake bay and then marched north to philadelphia.
washingtons troops obstructed the enemys progress first at brandywine creek september 11 and then at paoli september 20 but the outnumbered americans could not stop the british from entering philadelphia.
anxious lest these defeats discourage congress and the american people washington attempted one last battle before the onset of winter.
in an engagement at germantown october 4 the americans launched a major counterattack on a fog covered battlefield but just at the moment when success seemed assured they broke off the fight.
when every thing gave the most flattering hopes of victory washington complained the troops began suddenly to retreat bad luck confusion and incompetence contributed to the failure.
a discouraged continental army dug in at valley forge twenty miles outside of philadelphia where camp diseases took twenty five hundred american lives.
in their misery few american soldiers realized their situation was not nearly as desperate as it had been in 1776.
the french alliance even before the americans declared their independence agents of the government of louis xvi began to explore ways to aid the colonists not so much because the french monarchy favored the republican cause but because it hoped to embarrass the english.
the french deeply resented the defeat they had sustained during the seven years war.
during the early months of the revolution the french covertly sent tons of essential military supplies to the americans.
the negotiations for these arms involved secret agents and fictitious trading companies the type of clandestine operation more typical of modern times than of the eighteenth century.
but when american representatives benjamin franklin for one pleaded for official recognition of american independence or for outright military alliance the french advised patience.
the international stakes were too great for the king to openly back a cause that had little chance of success.
the american victory at saratoga convinced the french that the rebels had formidable forces and were serious in their resolve.
indeed lord north drew the same conclusion.
when news of saratoga reached london north muttered this damned war in private conversation he expressed doubts about englands ability to win the contest knowing the french would soon enter the fray.
in paris franklin performed brilliantly.
in meetings with french officials he hinted that the americans might accept a british peace initiative.
if the french wanted the war to continue if they really wanted to embarrass their old rival then they had to do what the english refused formally recognize the independence of the united states.
the stratagem paid off handsomely.
on february 6 1778 the french presented american representatives with two separate treaties.
the first called the treaty of amity and commerce established commercial relations between france and the united states.
it tacitly accepted the existence of a new independent republic.
the treaty of alliance was even more generous considering americas obvious military and economic weaknesses.
in the event that france and england went to war they did so on june 14 as everyone expected the french agreed to reject either truce or peace with great britain.
until the independence of the united states fighting for independence shall have been formally or tacitly assured by the treaty or treaties that shall terminate the war even more amazing france surrendered its claim to all territories formerly owned by great britain east of the mississippi river.
the americans pledged they would not sign a separate peace with britain without first informing their new ally.
and in return france made no claim to canada asking only for the right to take possession of certain british islands in the caribbean.
never had franklin worked his magic to greater effect.
french intervention instantly transformed british military strategy.
what had been a colonial rebellion suddenly became a world conflict a continuation of the great wars for empire of the late seventeenth century see chapter 4.
scarce military resources especially newer fighting ships had to be diverted from the american theater to guard the english channel.
in fact there was talk in london of a possible french invasion.
although the threat of such an assault was not very great until 1779 the british did have cause for concern.
the french navy posed a serious challenge to the overextended british fleet.
by concentrating their warships in a specific area the french could hold off or even defeat british squadrons an advantage that would figure significantly in the american victory at yorktown.
the final campaign british general henry clinton replaced howe who resigned after the battle of saratoga.
clinton was a strangely complex individual.
as a subordinate officer he had impressed his superiors as imaginative but easily provoked to anger.
when he took command of the british army his resolute self confidence suddenly dissolved.
perhaps he feared failure.
whatever the explanation for his vacillation clintons record in america was little better than howes or gages.
military strategists calculated that britains last chance of winning the war lay in the southern colonies a region largely untouched in the early years of fighting.
intelligence reports reaching london indicated that georgia and south carolina contained a sizable body of loyalists men who would take up arms for the crown if only they received support and encouragement from the regular army.
the southern strategy devised by germain and clinton in 1779 turned the war into a bitter guerrilla conflict and during the last months of battle british officers worried that their search for an easy victory had inadvertently opened a pandoras box of uncontrollable partisan furies.
the southern campaign opened in the spring of 1780.
savannah had already fallen and clinton reckoned that if the british could take charles town they would be able to control the entire south.
a large fleet carrying nearly eight thousand redcoats reached south carolina in february.
complacent americans had allowed the citys fortifications to decay and in a desperate last minute effort to preserve charles town general benjamin lincolns forces dug trenches and reinforced walls but to no avail.
clinton and his second in command general cornwallis gradually encircled the city and on may 12 lincoln surrendered an american army of almost six thousand men.
the defeat took congress by surprise and without making proper preparations it dispatched a second army to south carolina under horatio gates the hero of saratoga.
he too failed.
at camden cornwallis outmaneuvered the raw american recruits capturing or killing 750 during the course of battle august 16.
poor gates galloped from the scene and did not stop until he reached hillsboro north carolina two hundred miles away.
major battles of the american revolution battle lexington concord bunker hill montreal quebec brooklyn heights white plains trenton princeton bennington brandywine saratoga first battle freemans farm philadelphia captured germantown saratoga second battle bemis heights charles town camden kings mountain cowpens guilford courthouse yorktown date apr.
19 1775 apr.
19 1775 jun.
17 1775 nov 13 1775 dec 31 1775 aug 27 1776 oct 28 1776 dec 26 1776 jan 3 1777 aug 16 1777 sept 11 1777 sept 19 1777 victor british americans mixed results americans british british british americans americans americans british mixed results sept 26 1777 oct 4 1777 oct 7 1777 british british americans may 12 1780 aug 16 1780 oct 7 1780 jan 17 1781 mar.
15 1781 aug 30 oct 18 british british americans americans british americans and french even at this early stage of the southern campaign the dangers of partisan warfare had become evident.
tory raiders showed little interest in serving as regular soldiers in cornwalliss army.
they preferred night riding indiscriminate plundering or murdering of neighbors against whom they harbored ancient grudges.
the british had unleashed a horde of banditti across south carolina.
men who genuinely supported independence or who had merely fallen victim to loyalist guerrillas bided their time.
they retreated westward waiting for their enemies to make a mistake.
their chance came on october 7 at kings mountain north carolina.
in the most vicious fighting of the revolution the backwoodsmen decimated a force of british regulars and tory raiders who had strayed too far from base.
one witness reported that when a british officer tried to surrender he was summarily shot down by at least seven american soldiers.
cornwallis badly confused and poorly supplied squandered his strength chasing american forces across the carolinas.
congress sent general nathanael greene to the south with a new army.
this young rhode islander was the most capable general on washingtons staff.
greene joined daniel morgan leader of the famed virginia riflemen and in a series of tactically brilliant engagements they sapped the strength of cornwalliss army first at cowpens south carolina january 17 1781 and later at guilford courthouse north carolina march 15.
clinton fumed in new york city.
in his estimation the inept cornwallis had left two valuable colonies chapter 5 the american revolution from elite protest to popular revolt 1763 1783 bri ti sh no rth am eri ca no va ia ot c s halifax the loyalist dilemma why did so many loyalists decide to leave the united states during the revolution.
no one knows for certain how many americans actually supported the crown n h during the revolution.
some loyalists boston undoubtedly kept silent and avoided making ario t n new mass.
l o york a public commitment that might have led to newport conn 1776 1778 banishment or loss of property.
but for many persons neutrality proved impossible.
almost e r i i er new york one hundred thousand men and women l philadelphia permanently left america.
while a number 1777 1778 n j of these exiles had served as imperial office pa at l a n t i c ocean holders thomas hutchinson for example md.
in the main they came from all ranks and backgrounds.
a large number of humble farmers more than thirty thousand resettled virginia in canada.
others relocated to england the norfolk west indies or africa.
the political ideology of the loyalists north was not substantially different from that of carolina their opponents.
like other americans they believed that men and women were entitled wilmington to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
south the loyalists were also convinced that indecarolina pendence would destroy those values by proloyalist strongholds charleston moting disorder.
by turning their backs on indians loyalist or neutral britain a source of tradition and stability savannah 200 miles strongly contested areas georgia the rebels seemed to have encouraged licen0 200 kilometers patriot strongholds tiousness even anarchy in the streets.
the loyalists suspected that patriot demands for loyalist strongholds the highest concentrations of loyalists were in the colonies of freedom were self serving even hypocritinew york north carolina south carolina and georgia especially in the areas around port cities such cal for as perserved smith a loyalist from as new york city wilmington charleston and savannah.
ashfield massachusetts observed sons of liberty.
did not deserve the name for it was evident all they wanted was liberty from oppression that they might have liberty behind him to be overrun and conquered by the very army which he to oppress boasts to have completely routed but a week or two before the loyalists were caught in a difficult squeeze.
the british cornwallis pushed north into virginia planning apparently to never quite trusted them.
after all they were americans.
during the establish a base of operations on the coast.
he selected yorktown early stages of the war loyalists organized militia companies and a sleepy tobacco market located on a peninsula bounded by the hoped to pacify large areas of the countryside with the support of the york and james rivers.
washington watched these maneuvers regular army.
the british generals were unreliable partners however closely.
the canny virginia planter knew this territory intimately for no sooner had they called on loyal americans to come forward and he sensed that cornwallis had made a serious blunder.
when than the redcoats marched away leaving the tories exposed to rebel washington learned the french fleet could gain temporary domiretaliation.
and in england the exiles found themselves treated as nance in the chesapeake bay he rushed south from new jersey.
second class citizens.
while many of them received monetary comwith him marched thousands of well trained french troops pensation for their sacrifice they were never regarded as the equals of under the comte de rochambeau.
all the pieces fell into place.
native born english citizens.
not surprisingly the loyalist commuthe french admiral the comte de grasse cut cornwallis off from nity in london was gradually transformed into a collection of bitter the sea while washington and his lieutenants encircled the british men and women who felt unwelcome on both sides of the atlantic.
on october 19 1781 cornwallis surrendered his entire americans who actively supported independence saw these army of six thousand men.
when lord north heard of the defeat people as traitors who deserved their fate of constant often vioat yorktown he moaned oh god.
it is all over the british still lent harassment.
in many states but especially in new york controlled new york city and charles town but except for a few revolutionary governments confiscated loyalist property.
other skirmishes the fighting ended.
the task of securing the indepenfriends of the king received beatings or as the rebels called them dence of the united states was now in the hands of the diplomats.
l vt hu ro a p pa la c hi an mo un ta in s n study resources grand toory sic rides a few were even executed.
according to one patriot a tory is a thing whose head is in england and its body in america and its neck ought to be stretched long after the victorious americans turned their attentions to the business of building a new republic loyalists remembered a receding colonial past a comfortable ordered world that had been lost forever at yorktown.
although many loyalists eventually returned to their homes a sizable number could not do so.
for them the sense of loss remained a heavy emotional burden.
perhaps the most poignant testimony came from a young mother living in exile in nova scotia.
i climbed to the top of chipmans hill and watched the sails disappear in the distance she recounted and such a feeling of loneliness came over me that though i had not shed a tear through all the war i sat down on the damp moss with my baby on my lap and cried bitterly winning the peace how did benjamin franklin john adams and john jay secure a better peace treaty than congress could have expected.
congress appointed a skilled delegation to negotiate a peace treaty benjamin franklin john adams and john jay.
according to their official instructions they were to insist only on the recognition of the independence of the united states.
on other issues congress ordered its delegates to defer to the counsel of the french government.
but the political environment in paris was much different from what the diplomats had been led to expect.
the french had formed a military alliance with spain and french officials announced that they could not consider the details of an american settlement until after the spanish had recaptured gibraltar from the british.
the prospects for a spanish victory were not good and in any case it was well known that spain coveted the lands lying between the appalachian mountains and the mississippi river.
indeed there were even rumors afloat in paris that the great european powers might intrigue to deny the united states its independence.
while the three american delegates publicly paid their respects to french officials they secretly entered into negotiations with an english agent.
the peacemakers drove a remarkable bargain a much better one than congress could have expected.
the preliminary agreement the treaty of paris of 1783 signed on september 3 not only guaranteed the independence of the united states it also transferred all the territory east of the mississippi river except spanish florida to the new republic.
the treaty established generous boundaries on the north and south and gave the americans important fishing rights in the north atlantic.
in exchange congress promised to help british merchants collect debts contracted before the revolution and compensate loyalists whose lands had been confiscated by the various state governments.
even though the americans negotiated separately with the british they did not sign a separate peace.
the preliminary treaty did not become effective until france reached its own agreement with great britain.
thus did the americans honor the french alliance.
it is difficult to imagine how franklin adams and jay could have negotiated a more favorable conclusion to the war.
in the fall of 1783 the last redcoats sailed from new york city ending 176 years of colonial rule.
conclusion preserving independence the american people had waged war against the most powerful nation in europe and emerged victorious.
the treaty marked the conclusion of a colonial rebellion but it remained for the men and women who had resisted taxation without representation to work out the full implications of republicanism.
what would be the shape of the new government.
what powers would be delegated to the people the states the federal authorities.
how far would the wealthy well born leaders of the rebellion be willing to extend political social and economic rights.
for many americans the challenge of nation building appeared even more formidable than waging war against great britain.
as philadelphia physician dr benjamin rush explained there is nothing more common than to confound the terms of american revolution with those of the late american war.
the american war is over but this is far from being the case with the american revolution.
on the contrary nothing but the first act of the great drama is closed study resources take the study plan for chapter 5 the american revolution on myhistorylab time line 1763 peace of paris ends the seven years war 1764 parliament passes sugar act to collect american revenue stamp act receives support of house of commons march stamp act congress meets in new york city october 1766 stamp act repealed the same day that declaratory act becomes law march 18 1767 townshend revenue acts stir american anger june july 1768 massachusetts assembly refuses to rescind circular letter february chapter 5 chapter review 1770 parliament repeals all townshend duties except one on tea march british troops massacre boston civilians march samuel adams forms committee of correspondence lord norths government passes tea act may bostonians hold tea party december parliament punishes boston with coercive acts march june first continental congress convenes september patriots take stand at lexington and concord april second continental congress gathers may americans hold their own at bunker hill june 1776 congress votes for independence declaration of independence is signed british defeat washington at long island august americans score victory at trenton december general burgoyne surrenders at saratoga october french treaties recognize independence of the united states february british take charles town may washington forces cornwallis to surrender at yorktown october peace treaty signed september british evacuate new york city november chapter review e graves how the loyalist dilemma l e ri e n philadelphia 1777 1778 n j md.
why did so many loyalists decide to leave the united states during the revolution.
un ta in s pa virginia mo almost 100 000 loyalists permanently left america during the revolution.
while some loyalists had held office under the crown before the revolution many others believed that independence from britain would destroy traditional values and lead to anarchy and new forms of oppression.
p 126 la c hi an norfolk north carolina pa wars in america were expensive.
parliament established the proclamation line of 1763 to reduce the costs of protecting the frontier but this angered colonists seeking new lands in the west.
parliament also concluded that the colonists should help reduce the national debt but when it passed the stamp act 1765 americans protested.
colonists boycotted british manufactured goods.
taken aback parliament repealed the hated statute while maintaining in the declaratory act 1766 its complete legislative authority over the americans.
p 108 howe clinto tow what events eroded the bonds of empire during the 1760s.
to win their independence the colonies first had to overcome the formidable military power of great britain.
britain had four times the population of the colonies was the worlds leading manufacturer had a well trained and experienced army and the worlds best navy.
the outgunned colonists had to rely on a war of attrition.
it was only after the victory at saratoga in 1777 convinced the french to enter into an alliance that the colonists were able to win conclusive battles and successfully end the war.
p 119 rles cha eroding the bonds of empire why did it take eight years of warfare for the americans to gain independence.
m fro during the 1760s british rulers claimed that parliament could make laws for the colonists in all cases whatsoever americans challenged this parliamentary sovereignty drawing on the work of john locke the english philosopher they insisted that god had given them certain natural and inalienable rights.
by attempting to tax them without representation parliament threatened those rights.
p 106 r i conn washington s white plains retreat oct 28 1776 s is.
ng morristown fro new york lo winter quarters 1777 germantown ad oct 4 1777 from e ey forge monmouth quarters court house 77 1778 june 28 1778 andywine n j princeton t 11 1777 jan 3 1777 trenton dec 26 1776 md.
philadelphia d captured u sept 26 1777 wilmington p why did americans resist parliamentary taxation.
fighting for independence a structure of colonial society south winning the peace steps toward independence what events in 1775 and 1776 led to the colonists decision to declare independence.
how did benjamin franklin john adams and john jay secure a better peace treaty than congress could have expected.
in 1775 following battles at lexington and concord militiamen from throughout new england descended upon boston besieging the british troops encamped there.
in response the continental congress formed the continental army and appointed george washington commander.
in 1776 thomas paines common sense convinced colonists that a republic was a better form of government than monarchy and congress declared independence.
p 116 apart from insisting that britain recognize the independence of the united states congress instructed franklin adams and jay to defer to the counsels of the french government during the peace conference.
but by conducting secret and separate negotiations with the british the american delegates were also able to secure all the territory east of the mississippi river except spanish florida for the new republic and to gain important fishing rights for americans in the north atlantic.
p 127 study resources key terms and definitions whigs in mid eighteenth century britain the whigs were a political faction that dominated parliament.
generally they opposed royal influence in government and wanted to increase the power of parliament.
in america a whig party coalesced in the 1830s in opposition to president andrew jackson.
the american whigs supported federal power and internal improvements but not territorial expansion.
the whig party collapsed in the 1850s.
p 106 parliamentary sovereignty principle that emphasized parliaments power to govern colonial affairs.
p 107 stamp act of 1765 placed a tax on newspapers and printed matter produced in the colonies causing mass opposition by colonists.
p 110 stamp act congress meeting of colonial delegates in new york city in october 1765 to protest the stamp act a law passed by parliament to raise revenue in america.
p 111 boston massacre a violent clash between british troops and a boston mob on march 5 1770.
five citizens were killed when the troops fired into the crowd.
the incident inflamed anti british sentiment in massachusetts.
p 113 coercive acts also known as the intolerable acts the four pieces of legislation passed by parliament in response to the boston tea party to punish massachusetts.
p 115 first continental congress a meeting of delegates from 12 colonies in philadelphia in 1774 the congress denied parliaments authority to legislate for the colonies condemned british actions toward the colonies created the continental association and endorsed a call to take up arms.
p 117 second continental congress a gathering of colonial representatives in philadelphia in 1775 that organized the continental army and began requisitioning men and supplies for the war effort.
p 117 common sense revolutionary tract written by thomas paine in 1776.
it called for independence and a republican government in america.
p 117 loyalists colonists sided with britain during the american revolution.
p 120 committee of correspondence communication network formed in massachusetts and other colonies to communicate grievances and provide colonists with evidence of british oppression.
p 114 yorktown virginia market town on a peninsula bounded by the york and james rivers where lord cornwalliss army was trapped by the americans and french in 1781 p 125 boston tea party raid on british ships in which patriots disguised as mohawks threw hundreds of chests of tea owned by the east india company into boston harbor to protest british taxes.
p 115 treaty of paris of 1783 agreement establishing american independence after the revolutionary war.
it also transferred territory east of the mississippi river except for spanish florida to the new republic.
p 127 critical thinking questions 1.
were british political leaders or american agitators more to blame for the imperial crisis.
did lexington and concord make national independence inevitable.
given the logistical problems facing the british could they have 2.
with more enlightened leadership could the king and parliament have possibly won the revolutionary war.
preserved britains american empire.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 5 on myhistorylab eroding the bonds of empire steps toward independence read the document james otis the rights of the british colonies asserted and proved p 109 read the document benjamin franklin testimony against the stamp act 1766 p 111 listen to the audio file read the document thomas paine a freelance writer urges his readers to use common sense p 118 watch the video the american revolution as different americans saw it p 119 the liberty song p 112 fighting for independence read the document read the document boston gazette description of the boston massacre p 113 george r t hewes a retrospect on the boston tea party p 115 view the map the american revolution p 121 complete the assignment spains contribution to american independence p 122 indicates study plan media assignment the republican experiment contents and learning objectives defining republican culture pg.
131 strengthening federal authority pg.
141 what were the limits of equality in the republican society of the new united states.
what did the nationalists call for and how did they aim to achieve their initiatives.
living in the shadow of revolution pg.
132 we fought for this pg.
143 during the 1780s why were americans so sensitive to the dangers of aristocratic display.
why did constitutional delegates compromise on representation and slavery.
the states experiments in republicanism pg.
136 whose constitution.
struggle for ratification pg.
150 following independence why did the states insist on drafting written constitutions.
what issues separated federalists from antifederalists during debates over ratification.
stumbling toward a new national government pg.
137 feature essay the elusive constitution search for original intent why did many americans regard the articles of confederation as inadequate.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab 44 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic uictadv the declaration of history independence el 7 video the year is 1787.
you have recently helped your fellow patriots overthrow decades of oppressive british rule.
however it is easier to destroy an old system of government than to create a new one.
in a world of kings and tyrants your new republic struggles to find its place.
as you read the chapter and explore the issues below use the annotation tools in your ebook to record your thoughts.
explore the issues which should have more power the states or the national government.
how can the new nation avoid a return to tyranny.
how can the rights of all people be protected.
1781 the british surrender at yorktown.
1786 daniel shays leads a rebellion against higher taxes.
1788 the constitution is ratified.
i 831 wasbihgtof is elected president 117921 george washington is reelected.
j 1781 joseph ii 1785 british allows religious preacher edmund toleration in cartwright invents austria.
the first power loom.
1787 sierra leone in africa is made a haven for freed american slaves.
1789 the french revolution starts.
1793 french king louis xvi is executed.
review unit 45 colonial resistance and rebellion main idea i why it matters now j terms names conflicts between great britain and the american colonies escalated until the colonists finally declared their independence.
the ideas put forth by the colonists in the declaration of independence remain the guiding principles of the united states today.
king george iii john locke sugar act common sense stamp act thomas jefferson samuel adams declaration of boston massacre independence boston tea party poneamerican s story.
taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major events of the conflict between great britain and the american colonies.
crispus attucks was a sailor of african and native american ancestry.
on the night of march 5 1770 he was part of a large and angry crowd that had gathered at the boston customs house to harass the british soldiers stationed there.
more soldiers soon arrived and the mob began hurling stones and snowballs at them.
attucks then stepped forward.
a personal voice john adams this attucks appears to have undertaken to be the hero of the night and to lead this army with banners up to king street with their clubs.
this man with his party cried do not be afraid of them.
he had hardiness enough to fall in upon them and with one hand took hold of a bayonet and with the other knocked the man down.
quoted in the black presence in the era of the american revolution crispus attucks attucks s action ignited the troops.
ignoring orders not to shoot civilians one soldier and then others fired on the crowd.
five people were killed several were wounded.
crispus attucks was according to a newspaper account the first to die.
the colonies organize to resist britain because the proclamation of 1763 sought to halt expansion by the colonists west of the appalachian mountains it convinced the colonists that the british government did not care about their needs.
a second result of the french and indian war britain s financial crisis brought about new laws that reinforced the colonists opinion.
the sugar act great britain had borrowed so much money during the war that it nearly doubled its national debt.
king george iii who had succeeded his grandfather in 1760 hoped to lower that debt.
to do so in 1763 the king chose a financial expert george grenville to serve as prime minister.
revolution and the early republic chapter 2 main idea analyzing issues how did the sugar act cause tension between the colonists and britain.
j main idea summarizing jbj how did the colonists respond to the stamp act and the townshend acts.
by the time grenville took over tensions between britain and one colony massachusetts were on the rise.
during the french and indian war the british had cracked down on colonial smuggling to ensure that merchants were not doing business in any french held territories.
in 1761 the royal governor of massachusetts authorized the use of the writs of assistance a general search warrant that allowed british customs officials to search any colonial ship or building they believed to be holding smuggled goods.
because many merchants worked out of their residences the writs enabled british officials to enter and search colonial homes whether there was evidence of smuggling or not.
the merchants of boston were outraged.
grenville s actions however soon angered merchants throughout the colonies.
the new prime minister noticed that the american customs service which collected duties or taxes on imports was losing money.
grenville concluded that the colonists were smuggling goods into the country without paying duties.
in 1764 he prompted parliament to enact a law known as the sugar act.
the sugar act did three things.
it halved the duty on foreign made molasses in the hopes that colonists would pay a lower tax rather than risk arrest by smuggling.
it placed duties on certain imports that had not been taxed before.
most important it provided that colonists accused of violating the act would be tried in a vice admiralty court rather than a colonial court.
there each case would be decided by a single judge rather than by a jury of sympathetic colonists.
colonial merchants complained that the sugar act would reduce their profits.
merchants and traders further claimed that parliament had no right to tax the colonists because the colonists had not elected representatives to the body.
the new regulations however had little effect on colonists besides merchants and traders.
the stamp act in march 1765 parliament passed the stamp act.
this act imposed a tax on documents and printed items such as wills newspapers and playing cards.
a stamp would be placed on the items to prove that the tax had been paid.
it was the first tax that affected colonists directly because it was levied on goods and services.
previous taxes had been indirect involving duties on imports.
in may of 1765 the colonists united to defy the law.
boston shopkeepers artisans and laborers organized a secret resistance group called the sons of liberty to protest the law.
meanwhile the colonial assemblies declared that parliament lacked the power to impose taxes on the colonies because the colonists were not represented in parliament.
in october 1765 merchants in new york boston and philadelphia agreed to a boycott of british goods until the stamp act was repealed.
the widespread boycott worked and in march 1766 parliament repealed the law.
but on the same day that it repealed the stamp act parliament passed the declaratory act which asserted parliament s full right to bind the colonies and people of america in all cases whatsoever.
then in 1767 parliament passed the townshend acts named after charles townshend the leading government minister the townshend acts taxed goods that were imported into the colony from britain such as lead glass paint and paper.
the acts also imposed a tax on tea the most popular drink in the colonies.
led by men such as samuel adams one of the founders of the sons of liberty the colonists again boycotted british goods.
e sow thejy proposition 13 a more recent tax revolt occurred in california on june 6 1978 when residents voted in a tax reform law known as proposition 13.
by the late 1970s taxes in california were among the highest in the nation.
the property tax alone was fifty two percent above the national norm.
proposition 13 initiated by ordinary citizens limited the tax on real property to one percent of its assessed value in 1975 1976.
it passed with sixty five percent of the vote.
because of the resulting loss of revenue many state agencies were scaled down or cut.
in 1984 california voters approved a state lottery that provides supplemental funds for education.
but proposition 13 still remains a topic of heated debate as californians like other americans across the country struggle with conflicting desires more government services vs less taxes.
review unit 47 british actions and colonial reactions 1765 1775 stamp act british action britain passes the stamp act a tax law requiring colonists to purchase special stamps to prove payment of tax.
colonial reaction colonists harass stamp distributors boycott british goods and prepare a declaration of rights and grievances.
townshend acts boston massacre british action britain taxes certain colonial imports and stations troops at major colonial ports to protect customs officers colonial reaction colonists protest taxation without representation and organize a new boycott of imported goods.
british action taunted by an angry mob british troops fire into the crowd killing five colonists.
colonial reaction colonial agitators label the conflict a massacre and publish a dramatic engraving depicting the violence.
this colonial engraving was meant to warn of the effects of the stamp act.
tension mounts in massachusetts as hostilities between the colonists and the british mounted the atmosphere in boston grew increasingly tense.
the city soon erupted in bloody clashes and later in a daring tax protest all of which pushed the colonists and britain closer to war.
violence erupts in boston on march 5 1770 a mob gathered in front of the boston customs house and taunted the british soldiers standing guard there.
shots were fired and five colonists including crispus attucks were killed or mortally wounded.
colonial leaders quickly labeled the confrontation the boston massacre.
despite strong feelings on both sides the political atmosphere relaxed somewhat during the next three years.
lord frederick north who later followed grenville as the prime minister realized that the townshend acts were costing more to enforce than they would ever bring in in their first year for example the taxes raised only 295 pounds while the cost of sending british troops to boston history through background pounds are the basic monetary unit of british currency.
art the boston massacre 1770 paul revere was not only a patriot but a silversmith and an engraver as well.
one of the best known of his engravings depicting the boston massacre is a masterful piece of anti british propaganda.
widely circulated reveres engraving played a key role in rallying revolutionary fervor.
the sign above the soldiers reads butchers hall the british commander captain preston standing at the far right of the engraving appears to be inciting the troops to fire.
in fact he tried to calm the situation.
at the center foreground is a small dog a detail that gave credence to the rumor that following the shootings dogs licked the blood of the victims from the street.
skillbuilder interpreting visual sources 1.
according to the details of the engraving what advantages do the soldiers have that the colonists do not.
what point does the artist make through this contrast.
what do you think is the intended message behind the artists use of smoke spreading out from the soldiers rifles.
48 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic h tea act british action britain gives the east india company special concessions in the colonial tea business and shuts out colonial tea merchants.
colonial reaction colonists in boston rebel dumping 18 000 pounds of east india company tea into boston harbor intolerable acts british action king george iii tightens control over massachusetts by closing boston harbor and quartering troops.
lexington and concord colonial reaction colonial leaders form the first continental congress and draw up a declaration of colonial rights.
british action general gage orders troops to march to concord massachusetts and seize colonial weapons.
colonial reaction minutemen intercept the british and engage in battle first at lexington and then at concord.
a this bottle contains tea that skillbuilder interpreting charts in what ways did colonial reaction to british rule intensify between 1765 and 1775.
was over 170 000 pounds.
north persuaded parliament to repeal the townshend acts except for the tax on tea.
tensions rose again in 1772 when a group of rhode island colonists attacked a british customs schooner that patrolled the coast for smugglers.
the colonists boarded the vessel which had accidentally run aground near providence and burned it to the waterline.
in response king george named a special commission to seek out the suspects and bring them to england for trial.
the plan to haul americans to england for trial ignited widespread alarm.
the assemblies of massachusetts and virginia set up committees of correspondence to communicate with other colonies about this and other threats to american liber ties.
by 1774 such committees formed a buzzing communication network linking leaders in nearly all the colonies.
colonists threw into boston harbor during the boston tea party.
the boston tea party in 1773 lord north devised the tea act in order to save the nearly bankrupt british east india company.
the act granted the company the right to sell tea to the colonies free of the taxes that colonial tea sellers had to pay.
this action would have cut colonial merchants out of the tea trade by enabling the east india company to sell its tea directly to consumers for less.
north hoped the american colonists would simply buy the cheaper tea instead they protested dramatically.
on the moonlit evening of december 16 1773 a large group of boston rebels disguised themselves as native americans and proceeded to take action against three british tea ships anchored in the harbor.
in this incident later known as the boston tea party the indians dumped 18 000 pounds of the east india company s tea into the waters of boston harbor.
main idea analyzing motives what do you think king george set out to achieve when he disciplined massachusetts.
the intolerable acts an infuriated king george iii pressed parliament to act.
in 1774 parliament responded by passing a series of measures that colonists called the intolerable acts.
one law shut down boston harbor.
another the quartering act authorized british commanders to house soldiers in vacant private homes and other buildings.
in addition to these measures general thomas gage commander in chief of british forces in north america was appointed the new governor of massachusetts.
to keep the peace he placed boston under martial law or rule imposed by military forces.
in response to britain s actions the committees of correspondence assembled the first continental congress.
in september 1774 56 delegates met in philadelphia and drew up a declaration of colonial rights.
they defended the colonies right to run their own affairs and stated that if the british used force against the colonies the colonies should fight back.
review unit 49 the battle of lexington as depicted in a mid nineteenth century painting.
the road to revolution after the first continental congress met colonists in many eastern new england towns stepped up military preparations.
minutemen civilian soldiers who pledged to be ready to fight against the british on a minute s notice quietly stockpiled firearms and gunpowder.
general thomas gage soon learned about these activities.
in the spring of 1775 he ordered troops to march from boston to nearby concord massachusetts and to seize illegal weapons.
fighting at lexington and concord colonists in boston were watching and on the night of april 18 1775 paul revere william dawes and samuel prescott rode out to spread word that 700 british troops were headed for concord.
the darkened countryside rang with church bells and gunshots prearranged signals sent from town to town that the british were coming.
the king s troops known as redcoats because of their uniforms reached lexington massachusetts five miles short of concord on the cold windy dawn of april 19.
as they neared the town they saw 70 minutemen drawn up in lines on the village green.
the british commander ordered the minutemen to lay down their arms and leave and the colonists began to move out without laying down their muskets.
then someone fired and the british soldiers sent a volley of shots into the departing militia.
eight minutemen were killed and ten more were wounded but only one british soldier was injured.
the battle of lexington the first battle of the revolutionary war lasted only 15 minutes.
the british marched on to concord where they found an empty arsenal.
after a brief skirmish with minutemen the british soldiers lined up to march back to boston but the march quickly became a slaughter.
between 3 000 and 4 000 minutemen had assembled by now and they fired on the marching troops from behind stone walls and trees.
british soldiers fell by the dozen.
bloodied and humiliated the remaining british soldiers made their way back to boston that night.
colonists had become enemies of britain and now held boston and its encampment of british troops under siege.
main idea evaluating 4 do you think the british underestimated the colonists in 1770 1775.
50 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic vocabulary reconciliation the restoration of a former state of harmony or friendship main idea developing historical perspective do you think that the olive branch petition was too little too late.
the second continental congress in may of 1775 colonial leaders called the second continental congress in philadelphia to debate their next move.
the loyalties that divided colonists sparked endless debates at the second continental congress.
some delegates called for independence while others argued for reconciliation with great britain.
despite such differences the congress agreed to recognize the colonial militia as the continental army and appointed george washington as its commander.
the battle of bunker hill cooped up in boston british general thomas gage decided to strike at militiamen on breed s hill north of the city and near bunker hill.
on june 17 1775 gage sent 2 400 british soldiers up the hill.
the colonists held their fire until the last minute and then began to mow down the advancing redcoats before finally retreating.
by the time the smoke cleared the colonists had lost 450 men while the british had suffered over 1 000 casualties.
the misnamed battle of bunker hill would prove to be the deadliest battle of the war.
by july the second continental congress was readying the colonies for war though still hoping for peace.
most of the delegates like most colonists felt deep loyalty to george iii and blamed the bloodshed on the king s ministers.
on july 8 congress sent the king the so called olive branch petition urging a return to the former harmony between britain and the colonies king george flatly rejected the petition.
furthermore he issued a proclamation stating that the colonies were in rebellion and urged parliament to order a naval blockade to isolate a line of ships meant for the american coast.
contributions of select founding fathers charles carroll served as a delegate to the continental congress and signed the declaration of independence helped to write marylands constitution of 1776 served in the u s senate from 1789 to 1792 john hancock served as president of the continental congress and became the first member to sign the declaration of independence commissioned george washington to lead the continental army as governor led massachusetts to ratify the u s constitution john peter muhlenberg member of the virginia house of burgesses and the pennsylvania assembly commissioned as a general in the continental army in 1777 elected to the u s senate benjamin rush author of an anti slavery pamphlet member of the continental congress and signer of the declaration of independence served as surgeon general of the continental army appointed treasurer of the u s mint in 1797 jonathan trumbull sr as governor of the colony of connecticut sided with the colonists the only governor of an english colony to do so provided much needed personnel and supplies for the continental army john witherspoon a presbyterian minister who moved to america to be the president of the college of new jersey later princeton university and became a social and religious leader served as a delegate to the continental congress and signed the declaration of independence skillbuilder choose one indivic to lead the colonie interpreting charts jual from the chart above and explain how his contributions helped s to independence and to develop the new democratic republic.
review unit 51 thomas paines pamphlet common sense helped to overcome many colonists doubts about separating from britain.
common t tb.
habitants a m e r i c a ob uib followiog sub 1 w 3 5 tfmmighd on a parent stitt.
of amuitu afctn of af pnftnt ability at astrin witk saw aiif.
ttiottto ibaduphu ti ijr m bell fa tw smbt.
the patriots declare independence despite the growing crisis many colonists were uncertain about the idea of independence.
following the olive branch petition public opinion began to shift.
the ideas behind the revolution this shift in public opinion occurred in large part because of the enlightenment ideas that had spread throughout the colonies in the 1760s and 1770s.
one of the key enlightenment thinkers was english philosopher john locke.
locke maintained that people have natural rights to life liberty and property.
furthermore he contended every society is based on a social contract an agreement in which the people consent to choose and obey a government so long as it safeguards their natural rights.
if the government violates that social contract by taking away or interfering with those rights people have the right to resist and even overthrow the government.
other influences on colonial leaders who favored independence were religious traditions that supported the cause of liberty.
one preacher of the time jonathan mayhew wrote that he had learned from the holy scriptures that wise brave and virtuous men were always friends of liberty.
some ministers even spoke from their pulpits in favor of liberty.
yet the ideas of limited government and civil rights had been basic to english law since even before a d 1215 when the english nobility had forced king john to sign magna carta or the great charter.
magna carta acknowledged certain specific rights of the barons against the king including some rights to due process a speedy trial and trial by a jury of one s peers.
its main significance though was to recognize that the sovereign did not have absolute authority but was subject like all men and women to the rule of law.
this principle was reaffirmed by the english bill of rights accepted by king william and queen mary in 1689.
to the colonists however various acts of parliament between 1763 and 1775 had clearly violated their rights as englishmen.
in addition to due process a speedy trial and trial by a jury of one s peers those rights included taxation only by consent of property owners a presumption of innocence no standing army in peacetime without consent no quartering of troops in private homes freedom of travel in peacetime and the guarantee of regular legislative sessions.
thomas paines common sense just as important were the ideas of thomas paine.
in a widely read 50 page pamphlet titled common sense paine attacked king george and the monarchy.
paine a recent immigrant argued that responsibility for british tyranny lay with the royal brute of britain.
paine explained that his own revolt against the king had begun with lexington and concord.
a personal voice thomas paine no man was a warmer wisher for a reconciliation than myself before the fetal nineteenth of april 1775 but the moment the event of that day was made known i rejected the hardened sullen tempered pharaoh of england for ever the wretch that with the pretended title of father of his people can unfeelingly hear of their slaughter and composedly sleep with their blood upon his soul 5 common sense main idea making inferences why might the ideals of the enlightenment appeal to the colonists.
paine declared that independence would allow america to trade more freely.
he also stated that independence would give american colonists the chance to create a better society one free from tyranny with equal social and economic opportunities for all.
common sense sold nearly 500 000 copies in 1776 and was widely applauded.
in april 1776 george washington wrote i find common sense is working a powerful change in the minds of many men.
52 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic main idea summarizing g what reasons did jefferson give to justify revolt by the colonies.
declaring independence by the early summer of 1776 the wavering continental congress finally decided to urge each colony to form its own government.
on june 7 virginia delegate richard henry lee moved that these united colonies are and of a right ought to be free and independent states while talks on this fateful motion were under way the congress appointed a committee to prepare a formal declaration of independence.
virginia lawyer thomas jefferson was chosen to prepare the final draft.
drawing on locke s ideas of natural rights jefferson s document declared the rights of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness to be unalienable rights ones that can never be taken away.
jefferson then asserted that a government s legitimate power can only come from the consent of the governed and that when a government denies their unalienable rights the people have the right to alter or abolish that government.
jefferson provided a long list of violations committed by the king and parliament against the colonists unalienable rights.
on that basis the american colonies declared their independence from britain gj the declaration states flatly that all men are created equal.
when this phrase was written it expressed the common belief that free citizens were political equals.
it did not claim that all people had the same ability or ought to have equal wealth.
it was not meant to embrace women native americans or african american slaves a large number of americans.
however jefferson s words presented ideals that would later help these groups challenge traditional attitudes.
in his first draft jefferson included an eloquent attack on the cruelty and injustice of the slave trade.
however south carolina and georgia the two colonies most dependent on slavery objected.
in order to gain the votes of those two states jefferson dropped the offending passage.
on july 2 1776 the delegates voted unanimously that the american colonies were free and on july 4 1776 they adopted the declaration of independence.
the colonists had declared their freedom from britain.
they would now have to fight for it.
terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
king george iii samuel adams john locke sugar act boston massacre common sense stamp act boston tea party thomas jefferson declaration of independence t main idea using your notes create a cluster diagram like the one shown and fill it with events that demonstrate the conflict between great britain and the american colonies.
choose one event to further explain in a paragraph.
critical thinking 3.
evaluating explain whether you think the british government acted wisely in its dealings with the colonies between 1765 and 1775.
support your explanation with examples from the text.
think about the reasons for british action the reactions of colonists the results of british actions analyzing effects while jefferson borrowed john lockes ideas he changed lockes definition of the rights of men from life liberty and property to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness how do you think jeffersons rewording of lockes words has affected american life.
think about the experience of immigrants seeking new lives the experience of african americans and native americans the socioeconomic groups living in america review unit 53 the declaration of independence thomas jeffersons declaration of independence is one of the most important and influential legal documents of modern times.
although the text frequently refers to eighteenth century events its enlightenment philosophy and politics have continuing relevance today.
for more than 200 years the declaration of independence has inspired leaders of other independence movements and has remained a crucial document in the struggle for civil rights and human rights.
in congress july 4 1776.
jefferson begins the declaration by attempting to legally and philosophically justify the revolution that was already underway.
here jefferson is saying that now that the colonists have begun to separate themselves from british rule it is time to explain why the colonists have taken this course of action.
these passages reveal the influence of the english philosopher john locke.
in two treatises of government 1690 locke argued that if a government does not allow its citizens to enjoy certain rights and freedoms the people have a right to replace that government.
a declaration by the representatives of the united states of america in general congress assembled.
when in the course of human events it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another and to assume among the powers of the earth the separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and of nature s god entitle them a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it and to institute new government laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness.
prudence indeed will dictate that governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes and accordingly all experience hath shewn that mankind are more disposed to suffer while evils are sufferable than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed.
but when a long train of abuses and usurpations pursuing invariably the same object evinces a design to reduce them under absolute despotism it is their right it is their duty to throw off such government and to provide new guards for their future security.
such has been the patient sufferance of these colonies and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former systems of government.
the history of the present king of great britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over these states.
to prove this let facts be submitted to a candid world.
here begins the section in which jefferson condemns the behavior of king george listing the kings many tyrannical actions that have forced his american subjects to rebel.
he has refused his assent to laws the most wholesome and necessary for the public good.
he has forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing importance unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be obtained and when so suspended he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
he has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of people unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the legislature a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only.
54 chapter 2 he has called together legislative bodies at places unusual uncomfortable and distant from the depository of their public records for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.
he has dissolved representative houses repeatedly for opposing with manly firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.
he has refused for a long time after such dissolutions to cause others to be elected whereby the legislative powers incapable of annihilation have returned to the people at large for their exercise the state remaining in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasions from without and convulsions within.
he has endeavoured to prevent the population of these states for that purpose obstructing the laws for naturalization of foreigners refusing to pass others to encourage their migration hither and raising the conditions of new appropriations of lands.
he has obstructed the administration of justice by refusing his assent to laws for establishing judiciary powers.
he has made judges dependent on his will alone for the tenure of their offices and the amount and payment of their salaries.
he has erected a multitude of new offices and sent hither swarms of officers to harass our people and eat out their substance.
he has kept among us in times of peace standing armies without the i consent of our legislatures.
he has affected to render the military independent of and superior to the civil power.
he has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution and unacknowledged by our laws giving his assent to their acts of pretended legislation for quartering large bodies of armed troops among us for protecting them by a mock trial from punishment for any murders which they should commit on the inhabitants of these states for cutting off our trade with all parts of the world for imposing taxes on us without our consent for depriving us in many cases of the benefits of trial by jury for transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offenses for abolishing the free system of english laws in a neighboring province establishing therein an arbitrary government and enlarging its boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these colonies for taking away our charters abolishing our most valuable laws and altering fundamentally the forms of our governments for suspending our own legislatures and declaring themselves invested with power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
historical spotlight independence and slavery the declaration of independence went through many revisions before the final draft.
jefferson a slaveholder himself regretted having to eliminate one passage in particular a condemnation of slavery and the slave trade.
however in the face of opposition of delegates from southern states the anti slavery passage was deleted.
this is a reference to the 10 000 troops that the british government stationed in north america after the french and indian war.
although the british government saw the troops as protection for the colonists the colonists themselves viewed the troops as a standing army that threatened their freedom.
here jefferson condemns both the king and parliament for passing the intolerable acts.
most of these laws were intended to punish the people of massachusetts for the boston tea party.
for example the quartering act of 1774 forced colonists to provide lodging for british troops.
another act allowed british soldiers accused of murder to be sent back to england for trial.
the boston port bill closed the port of boston cutting off our trade with all parts of the world here jefferson refers to the quebec act which extended the boundaries of the province.
he then refers to another act that changed the charter of massachusetts and restricted town meetings.
review unit 55 vv rspici v men would be tyrants if they could although the declaration dealt with issues of equality justice and independence it did not address conditions of inequality within the colonies themselves.
husbands dominated their wives for example and slaves lived under complete control of their owners.
speaking on behalf of women abigail adams above had this to say to her husband john who served in the continental congress remember the ladies and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands.
remember all men would be tyrants if they could.
if particular care is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion here jefferson turns his attention away from the king and toward the british people.
calling the british the common kindred of the colonists jefferson reminds them how often the americans have appealed to their sense of justice.
reluctantly the colonists are now forced to break their political connections with their british kin.
in this passage the delegates declare independence.
he has abdicated government here by declaring us out of his protection and waging war against us.
he has plundered our seas ravaged our coasts burnt our towns and destroyed the lives of our people.
he is at this time transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to com pleat the works of death desolation and tyranny already begun with circumstances of cruelty perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.
he has constrained our fellow citizens taken captive on the high seas to bear arms against their country to become the executioners of their friends and brethren or to fall themselves by their hands.
he has excited domestic insurrections amongst us and has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless indian savages whose known rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages sexes and conditions.
in every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in the most humble terms our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated injury.
a prince whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a tyrant is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
nor have we been wanting in attentions to our british brethren.
we have warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us.
we have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here.
we have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these usurpations which would inevitably interrupt our connections and correspondence.
they too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity.
we must therefore acquiesce in the necessity which denounces our separation and hold them as we hold the rest of mankind enemies in war in peace friends.
we therefore the representatives of the united states of america in general congress assembled appealing to the supreme judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions do in the name and by the authority of the good people of these colonies solemnly publish and declare that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states that they are absolved from all allegiance to the british crown and that all political connection between them and the state of great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved and that as free and independent states they have full power to levy war conclude peace contract alliances establish commerce and do all other acts and things which independent states may of right do.
56 chapter 2 congress.
and for the support of this declaration with a firm reliance on the pro tection of divine providence we mutually pledge to each other our lives our.
fortunes and our sacred honor.
signed by john hancock president of the continental congress georgia maryland delaware button gwinnett samuel chase caesar rodney lyman hall william paca george read george walton thomas stone charles carroll thomas mckean rhode island new york stephen hopkins virginia william floyd william ellery george wythe philip livingston richard henry lee francis lewis connecticut thomas jefferson lewis morris roger sherman benjamin harrison samuel huntington thomas nelson jr new jersey william williams francis lightfoot lee richard stockton oliver wolcott carter braxton john witherspoon francis hopkinson north carolina pennsylvania john hart william hooper robert morris abraham clark joseph hewes benjamin rush john penn benjamin franklin new hampshire john morton josiah bartlett south carolina george clymer william whipple edward rutledge james smith matthew thornton thomas heyward jr george taylor thomas lynch jr james wilson massachusetts arthur middleton george ross samuel adams john adams robert treat paine elbridge gerry the declaration ends with the delegates pledge or pact.
the delegates at the second continental congress knew that in declaring their independence from great britain they were committing treason a crime punishable by death.
we must all hang together benjamin franklin reportedly said as the delegates prepared to sign the declaration or most assuredly we shall all hang separately.
yv y playfi at john hancock 1737 1793 born in braintree massachusetts and raised by a wealthy uncle john hancock became one of the richest men in the colonies.
he traveled around boston in a luxurious carriage and dressed only in the finest clothing.
he looked every inch an aristocrat noted one acquaintance from his dress and powdered wig to his smart pumps of grained leather beneath hancocks refined appearance however burned the heart of a patriot.
he was only too glad to lead the second continental congress.
when the time came to sign the declaration of independence hancock scrawled his name in big bold letters.
there he reportedly said i guess king george will be able to read that review unit 57 the war for independence main idea why it matters now terms names key american victories reversed british advances during the american revolutionary war.
the american revolution is today a national even international symbol of the fight for freedom.
loyalists patriots saratoga valley forge inflation marquis de lafayette charles cornwallis yorktown treaty of paris egalitarianism taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the significant events of the revolutionary war.
benjamin franklin the famous american writer scientist statesman and diplomat represented the colonies in london throughout the growing feud with britain.
as resistance in the colonies turned to bloodshed however franklin fled london in 1775 and sailed home to philadelphia.
ironically the issue of loyalty versus independence that was dividing the american colonies from their mother country was also dividing franklin s own family.
franklin s son william the royal governor of new jersey was stubbornly loyal to king george and opposed the rebellious atmosphere in the colonies.
in one of his many letters to british authorities regarding the conflict in the colonies william stated his position and that of others who resisted revolutionary views.
a personal voice william franklin there is indeed a dread in the minds of many here that some of the leaders of the people are aiming to establish a republic.
rather than submit we have thousands who will risk the loss of their lives in defense of the old constitution.
they are ready to declare themselves whenever they see a chance of its being of any avail.
quoted in a little revenge benjamin franklin and his son because of william s stand on colonial issues communication between him and his father virtually ceased.
the break between benjamin franklin and his son mirrored the chasm that now divided the colonies from britain.
the notion of fighting britain frightened and horrified some colonists even as it inspired others.
both sides believed that they were fighting for their country and being loyal to what was best for america.
a william franklin s8 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic main idea forming generalizations how did the thinking of loyalists differ from that of patriots.
history video saratoga force surrender 7 weaknesses large distance separating britain from battlefields troops unfamiliar with terrain weak military leaders sympathy of certain british politicans for the american cause united states strengths familiarity of home ground leadership of george washington and other officers inspiring cause independence great britain strengths strong well trained army and navy strong central government with available funds support of colonial loyalists and native americans 65w the war begins as they took on the mighty british empire the colonists suffered initial losses in the middle states which served as the revolutionary war s early battleground.
in time however the colonists would battle their way back.
loyalists and patriots as the war began americans found themselves on different sides of the conflict.
loyalists those who opposed independence and remained loyal to the british king included judges and governors as well as people of more modest means.
many loyalists thought that the british were going to win and wanted to avoid punishment as rebels.
still others thought that the crown would protect their rights more effectively than the new colonial governments would.
patriots the supporters of independence drew their numbers from people who saw political and economic opportunity in an independent america.
many americans remained neutral the conflict presented dilemmas for other groups as well.
many african americans fought on the side of the patriots but others joined the loyalists because the british promised freedom to slaves who would fight for the crown.
most native americans supported the british because they viewed colonial settlers as a greater threat to their lands.
early victories and defeats as part of a plan to stop the rebellion by isolating new england the british quickly attempted to seize new york city.
the british sailed into new york harbor in the summer of 1776 with a force of about 32 000 soldiers.
they included thousands of german mercenaries or hired soldiers known as hessians because many of them came from the german region of hesse.
weaknesses most soldiers untrained and undisciplined shortage of food and ammunition inferior navy no central government to enforce wartime policies revolutionary war 1775 1778 75 w 70w geography skillbuilder location from which city did general burgoyne march his troops to saratoga.
place what characteristic did many of the battle sites have in common.
why do you think this was so.
although the continental army attempted to defend new york in late august the untrained and poorly equipped colonial troops soon retreated.
by late fall the british had pushed washington s army across the delaware river into pennsylvania.
desperate for an early victory washington risked everything on one bold stroke set for christmas night 1776.
in the face of a fierce storm he led 2 400 men in small rowboats across the ice choked delaware river.
they then marched to their objective trenton new jersey and defeated a garrison of hessians in a surprise attack.
the british soon regrouped however and in september of 1777 they captured the american capital at philadelphia.
saratoga and valley forge in the meantime one british general was marching straight into the jaws of disaster.
in a complex scheme general john burgoyne planned to lead an army down a route of lakes from canada to albany where he would meet british troops as they arrived from new york city.
the two regiments would then join forces to isolate new england from the rest of the colonies.
as burgoyne traveled through forested wilderness militiamen and soldiers from the continental army gathered from all over new york and new england.
while he was fighting off the colonial troops burgoyne didn t realize that his fellow british officers were preoccupied with holding philadelphia and weren t coming to meet him.
american troops finally surrounded burgoyne at saratoga where he surrendered on october 17 1777.
the surrender at saratoga turned out to be one of the most important events of the war.
although the french had secretly aided the patriots since early 1776 the saratoga victory bolstered france s belief that the americans could win the war.
as a result the french signed an alliance with the americans in february 1778 and openly joined them in their fight.
while this hopeful turn of events took place in paris washington and his continental army desperately low on food and supplies fought to stay alive at winter camp in valley forge pennsylvania.
more than 2 000 soldiers died yet the survivors didn t desert.
their endurance and suffering filled washington s letters to the congress and his friends.
main idea developing historical perspective why were these early victories so important to the continental army.
bgeorge washington 1732 1799 during the revolutionary war commander in chief george washington became a national hero.
an imposing man washington stood six feet two inches tall.
he was broad shouldered calm and dignified and he was an expert horseman.
but it was washingtons character that won hearts and ultimately the war.
washington persistently roused dispirited men into a fighting force.
at princeton he galloped on his white horse into the line of fire shouting and encouraging his men.
at valley forge he bore the same cold and privation as every suffering soldier.
time and again washingtons tactics saved his smaller weaker force to fight another day.
by the end of the war the entire nation idolized general washington and adoring soldiers crowded near him just to touch his boots when he rode by.
a personal voice george washington it may be said that no history.
can furnish an instance of an armys suffering uncommon hardships as ours have done.
to see the men without clothes to cover their nakedness without blankets to lie upon without shoes.
and submitting without a murmur is a proof of patience and obedience which in my opinion can scarcely be paralleled quoted in ordeal at valley forge life during the revolution one huge problem that the continental congress faced was paying the troops.
when the congress ran out of hard currency silver and gold it printed paper money called continentals like the revolutionary soldiers.
as congress printed more and more money its value plunged causing rising prices or inflation.
the congress also struggled against great odds to equip the beleaguered army.
60 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic molly pitcher was the heroine of the battle of monmouth in new jersey which was fought in 1778.
afterward general washington appointed her as a noncommissioned officer to honor her brave deeds.
main idea summarizing what important contributions did women make in the revolutionary war.
in 1781 the congress appointed a rich philadelphia merchant named robert morris as superintendent of finance.
his associate was haym salomon a jewish political refugee from poland.
morris and salomon begged and borrowed on their personal credit to raise money to provide salaries for the continental army.
they raised funds from philadelphia s quakers and jews.
on september 8 1781 a continental major wrote in his diary this day will be famous in the annals of history for being the first on which the troops of the united states received one month s pay in specie coin.
the demands of war also affected civilians.
when men marched off to fight many wives stepped into their husbands shoes managing farms and businesses as well as households and families.
hundreds of women also followed their husbands to the battlefield where they washed and cooked for the troops while some including molly pitcher even risked their lives in combat.
the war opened some doors for african americans.
thousands of slaves escaped to freedom in the chaos of war.
about 5 000 african americans served in the continental army where their courage loyalty and talent impressed white americans.
native americans however remained on the fringes of the revolution preferring to remain independent and true to their own cultures.
winning the war in february 1778 in the midst of the frozen winter at valley forge american troops began an amazing transformation.
friedrich von steuben a prussian captain and talented drill master helped to train the continental army.
other foreign military leaders such as the marquis de lafayette mar ke da laf e et also arrived to offer their help.
lafayette lobbied france for french reinforcements in 1779 and led a command in virginia in the last years of the war.
with the help of such european military leaders the raw continental army became an effective fighting force.
historical spotlight john paul jones as the revolutionary war raged on land britain and the colonies also engaged each other at sea.
the newly formed continental navy was no match for the mighty british fleet.
it was only after france and spain joined the colonists cause that britain lost its maritime supremacy.
nonetheless the colonists scored several morale boosting victories over the british navy due in large part to the heroics of american naval commander john paul jones.
the scottish born jones captured a number of british vessels including the serapis in 1779.
it was during his epic battle against this ship that jones rejected the british demand that he surrender by uttering the famous line i have not yet begun to fight i s review unit 61 geography skillbuilder 1.
place where were most of the later revolutionary war battles fought.
movement why might general cornwalliss choice of yorktown as a base have left him at a military disadvantage.
atlantic ocean american french campaign british campaign american french victory british victory thirteen colonies n other british territory 0 100 200 miles 0 100 200 kilometers 35n the british move south after their devastating defeat at saratoga the british began to shift their operations to the south.
at the end of 1778 a british expedition easily took savannah georgia.
in their greatest victory of the war the british under generals henry clinton and charles cornwallis captured charles town south carolina in may 1780.
clinton then left for new york while cornwallis continued to conquer land throughout the south.
in early 1781 despite several defeats the colonists continued to battle cornwallis hindering his efforts to take the carolinas.
the british general then chose to move the fight to virginia.
he led his army of 7 500 onto the peninsula between the james and york rivers and camped at yorktown.
cornwallis planned to fortify yorktown take virginia and then move north to join clinton s forces.
the british surrender at yorktown shortly after learning of corwallis s actions the armies of lafayette and washington moved south toward yorktown.
meanwhile a french naval force defeated a british fleet and then blocked the entrance to the chesapeake bay thereby obstructing british sea routes to the bay.
by late september about 17 000 french and american troops surrounded the british on the yorktown peninsula and began bombarding them day and night.
less than a month later on october 19 1781 cornwallis finally surrendered.
the americans had shocked the world and defeated the british.
peace talks began in paris in 1782.
the american negotiating team included john adams john jay of new york and benjamin franklin.
in september 1783 the delegates signed the treaty of paris which confirmed u s independence and set the boundaries of the new nation.
the united states now stretched from the atlantic ocean to the mississippi river and from canada to the florida border.
vocabulary peninsula a piece of land that projects into a body of water main idea evaluating what was the most important challenge that faced the new united states.
62 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic main idea analyzing effects how had the american revolution affected the lives of native americans.
the war becomes a symbol of liberty revolutionary ideals set a new course for american society.
during the war social distinctions had begun to blur as the wealthy wore homespun clothing and as military leaders showed respect for all of their soldiers.
changes like these stimulated the rise of egalitarianism i gan tar e e niz om a belief in the equality of all people.
this belief fostered a new attitude the idea that ability effort and virtue not wealth or family background defined one s worth.
the egalitarianism of the 1780s however applied only to white males.
it did not bring any new political rights to women.
a few states made it possible for women to divorce but common law still dictated that a married woman s property belonged to her husband.
moreover most african americans were still enslaved and even those who were free usually faced discrimination and poverty.
however by 1804 many new england and middle states had taken steps to outlaw slavery.
for native americans the revolution brought uncertainty.
during both the french and indian war and the revolution many native american communities had been either destroyed or displaced and the native american population living east of the mississippi had declined by about 50 percent.
postwar developments further threatened native american interests as settlers began taking triballands left unprotected by the treaty of paris.
in the closing days of the revolution the continental congress had chosen a quotation from the works of the roman poet virgil as a motto for the reverse side of the great seal of the united states.
the motto novus ordo seclorum means a new order of the ages.
establishing a government and resolving internal problems in that new order would be atremendous challenge for citizens of the newborn united states.
english potter josiah wedgwood designed this anti slavery cameo and sent copies of it to benjamin franklin.
terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
loyalists valley forge charles cornwallis treaty of paris patriots inflation yorktown egalitarianism saratoga marquis de lafayette main idea using your notes on a chart like the one below list five significant events of the revolutionary war in the column on the left.
note the significance of each event towards the american cause in the column on the right.
event significance critical thinking 3.
evaluating do you think the colonists could have won their independence without aid from foreigners.
think about the military needs of the americans and the strengths of the french the colonists military efforts in the south the americans belief in their fight for independence analyzing effects what were the effects of the revolutionary war on the american colonists.
think about political effects economic effects social effects review unit 63 tracing themes women and political power in their families and in the workplace in speeches and in print countless american women have worked for justice for all citizens.
throughout the history of the united states women have played whatever roles they felt were necessary to better this country.
they also fought to expand their own political power a power that throughout much of american history has been denied them.
protest against britain in the tense years leading up to the revolution american women found ways to participate in the protests against the british.
homemakers boycotted tea and british made clothing.
in the painting at right sarah morris mifflin shown with her husband thomas spins her own thread rather than use british thread.
some businesswomen such as printer mary goddard who produced the official copies of the declaration of independence took more active roles.
a womans declaration seneca falls elizabeth cad the cruel and unju the office of her f s child to find a way to the abolitionist 1 ly into the curren foundation for the for woman s right inspiring leader.
1 executed the first falls new york j as america grew women became acutely aware of their unequal status in society particularly their lack of suffrage or the right to vote.
in 1848 two women elizabeth cady stanton shown above and lucretia mott launched the first woman suffrage movement in the united states at the seneca falls convention in seneca falls new york.
during the convention stanton introduced her declaration of sentiments in which she demanded greater rights for women including the right to vote.
64 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic the equal rights amendment movement during the mid 1900s as more women entered the workforce many women recognized their continuing unequal status including the lack of equal pay for equal work.
by passing an equal rights amendment some women hoped to obtain the same social and economic rights as men.
although millions supported the amendment many men and women feared the measure would prompt unwanted change.
the era ultimately failed to be ratified for the constitution.
women in congress in spite of the failure of the era many women have achieved strong positions for themselves politically as well as socially and economically.
in the 111th congress 73 women served in the house of representatives and 17 served in the senate.
shown above is nancy pelosi the first woman to serve as speaker of the house.
the right to vote more than a half century after organizing for the right to vote women finally won their struggle.
in 1920 the united states adopted the nineteenth amendment which granted women the right to vote.
pictured above is one of the many suffrage demonstrations of the early 1900s that helped garner public support for the amendment.
review unit 65 teks 1az21b 26e 26f confederation and the constitution main idea j why it matters now j terms names american leaders created the constitution as a blueprint of government for the united states.
more than 200 years after its creation the constitution remains the nations guiding document for a working government.
republic federalism articles of checks and confederation balances northwest ratification ordinance of 1787 federalists shayss rebellion antifederalists james madison bill of rights 3 taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes about issues debated at the constitutional convention.
roneamerican s john dickinson understood perhaps better than other delegates to the continental congress the value of compromise.
in 1776 dickinson hoped for reconciliation with britain and refused to sign the declaration of independence.
yet eight days after the declaration was adopted dickinson presented congress with the first draft of a plan for setting up a workable government for the new states.
a personal voice john dickinson 66 two rules i have laid down for myself throughout this contest first on all occasions where i am called upon as a trustee for my countrymen to deliberate on questions important to their happiness disdaining all personal advantages to be derived from a suppression of my real sentiments.
openly to avow declare them and secondly.
whenever the public resolutions are taken to regard them though opposite to my opinion as sacred.
and to join in supporting them as earnestly as if my voice had been given for them quoted in the life and times of john dickinson 1732 1808 dickinsons two rules became guiding principles for the john dickinson leaders who faced the formidable task of forming a new nation.
experimenting with confederation as citizens of a new and independent nation americans had to create their own political system.
fighting the revolutionary war gave the states a common goal but they remained reluctant to unite under a strong central government.
66 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic main idea contrasting what was the difference between the land ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance of 1787.
f main idea making inferences why do you think news of shayss rebellion made states eager to participate in the philadelphia convention.
after the revolution many americans favored a republic a government in which citizens rule through their elected representatives.
however many also feared that a democracy government directly by the people placed power in the hands of the uneducated masses.
these fears and concerns deeply affected the planning of the new government.
the articles of confederation the second continental congress set up a new plan of government in a set of laws called the articles of confederation.
the plan established a form of government called a confederation or alliance among the thirteen states.
the articles set up a congress in which each state would have one vote regardless of population.
powers were divided between the states and the national government.
the national government had the power to declare war make peace and sign treaties.
it could borrow money set standards for coins and for weights and measures and establish a postal service.
after approval by all thirteen states the articles of confederation went into effect in march 1781.
one of the first issues the confederation faced had to do with the the northwest territory lands west of the appalachians where many people settled after the revolutionary war.
to help govern these lands congress passed the land ordinance of 1785 which established a plan for surveying the land.
see geography spotlight on page 72.
in the northwest ordinance of 1787 congress provided a procedure for dividing the land into no fewer than three and no more than five states.
the ordinance also set requirements for the admission of new states which however overlooked native american land claims j weaknesses of the articles of confederation congress could not enact and collect taxes.
each state had only one vote in congress regardless of population.
nine out of thirteen states needed to agree to pass important laws.
articles could be amended only if all states approved.
there was no executive branch to enforce laws of congress.
there was no national court system to settle legal disputes.
there were thirteen separate states that lacked national unity.
the land ordinance of 1785 and the northwest ordinance of 1787 became the confederation s most significant achievements.
overshadowing such successes however were the confederation s many problems.
the most serious problem was that each state functioned independently by pursuing its own interests rather than considering those of the nation as a whole.
the government had no means of raising money or enforcing its laws.
moreover there was no national court system to settle legal disputes.
the articles of confederation created a weak central government and little unity among the states.
shayss rebellion the need for a stronger central government became obvious in 1786 when many farmers in western massachusetts rose up in protest over increased state taxes.
the farmers discontent boiled over into mob action in january of 1787 when daniel shays a fellow farmer led an army of 1 200 farmers toward the arsenal at springfield massachusetts.
state officials hurriedly called out the militia to head off the army of farmers killing four of the rebels and scattering the rest.
shays s rebellion as the farmers protest came to be called caused panic and dismay throughout the nation.
it was clearly time to talk about a stronger national government.
because the states had placed such severe limits on the government to prevent abuse of power the government was unable to solve many of the nation s problems.
news of the rebellion spread throughout the states.
the revolt persuaded twelve states to send delegates to a convention called by congress in philadelphia in may of 1787 kl history video shays s rebellion dsbbbq review unit 67 i tv player james madison 1751 1836 the oldest of 12 children james madison grew up in virginia.
he was a sickly child who suffered all his life from physical ailments.
because of a weak speaking voice he decided not to become a minister and thus entered politics.
madisons virginia plan resulted from extensive research that he had done on political systems before the convention.
he asked edmund randolph a fellow delegate from virginia to present the plan because his own voice was too weak to be heard throughout the assembly.
besides providing brilliant political leadership madison kept a record of the debates that took place at the convention.
because of his plan and his leadership madison is known as the father of the constitution.
creating a new government most of the delegates at the constitutional convention recognized the need to strengthen the central government.
within the first five days of the meeting they gave up the idea of fixing the articles of confederation and decided to form an entirely new government that would replace the one created by the articles.
conflict and compromise one major issue that the delegates faced was giving fair representation to both large and small states.
james madison proposed the virginia plan which called for a bicameral or two house legislature with membership based on each state s population.
delegates from the small states vigorously objected to the virginia plan because it gave more power to states with large populations.
small states supported william paterson s new jersey plan which proposed a single house congress in which each state had an equal vote.
the debate became deadlocked and dragged on through the hot and humid summer days.
eventually roger sherman suggested the great compromise which offered a two house congress to satisfy both small and big states.
each state would have equal representation in the senate or upper house.
the size of the population of each state would determine its representation in the house of representatives or lower house.
voters of each state would choose members of the house.
the state legislatures would choose members of the senate.
the great compromise settled one major issue but led to conflict over another.
southern delegates whose states had large numbers of slaves wanted slaves included in the population count that determined the number of representatives in the house.
northern delegates whose states had few slaves disagreed.
not counting the slaves would give the northern states more representatives than the southern states in the house of representatives.
the delegates eventually agreed to the three fifths compromise which called for three fifths of a state s slaves to be counted as part of the population.
division of powers after the delegates reached agreement on the difficult questions of slavery and representation they dealt with other issues somewhat more easily.
they divided power between the states and the national government and they separated the national government s power into three branches.
thus they created an entirely new government.
the new system of government that the delegates were building was a form of federalism in which power is divided between a national government and several state governments.
the powers granted to the national government by the constitution are known as delegated powers or enumerated powers.
these include such powers as the control of foreign affairs and regulation of trade between the states.
powers not specifically granted to the national government but kept by the states are called reserved powers.
these include powers such as providing for and supervising education.
some powers such as the right to tax and establish courts were shared by both the national and the state governments.
main idea analyzing issues jgj in what ways did the great compromise resolve certain problems even as it created new ones.
68 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic key conflicts in the constitutional convention strong central government vs strong states authority derives from the people.
the central government should be stronger than the states.
authority derives from the states.
the states should remain stronger than the centra government.
large states vs small states congress should be composed of two houses.
delegates should be assigned according to population.
a congress of one house should be preserved.
each state should have one vote.
north vs south slaves should not be counted when deciding the number of delegates.
slaves should be counted when levying taxes.
slaves should be counted when determining congressional representation.
slaves should not be counted when levying taxes.
main idea main idea making inferences why did the delegates fear that one branch of the government would gain too much power.
making inferences why did the delegates fear that one branch of the government would gain too much power.
separation of powers the delegates also limited the authority of the national government.
first they created three branches of government a legislative branch to make laws an executive branch to carry out laws and a judicial branch to interpret laws.
then the delegates established a system of checks and balances to prevent any one branch from dominating the other two.
the procedure the delegates established for electing the president reflected their fear of placing too much power in the hands of the people.
instead of choosing the president directly each state would choose a number of electors equal to the number of senators and representatives that the state had in congress.
this group of electors chosen by the states known as the electoral college would then cast ballots for the presidential candidates.
jg changing the constitution the delegates also provided a means of changing the constitution through the amendment process.
after four months of debate and compromise the delegates succeeded in creating a constitution that was an enduring document.
the constitution has been amended for a variety of reasons throughout history.
amendments help government change along with the values of the nation s people.
for example several amendments have expanded voting rights for various groups as society s expectations of equality have evolved see tracing themes on pages 104 105.
the twenty first amendment was passed to cancel or repeal the eighteenth amendment after social values shifted.
other amendments have altered the structure of government by establishing electoral procedures or setting limits on certain branches.
ratifying the constitution george washington adjourned the constitutional convention on september 17 1787.
the convention s work was over but the new government could not become a reality until at least nine states ratified or approved the constitution.
thus the battle over ratification began.
federalists and antifederalists supporters of the constitution called themselves federalists because they favored the new constitution s balance of power between the states and the national government.
their opponents became known as antifederalists because they opposed having such a strong central government and thus were against the constitution.
review unit 69 both sides waged a war of words in the public debate over ratification.
the federalist a series of 85 essays defending the constitution appeared in new york newspapers.
these were essays written by three influential supporters of ratification alexander hamilton james madison and john jay.
all three writers felt that there were defects in the new constitution but they also felt that its stronger central government was superior to the weak congress provided by the articles of confederation.
using the pen name publius the authors addressed those who argued that ratification should be delayed until a more perfect document could be written.
in the following excerpt from one of the essays now known to be written by madison the author asks his readers to compare the admittedly flawed constitution with its predecessor the articles.
a personal voice james madison it is a matter both of wonder and regret that those who raise so many objections against the new constitution should never call to mind the defects of that which is to be exchanged for it the articles.
it is not necessary that the former should be perfect it is sufficient that the latter is more imperfect.
the federalist number 38 1788 james madison the antifederalists main opposition to the new constitution was that it contained no guarantee that the government would protect the rights of the people or of the states.
antifederalists included such notable figures as patrick henry george mason and richard henry lee.
letters from the federal farmer most likely written by lee was the most widely read antifederalist publication.
lee listed the rights that antifederalists believed should be protected such as freedom of the press and of religion guarantees against unreasonable searches of people and their homes and the right to a trial by jury.
the antifederalists demand for a bill of rights a formal summary of citizens rights and freedoms stemmed from their fear of a strong central government.
all state constitutions guaranteed individual rights and seven of them included a bill of rights.
the states believed they would serve as protectors of the people.
yet in the end the federalists yielded to people s overwhelming desire and promised to add a bill of rights if the states would ratify the constitution.
in june 1788 new hampshire became the ninth state to approve the constitution making it the law of the land.
je adoption of a bill of rights by december 1791 the states also had ratified ten amendments to the constitution which became known as the bill of rights.
the first eight amendments spell out the personal liberties the states had requested.
the first amendment guarantees citizens rights to freedom of religion speech the press and political activity.
according to the second and third amendments the government cannot deny citizens the right to bear arms as members of a militia of citizen soldiers nor can the government house troops in private homes in peacetime.
the fourth amendment prevents the search of citizens homes without proper warrants.
the fifth through eighth amendments guarantee fair treatment for individuals accused of crimes.
the ninth and tenth amendments impose general limits on the powers of the federal government.
j main idea summarizing why did the antifederalists insist that the constitution must have a bill of rights.
70 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic the protection of rights and freedoms did not apply to all americans at the time the bill of rights was adopted.
native americans and slaves were excluded.
women were not mentioned in the constitution.
the growing number of free blacks did not receive adequate protection from the constitution.
although many states permitted free blacks to vote the bill of rights offered them no protection against whites discrimination and hostility.
i main idea drawing conclusions how did the adoption of the bill of rights show the flexibility of the constitution.
continuing relevance of the constitution the united states constitution is the oldest written national constitution still in use.
it is a living document capable of meeting the changing needs of americans.
one reason for this capability lies in article i section 8 which gives congress the power to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers that the constitution enumerates.
this clause is referred to as the elastic clause because it stretches the power of the government.
the framers of the constitution included these implied powers in order to allow the authority of the government to expand to meet unforeseen circumstances.
the constitution also can be formally changed when necessary through amendments.
the constitution provides ways for amendments to be proposed and to be ratified.
only 27 amendments have been added to the constitution.
these amendments have helped the government meet the challenges of a changing world while still preserving the rights of the american people.
since its ratification the u s constitution has served as a model for other democracies.
it has been one of our nation s most important exports influencing the constitutions of dozens of other nations.
it is a flexible document that continues to protect americans and inspire people around the world.
terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance republic james madison federalists articles of confederation federalism antifederalists northwest ordinance of 1787 checks and balances bill of rights shayss rebellion ratification main idea using your notes re create the web below on your paper and fill it in with specific issues that were debated at the constitutional convention.
choose one issue and explain how the delegates resolved that issue.
critical thinking 3.
evaluating do you think the federalists or the antifederalists had the more valid arguments.
support your opinion with examples from the text.
think about americans experience with the articles of confederation americans experience with great britain forming opinions several states ratified the constitution only after being assured that a bill of rights would be added to it.
in your opinion what is the most important value of the bill of rights.
analyzing issues what was the intent of the constitution.
the bill of rights.
how effective were these documents in fulfilling their intended purposes.
why are these documents so important.
review unit 71 citizenship spotlight symbols of patriotism patriotism or a love of and identification with one s country and its citizens is an important characteristic.
feelings of patriotism make citizens willing to act in a way that benefits their nation.
since the formation of the united states following the revolutionary war americans have found different symbols to represent their sense of patriotism.
some of these symbols have been long lasting and others have changed over time but all have given americans a sort of common ground.
they have also served as a way to demonstrate that patriotism to others.
stars and stripes perhaps the most recognizable symbol of the united states is the american flag.
in 1777 the continental congress passed an act that established an official flag for the new nation.
the design of the flag has changed as new states have joined the nation and today the flag consists of 13 red and white stripes representing the original colonies and 50 stars on a field of blue representing the states of the union.
americans demonstrate their patriotism by honoring the flag as a symbol of freedom.
i nearest recruiting station for u s army uncle sam as the story goes uncle sam made his first appearance during the war of 1812.
meatpacker samuel wilson supplied beef to the u s army during the war.
he stamped his barrels of beef with u s for united states but soldiers knew the food was supplied by uncle sam a newspaper reported the story and uncle sam became a widely accepted nickname for the united states.
the most famous visual representation of uncle sam is probably from the world war i recruiting poster at left which was created by artist james montgomery flagg.
the image was repurposed for world war ii and has become well known as a symbol of the united states.
72 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic the medal of honor one way to demonstrate patriotism is to serve in the armed services.
the armed services award medals to soldiers to acknowledge the sacrifices they have made in defense of their country.
the most prestigious of these awards is the medal of honor shown below which is the highest award for valor in action against an enemy force that an individual serving in the u s armed forces can earn.
it is sometimes called the congressional medal of honor because it is presented by the president on behalf of congress.
medal of honor recipients represent americans of all races and genders.
african american vernon j baker was awarded the medal for his brave service in world war ii and the heroic actions of hispanic american roy benavidez in vietnam led to his medal.
there has been only one female recipient mary edwards walker who served as a surgeon during the civil war.
these brave men and women inspire others with their acts of heroism and the medal of honor is an important way to call attention to their patriotism and gallantry.
national mottoes mottoes are used to briefly convey principles or ideals.
u s currency includes two mottoes that have historical significance to the nation.
the motto e pluribus unum meaning out of many one has appeared on the great seal of the united states since the seal was originally adopted by the continental congress in 1782.
it represents the idea that many individual americans make up one nation which continues to be an important ideal.
in 1956 president eisenhower signed legislation adopting in god we trust as the nations official motto.
the phrase has appeared on u s coins since 1795.
the mottos adoption in 1956 reflects the tension of the cold war and the desire to distinguish the united states from the soviet union and its policy of atheism.
today though some americans are uncomfortable with the religious nature of the motto most support it.
a 2003 gallup poll found that 90 percent of americans approve of including the words in god we trust on u s coins.
review unit 73 teks1c launching the new nation main idea why it matters now terms names with george washington as its first president the united states began creating a working government for its new nation.
the countrys early leaders established precedents for organizing government that the united states still follows.
judiciary act democratic of 1789 republican alexander protective tariff hamilton xyz affair cabinet alien and two party system sedition acts nullification.
taking notes use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the countrys first political parties.
american s george washington as the hero of the revolution george washington was the unanimous choice in the nation s first presidential election.
when the news reached him on april 14 1789 washington accepted the call to duty despite his uncertainty about how to lead the new country.
two days later he set out for new york city to take the oath of office.
a personal voice george washington 66 about ten oclock i bade adieu farewell to mount vernon to private life and to domestic felicity happiness and with a mind oppressed with more anxious and painful sensations than i have words to express set out for new york.
with the best dispositions intentions to render service to my country in obedience to its call but with less hope of answering its expectations 99 the diaries of george washington when washington took office as the first president of the united states under the constitution he and congress faced a daunting task to create an entirely new government.
the momentous decisions that these early leaders made have resounded through american history.
washington heads the new government although the constitution provided a strong foundation it was not a detailed blueprint for governing.
to create a working government washington and congress had to make many practical decisions.
perhaps james madison put it best we are in a wilderness without a single footstep to guide us.
judiciary act of 1789 one of the first tasks washington and congress faced was the creation of a judicial system.
the judiciary act of 1789 provided for a supreme court and federal circuit and district courts.
the judiciary act allowed state court decisions to be appealed to a federal court when constitutional issues 74 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic were raised.
it also guaranteed that federal laws would remain the supreme law of the land.
washington shapes the executive branch the nation s leaders also faced the task of building an executive branch.
to help the president govern congress created three executive departments the department of state to deal with foreign affairs the department of war to handle military matters and the department of the treasury to manage finances.
to head these departments washington chose capable leaders thomas jefferson as secretary of state alexander hamilton as secretary of the treasury henry knox as secretary of war.
these department heads soon became the president s chief advisers or cabinet.
main idea contrasting how did jeffersons and hamiltons views of government differ.
hamilton and jefferson two conflicting visions hamilton and jefferson held very different political ideas.
hamilton believed in a strong central government led by a prosperous educated elite of upper class citizens.
jefferson distrusted a strong central gov ernment and the rich.
he favored strong state and local governments rooted in popular participation.
hamilton believed that commerce and industry were the keys to a strong nation jefferson favored a society of farmer citizens.
hamiltons economic plan as secretary of the treasury hamilton s job was to put the nation s economy on a firm footing.
to do this he called on the nation to pay off its debts a large amount of which was incurred during the revolution.
he also proposed the establishment of a national bank that would be funded by both the federal government and wealthy private investors.
this bank would issue paper money and handle taxes and other government funds.
opponents of a national bank such as james madison argued that since the constitution made no provision for such an institution congress had no right to authorize it.
this argument began the debate between those like hamilton who favored a loose interpretation of the constitution and those like madison who favored a strict interpretation a vital debate that has continued throughout u s history.
key players thomas jefferson 1743 1826 the writer of the declaration of independence thomas jefferson began his political career at age 26 when he was elected to virginias colonial legislature.
in 1779 he was elected governor of virginia and in 1785 he was appointed minister to france.
he served as secretary of state from 1790 to 1793.
a southern planter jefferson was also an accomplished scholar the architect of monticello his virginia house an inventor of among other things a machine that made copies of letters and the founder of the university of virginia in 1819.
despite his elite background and his ownership of slaves he was a strong ally of the small farmer and average citizen.
alexander hamilton 1755 1804 born into poverty in the british west indies alexander hamilton was orphaned at age 13 and went to work as a shipping clerk.
he later made his way to new york where he attended kings college now columbia university.
he joined the army during the revolution and became an aide to general washington.
intensely ambitious hamilton quickly moved up in society.
although in his humble origins hamilton was the opposite of jefferson he had little faith in the common citizen and sided with the interests of upper class americans.
hamilton said of jefferson s beloved common people your people sir your people is a great beast review unit 75 contrasting views of the federal government hamilton concentrating power in federal government fear of mob rule republic led by a well educated elite loose interpretation of the constitution national bank constitutional loose interpretation economy based on shipping and manufacturing payment of national and state debts favoring creditors supporters merchants manufacturers landowners investors lawyers clergy jefferson sharing power with state and local governments limited national government fear of absolute power or ruler democracy of virtuous farmers and tradespeople strict interpretation of the constitution national bank unconstitutional strict interpretation economy based on farming payment of only the national debt favoring debtors supporters the plain people farmers tradespeople skillbuilder interpreting charts 1.
whose view of the federal government was a wealthy person more likely to favor.
how do you think jefferson differed from hamilton in his view of people and human nature.
the first political parties the differences within washington s cabinet intensified and soon helped to give rise to a two party system.
those who shared hamilton s vision of a strong central government mostly northerners called themselves federalists.
those who supported jefferson s vision of strong state governments mostly southerners called themselves democratic republicans.
french revolutionaries storm the bastille an infamous prison in paris france on july 14 1789.
the whiskey rebellion during washington s second term an incident occurred that reflected the tension between federal and regional interests.
previously congress had passed a protective tariff an import tax on goods produced abroad meant to encourage american production.
to generate even more revenue secretary hamilton pushed through an excise tax a tax on a product s manufacture sale or distribution to be levied on the manufacture of whiskey.
in 1794 furious whiskey producers in western pennsylvania refused to pay the tax and attacked the tax collectors.
the federal government responded by sending some 13 000 militiamen to end the conflict.
the whiskey rebellion as it came to be known marked the first use of armed force to assert federal authority.
background in addition to promoting american goods the tariff of 1789 as well as tariffs that followed provided the majority of the federal governments revenue until the 20th century.
challenges at home and abroad at the same time the new government faced critical problems and challenges overseas as well as at home along the western frontier.
addressing foreign affairs in 1789 a stunning revolution in france ended the french monarchy and brought hope for a government based on the will of the people.
by 1793 france was engaged in war with great britain as well as with other european countries.
in the united states reaction to the conflict tended to split along party lines.
democratic republicans supported france.
main idea developing historical perspective why did the united states want access to the mississippi river.
federalists wanted to back the british.
president washington took a middle position.
he issued a declaration of neutrality a statement that the united states would support neither side in the conflict.
washington remained wary of foreign involvement throughout his tenure in office.
in his farewell address in 1796 he warned the nation to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world.
in another significant foreign matter thomas pinckney negotiated a treaty with spain in 1795.
according to pinckney s treaty spain agreed to give up all claims to land east of the mississippi except florida and recognized the 31st parallel as the northern boundary of florida.
spain also agreed to open the mississippi river to american traffic and allow traders to use the port of new orleans.
the treaty was important because it helped pave the way for u s expansion west of the appalachians.
challenges in the northwest meanwhile americans faced trouble along their western border where the british still maintained forts and native americans continued to resist white settlers.
in 1794 after numerous skirmishes the u s military led by general anthony wayne defeated a confederacy of native americans at the battle of fallen timbers near present day toledo ohio.
the victory helped to establish the settlers supremacy in the region.
jays treaty at the time of the battle of fallen timbers john jay the chief justice of the supreme court was in london to negotiate a treaty with great britain.
one of the disputed issues was which nation would control territories west of the appalachian mountains.
when news of wayne s victory at fallen timbers arrived the british agreed to evacuate their posts in the northwest territory because they did not wish to fight both the united states and the french with whom they were in conflict at the same time.
although jay s treaty signed on november 19 1794 was a diplomatic victory the treaty provoked outrage at home.
for one thing it allowed the british to continue their fur trade on the american side of the u s canadian border.
this angered western settlers.
also the treaty did not resolve a dispute over neutral american trade in the caribbean.
americans believed that their ships had the right to free passage there.
the british however had seized a number of these ships confiscating their crews and cargo.
despite serious opposition the treaty managed to pass the senate.
the bitter political fight over jay s treaty along with the growing division between the federalists and democratic republicans convinced washington not to seek a third term.
adams provokes criticism in the election of 1796 the united states faced a new situation a contest between opposing parties.
the federalists nominated vice president john adams for president while the democratic republicans chose thomas jefferson.
in the election adams received 71 electoral votes while jefferson received 68.
because the constitution stated that the runner up should become vice president the country found itself with a federalist president and a democratic republican vice president.
the election also underscored the growing danger of sectionalism placing the interests of one region over those of the nation as a whole.
almost all the electors from the southern states voted for jefferson while all the electors from the northern states voted for adams.
portrait of a young john adams by joseph badger review unit 77 adams tries to avoid war soon after taking office president adams faced his first crisis a looming war with france.
the french government regarded the u s british agreement over the northwest territory a violation of the french american alliance.
in retaliation they began to seize american ships bound for britain.
adams sent a three man team to paris to negotiate a solution.
4s this team which included future chief justice john marshall planned to meet with the french foreign minister talleyrand.
instead the french sent three low level officials whom adams in his report to congress called x y and z.
the french officials demanded a 250 000 bribe as payment for seeing talleyrand.
news of this insult which became known as the xyz affair provoked a wave of anti french feeling at home.
millions for defense but not one cent for tribute became the slogan of the day.
in 1798 congress created a navy department and authorized american ships to seize french vessels.
for the next two years an undeclared naval war raged between france and the united states.
the federalists called for a full scale war against france but adams refused to take that step.
through diplomacy the two countries eventually smoothed over their differences.
adams damaged his standing among the federalists but he kept the united states out of war.
main idea analyzing motives why did the french begin to seize u s ships.
the alien and sedition acts although democratic republicans cheered adams for avoiding war with france they criticized him mercilessly on many other issues.
tensions between federalists and democratic republicans rose to a fever pitch.
adams regarded democratic republican ideas as dangerous to the welfare of the nation.
he and other federalists accused the democratic republicans of favoring foreign powers.
many immigrants were active in the democratic republican party.
some of the most vocal critics of the adams administration were foreign born.
they included french and british radicals as well as recent irish immigrants who lashed out at anyone who was even faintly pro british including the federalist adams.
to counter what they saw as a growing threat against the government the federalists pushed through congress in 1798 four measures that became known as the alien and sedition acts.
three of these measures the alien acts raised the residence requirement for american citizenship from 5 years to 14 years and allowed the president to deport or jail any alien considered undesirable.
vocabulary alien belonging to or coming from another country foreign sedition rebellion against ones country treason analyzing political cartoonsj paris monster cinque tetes or the paris monster is the title of this political cartoon satirizing the xyz affair.
on the right the five members of the french directory or ruling executive body are depicted as a five headed monster demanding money.
the three american representatives elbridge gerry charles pinckney and john marshall are on the left exclaiming cease bawling monster.
we will not give you six pence skillbuilder analyzing political cartoons 1.
how would you contrast the cartoons depiction of the u s representatives with its depiction of the french directory.
what other details in the cartoon show the cartoonists attitude toward the french.
78 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic the fourth measure the sedition act set fines and jail terms for anyone trying to hinder the operation of the government or expressing false scandalous and malicious statements against the government.
under the terms of this act the federal government prosecuted and jailed a number of democratic republican editors publishers and politicians.
outraged democratic republicans called the laws a violation of freedom of speech guaranteed by the first amendment.
virginia and kentucky resolutions the two main democratic republican leaders thomas jefferson and james madison saw the alien and sedition acts as a serious misuse of power on the part of the federal government.
they decided to organize opposition to the alien and sedition acts by appealing to the states.
madison drew up a set of resolutions that were adopted by the virginia legislature while jefferson wrote resolutions that were approved in kentucky.
the resolutions warned of the dangers that the alien and sedition acts posed to a government of checks and balances guaranteed by the constitution.
a personal voice let the honest advocate of confidence in government read the alien and sedition acts and say if the constitution has not been wise in fixing limits to the government it created and whether we should be wise in destroying those limits 8th resolution the virginia and kentucky resolutions j main idea analyzing issues how did the kentucky resolutions challenge the authority of the federal government.
the kentucky resolutions in particular asserted the principle of nullification the states had the right to nullify or consider void any act of congress that they deemed unconstitutional.
virginia and kentucky viewed the alien and sedition acts as unconstitutional violations of the first amendment that deprived citizens of their rights.
the resolutions also called for other states to adopt similar declarations.
no other state did so however and the issue died out by the next presidential election.
nevertheless the resolutions showed that the balance of power between the states and the federal government remained a controversial issue.
in fact the election of 1800 between federalist john adams and democratic republican thomas jefferson would center on this critical debate.
terms names for each term or name write a sentence explaining its significance.
judiciary act of 1789 two party system protective tariff alexander hamilton democratic republican xyz affair cabinet alien and sedition acts nullification main idea using your notes in a chart list the leaders beliefs and goals of the countrys first political parties.
federalists democratic republicans if you had lived in that time which party would you have favored.
critical thinking evaluating leadership how would you judge the leadership qualities of president washington in his decision to put two such opposed thinkers as hamilton and jefferson in his cabinet.
who do you think was the more significant member of the cabinet.
analyzing events do you agree with the democratic republicans that the alien and sedition acts were a violation of the first amendment.
were they necessary.
support your opinion with evidence from the text.
think about the intent of the first amendment what was happening in europe what was happening in the united states review unit review chapter assessment terms names ml hi the newly formed united states of america creates a new system of government with a constitution and a bill of rights.
below write a sentence explaining its for each term or name significance.
stamp act 2.
thomas jefferson 3.
declaration of independence 4.
valley forge 5.
treaty of paris 6.
articles of confederation 7 checks and balances 8.
antifederalists 9 cabinet 10.
democratic republican main ideas use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
colonial resistance and rebellion pages 46 53 1.
how did the first continental congress prepare the way for an armed uprising against britain.
why did jefferson eliminate criticism of the slave trade from the declaration of independence.
the war for independence pages 58 63 3.
why did so many colonists remain loyal to britain during the revolutionary war.
how did the american victory at saratoga affect the war.
confederation and the constitution pages 66 71 5.
what were some of the problems with the kind of government set up by the articles of confederation.
what are historical reasons the constitution has been amended.
launching the new nation pages 74 79 7.
what events after 1789 helped to unify the nation.
what issues led to the development of a two party system.
critical thinking using your notes in a chart like the one below show the ideological differences between the two political groups.
federalists antifederalists developing historical perspective review the feature on pages 72 73.
what is the meaning of the symbols of patriotism represented there.
why are they historically significant.
evaluating in your view which compromise during the constitutional convention was more important the great compromise or the three fifths compromise.
80 chapter 2 revolution and the early republic mm texas test practice use the cartoon and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1.
this british cartoon was published during the winter of 1775 1776.
in it king george iii and his ministers are shown killing the goose that laid the golden egg.
the cartoon is criticizing a the killing of british soldiers at concord and bunker hill.
b british response to the olive branch petition.
c john lockes theory of natural rights.
d thomas paines common sense.
both shayss rebellion and the boston tea party were the result of anger over f religious intolerance.
g the boston massacre.
use the information in the box and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 3.
declaration of independence battles of lexington and concord second continental congress 3.
which of the following lists the events in chronological order from first to last.
a declaration of independence battles of lexington and concord second continental congress b battles of lexington and concord second continental congress declaration of independence c second continental congress battles of lexington and concord declaration of independence d second continental congress declaration of independence battles of lexington and concord 71 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials interact with history writesmart h collaborative learni think about the issues you recorded in mynotebook as you read the chapter.
imagine you are living in the 1780s.
write an article for either the federalist or letters from the federal farmer arguing either for or against giving the national government more power.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write your article.
7 vgjjtui writesmart review the chart on page 51.
choose one of the founding fathers in this chapter and write him a letter thanking him for his contribution.
make sure to explain why his actions were important to the nation.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write your letter.
tcehtury in a small group reread the declaration of independence together to enhance and confirm your understanding.
discuss the intent of the document and why it is so important.
then imagine what it would have been like to see or hear these words for the first time during the revolutionary era.
work with your group to create a skit in which patriots are sharing the text of the document with other colonists.
make sure that your skit includes the full text of the first three paragraphs as well as an analysis of the text and its meaning.
review unit 81 end of chapter skill activity understanding historians interpretations of the past defining the skill historians ask questions to learn how or why something happened why someone acted in a certain way or how different conditions might have changed events.
they use the answers to these questions in historiography the interpretation and presentation of historical research.
to write accurate information historians review primary and secondary sources.
they develop a historical perspective that reflects their understanding of events and people in the context of their time.
an interpretation may reflect an extreme bias for one view or reflect two different schools of thought.
interpretations of history can change over time as new information is revealed and new sources become available.
historians are often faced with alternative interpretations of a period or event.
when faced with opposing viewpoints good historians do additional research to verify the information presented in each account.
understanding the skill strategy analyze historical interpretations the two passages below show two alternate interpretations about the american revolution.
when comparing these interpretations identify the source of the writing and note details and language that helps you identify each author s perspective.
primarily the american revolution was a political and constitutional movement and only secondarily one that was either financial commercial or social.
at bottom the fundamental issue was the political independence of the colonies and in the last analysis the conflict lay between the british parliament and the colonial assemblies m anderson historian the american revolution an interpretation 1926 the struggle was not over high sounding political and constitutional concepts over the power of taxation or even in the final analysis over natural rights it was over colonial manufacturing wild lands and furs sugar wine tea and currency all of which meant simply the survival or collapse of english mercantile capitalism within the imperial colonial framework of the mercantilist system.
m hacker economics professor the triumph of american capitalism 1940 define the main points in each argument.
this will help you compare the interpretations.
discount rhetoric or emotional language that is not factual.
here hacker uses rhetoric to demean the political and constitutional concepts that andrews supports.
0 consider reasons why the interpretations might differ.
look for information about the author or the source that may give clues.
do you see possible bias.
were the interpretations created in different time periods so one might have relied on new previously unavailable sources.
in this case andrews is a historian while hacker is an economics professor.
how could their different careers affect the authors points of view.
o investigate how the interpretations differ.
what is each authors interpretation of the event.
summarize each interpretation to compare them.
however you should read additional information opinions or studies before you decide with which interpretation to agree.
81 ski strategy make a chart in a chart list the key information about each interpretation that your analysis revealed.
then write a short summary of each interpretation as well as a summary of how and why the interpretations differ.
interpretation 1 charles m anderson historian the american devolution an interpretation 1926 interpretation 2 louis m hacker economics professor the triumph of american capitalism 1949 key information main point the american devolution was caused by political issues.
key information main point the american devolution was caused by economic issues.
dhetorical language author discounts political and constitutional causes by calling them high sounding summary according to historian charles m anderson political issues were the primary cause of the american devolution.
the colonies sought political independence.
economic causes were secondary.
summary economics professor louis m hacker argues that political and constitutional causes were not at the root of the american devolution.
he believes that economic issues led to the conflict.
comparison summary anderson believes political issues were the cause of the american devolution while hacker points to economic issues.
this difference in interpretation is likely because the two authors represent different schools of thought anderson is a historian and hacker is an economics professor.
applying the skill reread the two passages.
then conduct research on the internet or in print sources to find another different interpretation of the reasons for the american revolution.
compare this new interpretation to those of charles m andrews and louis m hacker.
recreate the chart above and use the steps on the previous page to add a column to summarize the new interpretation.
then revise the comparison summary to explain why this alternative interpretation might differ from the previous interpretations.
define main points in each argument.
what does the author think are the reasons for the american revolution.
discount rhetoric or emotional language that is not factual.
does your source use any rhetoric or emotional language.
if so what.
consider reasons why the interpretations might differ.
what makes the source you found qualified to interpret historical events.
what reasons might explain any differences from the previous sources.
investigate how the interpretations differ.
does your new source agree with anderson or hackler or are new ideas presented.
explain the differences as well as the reasons for them.
81 sk2 iwmw a r the revolution v sfc t the american revolution led to the formation of the united states of america in 1776.
beginning in the 1760s tensions grew between american colonists and their british rulers when britain started passing a series of new laws and taxes for the colonies.
with no representation in the british government however colonists had no say in these laws which led to growing discontent.
after fighting broke out in 1775 colonial leaders met to decide what to do.
they approved the declaration of independence announcing that the american colonies were free from british rule.
in reality however freedom would not come until after years of fighting.
explore some of the people and events of the american revolution online.
you can find a wealth of information video clips primary sources activities and more at i i know not what course others wtay take but at for nee give wte liberty or give wee death patrick henry seeds of revolution watch the video to learn about colonial discontent in the years before the revolutionary war.
fp give me liberty or give me death read an excerpt from patrick henry s famous speech which urged the colonists to fight against the british.
the american revolution 81 mc2 0 the living constitution table of contents for the living constitution preamble 84 article 1 84 article 2 90 article 3 92 article 4 94 article 5 94 article 6 95 article 7 95 bill of rights 96 amendments 11 27 98 tracing themes voting rights 104 assessment 106 projects for citizenship 108 0he constitution was not made to fit us like a straight acket.
in its elasticity lies its chief greatness.
president woodrow wilson purposes of the constitution the official charge to the delegates who met in philadelphia in 1787 was to amend the articles of confederation.
they soon made a fateful decision however to ignore the articles and to write an entirely new constitution.
these delegates the framers set themselves five purposes to fulfill in their effort to create an effective constitution.
establish legitimacy first the framers of the constitution had to establish the new government s legitimacy its right to rule.
the patriots theory of government was set out in the declaration of independence which explained why british rule over the colonies was illegitimate.
now the framers had to demonstrate that their new government met the standards of legitimacy referred to in the declaration.
for the framers of the constitution legitimacy had to be based on a compact or contract among those who are to be ruled.
this is why the constitution starts with the words we the people of the united states do ordain and establish this constitution.
create appropriate structures the framers second purpose was to create appropriate structures for the new government.
the framers were committed to the principles of representative democracy.
they also believed that any new government must include an important role for state governments and ensure that the states retained some legitimacy to rule within their borders.
to achieve their goals the framers created the congress the presidency and the judiciary to share the powers of the national government.
they also created a system of division of powers between the national government and the state governments.
the original manuscript of the constitution is now kept in the national archives in washington d c am d 82 the living constitution 3.
describe and distribute power researching a constitutional question as you study the constitution think about a constitutional question that interests you.
here are some possible questions how much if at all can the federal government or a state government restrict the sale of firearms.
under what conditions does the president have the power to order american troops into battle without congressional approval.
under what conditions may a police officer conduct a search of the inside of an automobile.
the framers had as their third purpose to describe governmental powers and to distribute them among the structures they created.
the powers of the legislative branch which are those of congress are listed in article 1 section 8 of the constitution.
many of the executive powers belonging to the president are listed in article 2 sections 2 and 3.
the courts are given judicial powers in article 3.
the words of article 4 imply that the states retain authority over many public matters.
once you have chosen a constitutional question research that question in articles and books on the constitution.
also check the indexes of well known newspapers such as the new york times for articles that are relevant.
limit government powers the fourth purpose of the framers was to limit the powers of the structures they created.
limits on the congress s powers are found in article 1 section 9.
some of the limits on the powers of state governments are found in article 1 section 10.
there the framers enumerate functions that are delegated to the national government and so cannot be directed by the states.
allow for change the framers fifth purpose was to include some means for changing the constitution.
here they faced a dilemma they wanted to make certain that the government endured by changing with the times but they did not want to expose the basic rules of government to so many changes that the system would be unstable.
so in article 5 they created a difficult but not impossible means for amending the constitution.
how to read the constitution the constitution which appears on pages 84 103 is printed on a beige background while the explanatory notes next to each article section or clause are printed on blue.
each article is divided into sections and the sections are subdivided into clauses.
headings have been added and the spelling and punctuation modernized for easier reading.
portions of the constitution no longer in use have been crossed out.
the constitutional insight questions and answers will help you understand significant issues related to the constitution.
71 research web links review unit 83 ji i preamble constitutional insight preamble why does the preamble say we the people of the united states.
ordain and establish the new government.
the articles of confederation was an agreement among the states.
but the framers of the constitution wanted to be sure its legitimacy came from the american people not from the states which might decide to withdraw their support at any time.
this is a basic principle of the constitution.
article 1 constitutional insight section 1 why does the first article of the constitution focus on congress rather than on the presidency or the courts.
the framers were intent on stressing the central role of the legislative branch in the new government because it is the branch that most directly represents the people and is most responsive to them.
critical thinking do you think congress is still the branch of the federal government that is most directly responsible to the people.
why or why not.
constitutional insight section 2 1 why are members of the house of representatives elected every two years.
the house of representatives was designed to be a truly representative body with members who reflect the concerns and sentiments of their constituents as closely as possible.
the framers achieved this timely representation by establishing two years as a reasonable term for members of the house to serve.
critical thinking do you think electing members of the house of representatives every two years is a good idea.
why or why not.
the constitution preamble.
purpose of the constitution we the people of the united states in order to form a more perfect union establish justice insure domestic tranquility provide for the common defense promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity do ordain and establish this constitution for the united states of america.
the legislature section 1.
congress all legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a congress of the united states which shall consist of a senate and house of representatives.
the house of representatives 1.
elections the house of representatives shall be composed of members chosen every second year by the people of the several states and the electors in each state shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the state legislature.
qualifications no person shall be a representative who shall not have attained to the age of twenty five years and been seven years a citizen of the united states and who shall not when elected be an inhabitant of that state in which he shall be chosen.
number of representatives representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several states which may be included within this union according to their respective numbers which shall be determined by add ing to the whole number of free persons including those bound to service for a term of years and excluding indians net taxed three fifths of all other persons the actual enu meration shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the congress of the united states and within every subsequent term of ten years in such manner as they shall by law direct.
the number of representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty thousand but each state shall have at least one representative and until such enumeration shall be made the state of new hampshire shall be entitled to choose three massachusetts eight rhode island and providence plantations ene connecticut five new york six new requirements for holding federal office position j minimum age residency citizenship representative 25 state in which elected 7 years senator 30 state in which elected 9 years president supreme court 35 14 years in the united states natural born justice none none none jersey four7 pennsylvania eight delaware one maryland six virginia ten north carolina hve j south carolina five and georgia three.
vacancies when vacancies happen in the representation from any state the executive authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.
officers and impeachment the house of representatives shall choose their speaker and other officers and shall have the sole power of impeachment.
84 the living constitution 1 section 3.
the senate 1.
numbers the senate of the united states shall be composed of two senators from each state chosen by the legislature thereof for six years and each senator shall have one vote.
classifying terms immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first election they shall be divided as equally as may be into three classes.
the seats of the senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the second year of the second class at the expiration of the fourth year and of the third class at the expiration of the sixth year so that one third may be chosen every second year and if vacancies happen by resignation or otherwise during the recess of the legislature of any state the executive thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the leg islaturc which shall then fill such vacancies.
qualifications no person shall be a senator who shall not have attained to the age of thirty years and been nine years a citizen of the united states and who shall not when elected be an inhabitant of that state for which he shall be chosen.
role of vice president the vice president of the united states shall be president of the senate but shall have no vote unless they be equally divided.
officers the senate shall choose their other officers and also a president pro tempore in the absence of the vice president or when he shall exercise the office of president of the united states.
impeachment trials the senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments.
when sitting for that purpose they shall be on oath or affirmation.
when the president of the united states is tried the chief justice shall preside and no person shall be convicted without the concurrence of two thirds of the members present.
punishment for impeachment judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from office and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor trust or profit under the united states but the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to indictment trial judgment and punishment according to law.
congressional elections 1.
regulations the times places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof but the congress may at any time by law make or alter such regulations except as to the places of choosing senators.
sessions the congress shall assemble at least once in every year stteh meeting shall be on the fir3t monday in december unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
constitutional insight section 3 1 why are members of the senate elected every six years.
the framers feared the possibility of instability in the government.
so they decided that senators should have six year terms and be elected by the state legislatures rather than directly by the people.
the seventeenth amendment as you will see later changed this.
the framers also staggered the terms of the senators so that only one third of them are replaced at any one time.
this stabilizes the senate still further.
critical thinking do you think it is important today for the senate to have more stability than the house of representatives.
constitutional insight sections 3 6 and 3 7 must an impeached president step down from office.
not necessarily.
an impeachment is a formal accusation of criminal behavior or serious misbehavior.
by impeaching the president the u s house of representatives is officially accusing the nations chief executive of one or more wrongdoings that warrant possible removal from office.
it is then the responsibility of the senate to conduct a trial to determine whether the president is guilty or not guilty of the charges and thus whether or not the president must step down.
conviction requires a two thirds vote of the senate.
critical thinking do you think a president should be put on trial for a crime while he or she is still in office.
review unit constitutional insight section 5 2 what kinds of rules does congress make for itself.
the constitution gives each house control over most of its rules of procedure and membership.
rules are important for they help shape the kinds of laws and policies that pass each body.
senate rules allow a filibuster whereby a senator holds the floor as long as he or she likes in order to block consideration of a bill he or she dislikes.
in recent years a cloture rule has been used to end debate if 60 or more members vote to do so.
in contrast the house of representatives has rules to limit debate.
a rules committee has the primary task of determining how long a bill on the floor of the house may be discussed and whether any amendments can be offered to the bill.
in recent years the power of the rules committee has been limited but being able to shape the rules remains a powerful tool of members of congress.
critical thinking why do you think the chair of the rules committee is in a powerful position.
constitutional insight section 7 1 why must all bills to raise revenue originate in the house.
because its members all stand for election every two years the house was expected to be more directly responsive to the people.
the tradition of restricting the powers of taxation to the peoples representatives dates prior to the english bill of rights 1689 which granted to parliament and withheld from the king the right to raise taxes.
when colonists protesting the stamp act and the intolerable acts protested no taxation without representation they were appealing to a longstanding right codified in the english bill of rights.
constitutional insight section 7 2 how often do presidents use the veto and how often is that action overridden.
the use of the veto which is the refusal to approve a bill depends on many factors especially the political conditions of the time.
until 1865 only nine presidents exercised the veto for 36 pieces of legislation including andrew jackson who used it 12 times.
since 1865 every president has used the veto power some on relatively few occasions others as frequently as over a hundred times.
usually congress is unable to produce the votes those of two thirds of the members present in each house needed to override presidential vetoes.
critical thinking do you think it should be easier for congress to override a presidents veto.
why or why not.
rules and procedures 1.
quorum each house shall be the judge of the elections returns and qualifications of its own members and a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do business but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as each house may provide.
rules and conduct each house may determine the rules of its proceedings punish its members for disorderly behavior and with the concurrence of two thirds expel a member.
congressional records each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings and from time to time publish the same excepting such parts as may in their judgment require secrecy and the yeas and nays of the members of either house on any question shall at the desire of one fifth of those present be entered on the journal.
adjournment neither house during the session of congress shall without the consent of the other adjourn for more than three days nor to any other place than that in which the two houses shall be sitting.
payment and privileges 1.
salary the senators and representatives shall receive a compensation for their services to be ascertained by law and paid out of the treasury of the united states.
they shall in all cases except treason felony and breach of the peace be privileged from arrest during their attendance at the session of their respective houses and in going to and returning from the same and for any speech or debate in either house they shall not be questioned in any other place.
restrictions no senator or representative shall during the time for which he was elected be appointed to any civil office under the authority of the united states which shall have been created or the emoluments whereof shall have been increased during such time and no person holding any office under the united states shall be a member of either house during his continuance in office.
how a bill becomes a law 1.
tax bills all bills for raising revenue shall originate in the house of representatives but the senate may propose or concur with amendments as on other bills.
lawmaking process every bill which shall have passed the house of representatives and the senate shall before it become a law be presented to the president of the united states if he approves he shall sign it but if not he shall return it with his objections to that house in which it shall have originated who shall enter the objections at large on their journal and proceed to reconsider it.
if after such reconsideration two thirds of that house shall agree to pass the bill it shall be sent together with the objections to the other house by which it shall likewise be reconsidered and if approved by two thirds of that house it shall become a law.
but in all such 86 the living constitution cases the votes of both houses shall be determined by yeas and nays and the names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each house respectively.
if any bill shall not be returned by the president within ten days sundays excepted after it shall have been presented to him the same shall be a law in like manner as if he had signed it unless the congress by their adjournment prevent its return in which case it shall not be a law.
role of the president every order resolution or vote to which the concurrence of the senate and house of representatives may be necessary except on a question of adjournment shall be presented to the president of the united states and before the same shall take effect shall be approved by him or being disapproved by him shall be repassed by two thirds of the senate and house of representatives according to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.
balances reflected in the process of a bills becoming a law.
review unit 87 constitutional insight section 8 the powers given to congress are in section 8 of article 1.
the first 17 clauses of section 8 are often called the enumerated powers because they name individually congresss specific powers.
these powers deal with issues ranging from taxation and the national debt to calling out the armed forces of the various states to governing the nations capital district washington d c.
the 18th and final clause is different.
it gives congress the power to do what is necessary and proper to carry out the enumurated powers.
thus the enumerated powers of congress to lay and collect taxes to borrow money to regulate commerce and to coin money imply the power to create a bank in order to execute these powers.
early in the countrys history this elastic clause as it has been called was used by congress to establish the controversial bank of the united states in 1791 and the second bank of the united states in 1816.
critical thinking why do you think the elastic clause is still important today.
modern money technological advances such as color copiers have led to increased counterfeiting.
in response the bureau of engraving and printing bep the federal agency that prints u s currency began adding advanced security features to paper money.
the bep also made a commitment to redesign the nations currency every seven to ten years to stay ahead of counterfeiters.
the 5 10 20 50 and 100 bills were all redesigned between 2003 and 2010 ixixd oogooooot iqoj section 8.
powers granted to congress 1.
taxation the congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes duties imposts and excises to pay the debts and provide for the com mon defense and general welfare of the united states but all duties imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the united states 2 credit to borrow money on the credit of the united states 3.
commerce to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several states and with the indian tribes 4.
naturalization bankruptcy to establish a uniform rule of naturalization and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the united states 5.
money to coin money regulate the value thereof and of foreign coin and fix the standard of weights and measures 6.
counterfeiting to provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the united states 7.
post office to establish post offices and post roads 8.
patents copyrights to promote the progress of science and useful arts by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries 9.
federal courts to constitute tribunals inferior to the supreme court 10 international law to define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas and offenses against the law of nations 11.
war to declare war grant letters of marque and reprisal and make rules concerning captures on land and water 12.
army to raise and support armies but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two years 13.
navy to provide and maintain a navy 14.
regulation of armed forces to make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces 15.
militia to provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union suppress insurrections and repel invasions 16.
regulations for militia to provide for organizing arming and disciplining the militia and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the united states reserving to the states respectively the appointment of the officers and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline prescribed by congress 17.
district of columbia to exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever over such district not exceeding ten miles square as may by cession of particular states and the acceptance of congress become the seat of the government of the united states and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by the consent of the legislature of the state in which the same shall be for the erection of forts magazines arsenals dockyards and other needful buildings and 18.
elastic clause to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers and all other powers vested by this constitution in the government of the united states or in any department or officer thereof.
88 the living constitution j section 9.
powers denied congress 1.
slave trade the migration or importation of such persons as any of the states now existing shall think proper to admit shall not be prohibited bythc congress prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight but a taxor duty may be imposed on such importation not exceeding ten dollars for each person.
habeas corpus the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it.
illegal punishment no bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed.
direct taxes no capitation or other direct tax shall be laid tmless in proportion to the census or enumeration herein before directed to be takem 5.
export taxes no tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any state.
no favorites no preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the ports of one state over those of another nor shall vessels bound to or from one state be obliged to enter clear or pay duties in another.
public money no money shall be drawn from the treasury but in consequence of appropriations made by law and a regular statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time.
titles of nobility no title of nobility shall be granted by the united states and no person holding any office of profit or trust under them shall without the consent of the congress accept of any present emolument office or title of any kind whatever from any king prince or foreign state.
section 10.
powers denied the states 1.
restrictions no state shall enter into any treaty alliance or confederation grant letters of marque and reprisal coin money emit bills of credit make anything but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts pass any bill of attainder ex post facto law or law impairing the obligation of contracts or grant any title of nobility.
import and export taxes no state shall without the consent of the congress lay any imposts or duties on imports or exports except what may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection laws and the net produce of all duties and imposts laid by any state on imports or exports shall be for the use of the treasury of the united states and all such laws shall be subject to the revision and control of the congress.
constitutional insight section 9 why didnt the framers include a bill of rights in the original constitution.
actually they did.
article 1 section 9 defines limits on the powers of congress just as the first ten amendments which we call the bill of rights do.
while some of the provisions focus on such issues as slavery and taxation there are three explicit prohibitions dealing with citizens rights writ of habeas corpus.
section 9 clause 2 says that except in time of rebellion or invasion congress cannot suspend peoples right to a writ of habeas corpus.
this means that people cannot be held in prison or jail without being formally charged with a crime.
bill of attainder.
clause 3 prohibits the passage of any law that convicts or punishes a person directly and without a trial.
any legislative action that would punish someone without recourse to a court of law is called a bill of attainder.
ex post facto law.
the same clause prohibits ex post facto laws.
such a law would punish a person for an act that was legal when it was performed.
the fact that these particular rights were protected by the original document issued by the framers reflects both the framers experiences during the revolution and their fear of excessive government power.
q critical thinking why are american citizens today so intent on having protections against government violations of their rights.
review unit 89 article 2 constitutional insight section 1 1 what exactly is executive power.
ne know the president has it but nowhere is it explicitly defined.
it is most often defined as the power to carry out the laws of the land but of course no one person can handle such a chore alone.
a more appropriate definition is found in section 3 of this article which empowers the president to take care that the laws be faithfully executed.
in this sense the president is the chief administrator.
o critical thinking why is it important to have an executive who is the chief administrator.
peacetime and war restraints no state shall without the consent of congress lay any duty of tonnage keep troops or ships of war in time of peace enter into any agreement or compact with another state or with a foreign power or engage in war unless actually invaded or in such imminent danger as will not admit of delay.
article 2 the executive section 1.
the presidency 1.
terms of office the executive power shall be vested in a president of the united states of america.
he shall hold his office during the term of four years and together with the vice president chosen for the same term be elected as follows 2.
electoral college each state shall appoint in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct a number of electors equal to the whole number of senators and representatives to which the state may be entitled in the congress but no senator or representative or person holding an office of trust or profit under the united states shall be appointed an elector.
former method of electing president the electors shall meet in their respective states and vote by balfo t for two persons of wham one at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with themselves.
and they shall make a list of all the persons voted for.
and of the number of votes for each which list t foey shall sign and eerti fy and transmit scaled to the seat of the government of the united states directed to the president of the senate.
the president ef the senate shall in the presence of the senate and house of representatives open all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted.
the person having the greatest number of votes shall be the president if such number be a majority of the whole number of clce tors appointed and if there be more than one who have 3uch major ity end have an equal number of votes then the house of representatives shall immediately choose by ballot one of them for president and if no person have a majority then from the five high est on the list the said house shall in like manner choose the president.
but in choosing the president the votes shall be taken by states the representation from each state having one vote a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two thirds of the states and a majority of ar the sta tes shall be necessary to a eheice.
in every case after the choice of the president the person having the greatest number of votes of the electors shall be the viee president.
but if there should remain two or more who have equal votes the senate shall choose from them by ballot the vice president.
election day the congress may determine the time of choosing the electors and the day on which they shall give their votes which day shall be the same throughout the united states.
90 the living constitution 5.
qualifications no person except a natural born citizen er a citizen of the united states amhc time of the adoption of this constitution shall be eligible to the office of president neither shall any person be eligible to that office who shall not have attained to the age of thirty five years and been fourteen years a resident within the united states.
succession in case of the removal of the president from office or of his death resignation or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office the same shall devolve on the vice president and the congress may by law provide for the case of removal death resignation or inability both of the president and vice president declaring what officer shall then act as president and such officer shall act accordingly until the disability be removed or a president shall be elected.
salary the president shall at stated times receive for his services a compensation which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the period for which he shall have been elected and he shall not receive within that period any other emolument from the united states or any of them.
oath of office before he enter on the execution of his office he shall take the following oath or affirmation i do solemnly swear or affirm that i will faithfully execute the office of president of the united states and will to the best of my ability preserve protect and defend the constitution of the united states.
powers of the president 1.
military powers the president shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the united states and of the militia of the several states when called into the actual service of the united states he may require the opinion in writing of the principal officer in each of the executive departments upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective offices and he shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the united states except in cases of impeachment.
treaties appointments he shall have power by and with the advice and consent of the senate to make treaties provided two thirds of the senators present concur and he shall nominate and by and with the advice and consent of the senate shall appoint ambassadors other public ministers and consuls judges of the supreme court and all other officers of the united states whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for and which shall be established by law but the congress may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers as they think proper in the president alone in the courts of law or in the heads of departments.
vacancies the president shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the senate by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their next session.
constitutional insight section 1 6 what happens when the vice president succeeds a dead or incapacitated president.
section 1 6 provides that the vice president shall assume the powers and duties of the presidential office.
but until the twenty fifth amendment was added to the constitution in 1967 there was no explicit statement in the document that the vice president is to become president.
that procedure owes its origin to john tyler the tenth president of the united states who in 1841 succeeded william henry harrison the first president to die in office.
tyler decided to take the oath of office and assume the title of president of the united states.
congress voted to go along with his decision and the practice was repeated after lincoln was assassinated.
it would take another century for the written provisions of the constitution to catch up with the practice.
critical thinking why is it important to know the order of succession if a president dies in office.
constitutional insight section 2 1 just how much authority does the president have as commander in chief of the armed forces.
the president has the power to give orders to american military forces.
there have been several instances in u s history when presidents have used that authority in spite of congressional wishes.
president harry truman involved the armed forces of the united states in the korean war from 1950 to 1953 without a congressional declaration of war.
reacting to criticism of the vietnam war congress in 1973 enacted the war powers resolution making the president more accountable to congress for any military actions he or she might take.
every president since richard nixon has called the resolution unconstitutional.
nevertheless every president has reported to congress within 48 hours of sending troops into an international crisis as is required by the war powers resolution.
critical thinking why is it important that the commander in chief of the armed forces of the united states be a civilian the president rather than a military general.
review unit constitutional insight section 3 is it necessary for the president to deliver a state of the union address before a joint session of congress at the start of each legislative year.
the constitution requires only that the president report to congress on the state of the union from time to time and nowhere does it call for an annual address.
in 1913 president woodrow wilson wanted to influence congress to take action without delay on some legislation that he thought was important.
wilson revived the tradition which had been discontinued by jefferson of delivering the state of the union address in person.
o critical thinking how does the president use the state of the union address today.
constitutional insight section 4 have high level public officials ever been impeached.
in all of american history the house has impeached two presidents and neither had to leave office.
in 1868 the senate found president andrew johnson not guilty by one vote after the house impeached him charging him with violating a congressional act.
in 1999 senators acquitted president bill clinton after the house impeached him with charges of lying under oath and obstructing justice in the attempted cover up of a white house scandal.
the only other president to come close to impeachment was richard nixon.
in 1974 the house judiciary committee in what is the first step of the impeachment process recommended three articles of impeachment against nixon for his role in the infamous watergate scandal.
before the full house could vote for or against the articles of impeachment however nixon resigned from office.
critical thinking why do you think the framers of the constitution created such an elaborate and seemingly difficult procedure for removing a sitting president.
presidential duties he shall from time to time give to the congress information of the state of the union and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient he may on extraordinary occasions convene both houses or either of them and in case of disagreement between them with respect to the time of adjournment he may adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper he shall receive ambassadors and other public ministers he shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed and shall commission all the officers of the united states.
impeachment the president vice president and all civil officers of the united states shall be removed from office on impeachment for and conviction of treason bribery or other high crimes and misdemeanors.
above rep henry hyde chairman of the house judiciary committee swears in independent counsel kenneth starr during the committees hearings on impeachment charges against president bill clinton in 1998 right president andrew johnson is handed the articles of impeachment before his trial in 1868 nmiulco.
irie judiciary j ederal courts and judges the judicial powei nflrin 1s shau be vcsted in ne supreme court and in suck establishth h congress may from time to time ordain and their offices d u f the supreme and inferior courts shall he their setvtces a t8 behavior and shall at stated times receive fc their continuancetoffice00 h diminished durin the living constitution section 2.
the courts authority article 3 1.
general authority the judicial power shall extend to all cases in law and equity arising under this constitution the laws of the united states and treaties made or which shall be made under their authority to all cases affecting ambassadors other public ministers and consuls to all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction to controversies to which the united states shall be a party to controversies between two or more states between a state and citizens of another state between citizens of different states between citizens of the same state claiming lands under grants of different states and between a state or the citizens thereof and foreign states citizcns or subjects.
supreme court in all cases affecting ambassadors other public ministers and consuls and those in which a state shall be party the supreme court shall have original jurisdiction.
in all the other cases before mentioned the supreme court shall have appellate jurisdiction both as to law and fact with such exceptions and under such regulations as the congress shall make.
trial by jury the trial of all crimes except in cases of impeachment shall be by jury and such trial shall be held in the state where the said crimes shall have been committed but when not committed within any state the trial shall be at such place or places as the congress may by law have directed.
constitutional insight section 2 1 what is judicial review.
is it the same as judicial power.
actually they are not the same.
judicial power is the authority to hear cases involving disputes over the law or the behavior of people.
judicial review in contrast is a courts passing judgment on the constitutionality of a law or government action that is being disputed.
interestingly nowhere does the constitution mention judicial review.
there are places where it is implied for example in section 2 of article 6 but the only explicit description of the responsibility of the courts is the reference to judicial power in section 1 of article 3.
the supreme courts power to review laws passed by congress was explicitly affirmed by the court itself in marbury v madison.
see page 118.
critical thinking why is judicial review although not mentioned in the constitution an important activity of the supreme court.
definition treason against the united states shall consist only in levying war against them or in adhering to their enemies giving them aid and comfort.
no person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act or on confession in open court.
punishment the congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason but no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood or forfeiture except during the life of the person attainted.
the supreme court of the united states as of august 2010.
in the front row left to right are associate justices clarence thomas and antonin scalia chief justice john roberts and associate justices anthony kennedy and ruth bader ginsburg.
in the back row left to right are associate justices sonia sotomayor stephen breyer samuel alito and elena kagan.
article 4 constitutional insight section 2 1 why do college students attending public universities outside their state of residence have to pay higher tuition fees.
the supreme court has interpreted the privileges and immunities clause to allow higher tuition fees and fees for hunting permits etc.
for nonresidents when a state can give a substantial reason for the difference.
since state colleges and universities receive some financial support from the states taxpayers the difference is regarded as justified in most states.
if a student establishes residency in the state he or she can pay in state tuition after one year.
critical thinking do you think it is fair that a nonresident must pay higher tuition fees at a state college than a resident of the state must pay.
constitutional insight section 3 1 should there be a west virginia.
the constitution states that no new state shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other state without the permission of the legislature of the state involved and of the congress.
vermont kentucky tennessee and maine were created from territory taken from existing states with the approval of the sitting legislatures.
west virginia however is a different story.
during the civil war the residents of the westernmost counties of virginia were angry with their states decision to secede from the union.
they petitioned congress to have their counties declared a distinct state.
congress agreed and so the state of west virginia was created.
after the civil war the legislature of virginia gave its formal approval perhaps because it was in no position to dispute the matter.
critical thinking suppose a section of texas should decide to become a new state today.
could it do this.
why or why not.
relations among states section 1.
state acts and records full faith and credit shall be given in each state to the public acts records and judicial proceedings of every other state.
and the congress may by general laws prescribe the manner in which such acts records and proceedings shall be proved and the effect thereof.
rights of citizens 1.
citizenship the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states.
extradition a person charged in any state with treason felony or other crime who shall flee from justice and be found in another state shall on demand of the executive authority of the state from which he fled be delivered up to be removed to the state having jurisdiction of the crime.
fugitive slaves no person held to service or labor in one stater under the laws thereof escaping into another shall in consequence of any law or regulation therein be discharged from such service or labor but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such sendee or labor may be due.
new states 1.
admission new states may be admitted by the congress into this union but no new state shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other state nor any state be formed by the junction of two or more states or parts of states without the consent of the legislatures of the states concerned as well as of the congress.
congressional authority the congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states and nothing in this constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the united states or of any particular state.
guarantees to the states the united states shall guarantee to every state in this union a republican form of government and shall protect each of them against invasion and on application of the legislature or of the executive when the legislature cannot be convened against domestic violence.
amending the constitution the congress whenever two thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary shall propose amendments to this constitution or on the application of the legislatures of two thirds of the several states shall call a convention for proposing amendments which in either case shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of this constitution when ratified by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states or by conventions ir three fourths thereof as the one or the other mode of ratification may b proposed by the congress provided that no amendment which may bo made prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight shall in any manner affect the first and fourth cjnmnr in the ninth section of the first article and that no state without its consent shall be deprived of it equal suffrage in the senate.
the living constitution r article 6.
supremacy of the national government section 1.
valid debts all debts contracted and engagements entered into before the adoption of this constitution shall be as valid against the united states under this constitution as under the confederation.
supreme law this constitution and the laws of the united states which shall be made in pursuance thereof and all treaties made or which shall be made under the authority of the united states shall be the supreme law of the land and the judges in every state shall be bound thereby anything in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding.
loyalty to constitution the senators and representatives before mentioned and the members of the several state legislatures and all executive and judicial officers both of the united states and of the several states shall be bound by oath or affirmation to support this constitution but no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the united states.
ratification the ratification of the conventions of nine states shall be sufficient for the establishment of this constitution between the states so ratifying the same.
done in convention by the unanimous consent of the states present the seventeenth day of september in the year of our lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty seven and of the independence of the united states of america the twelfth.
in witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names.
george washington president and deputy from virginia delaware george read gunning bedford jr john dickinson richard bassett jacob broom maryland james mchenry dan of st thomas jenifer daniel carroll virginia john blair james madison jr north carolina william blount richard dobbs spaight hugh williamson south carolina john rutledge charles cotesworth pinckney charles pinckney pierce butler georgia william few abraham baldwin new hampshire john langdon nicholas gilman massachusetts nathaniel gorham rufus king connecticut william samuel johnson roger sherman new york alexander hamilton new jersey william livingston david brearley william paterson jonathan dayton pennsylvania benjamin franklin thomas mifflin robert morris george clymer thomas fitzsimons fared ingersoll james wilson gouverneur morris article 6 constitutional insight section 2 just how supreme is the law of the land.
the constitution and all federal laws and treaties are the highest law of the land.
to be supreme federal laws must be constitutional.
all state constitutions and laws and all local laws rank below national law and cannot be enforced if they contradict national law.
for example if the united states enters into a treaty protecting migratory canadian birds the states must change their laws to fit the provisions of that agreement.
that was the decision of the supreme court in the case of missouri v holland 1920.
the state of missouri argued that the national government could not interfere with its power to regulate hunting within its borders but the supreme court concluded that the treaty was a valid exercise of national power and therefore took priority over state and local laws.
the states had to adjust their rules and regulations accordingly.
critical thinking what would happen if the national law were not supreme.
article 7 constitutional insight why was ratification by only 9 states sufficient to put the constitution into effect.
in taking such a momentous step as replacing one constitution the articles of confederation with another the framers might have been expected to require the agreement of all 13 states.
but the framers were political realists.
they knew that they would have a difficult time winning approval from all 13 states.
but they also knew that they had a good chance of getting 9 or 10 of the states on board and that once that happened the rest would follow.
their strategy worked but just barely.
although they had the approval of 9 states by the end of june 1788 2 of the most important states virginia and new york had not yet decided to ratify.
without the approval of these influential states the new government would have had a difficult time surviving.
finally by the end of july both had given their blessing to the new constitution but not without intense debate.
and then there was the last holdout rhode island.
not only had rhode island refused to send delegates to the constitutional convention in 1787 but it turned down ratification several times before finally giving its approval in 1790 under a cloud of economic and even military threats from neighboring states.
critical thinking do you think all 50 states would ratify the constitution today.
why or why not.
review unit 95 bill of rights constitutional insight amendment 1 do americans have an absolute right to free speech.
the right to free speech is not without limits.
in the case of schenck v united states 1919 justice oliver wendell holmes wrote that this right does not protect a man in falsely shouting fire in a theatre and causing a panic thus there are some forms of speech that are not protected by the first amendment and congress is allowed to make laws regarding certain types of expression.
see schenck v united states on page 396.
critical thinking why is there controversy over freedom of speech today.
constitutional insight amendment 4 can the police search your car without a court issued search warrant when they stop you for speeding.
the answer according to supreme court decisions depends on whether they have good reasons called probable cause for doing so.
if a state trooper notices bloody clothing on the back seat of a vehicle she stops for a traffic violation there might be probable cause for her to insist on searching the vehicle.
there is probably not sufficient reason for a search if the trooper is merely suspicious of the driver because of the way he is acting.
in such cases the trooper may make a casual request such as do you mind if i look inside your vehicle if the answer is no then according to the court the driver has waived his or her constitutional right against unreasonable searches.
critical thinking why do you think the right against unreasonable searches and seizures is highly important to most people.
constitutional insight amendment 5 can you be tried twice for the same offense.
the prohibition against double jeopardy protects you from having the same charge twice brought against you for the same offense but you can be tried on different charges related to that offense.
critical thinking what do you think could happen if a person could be tried twice for the same offense.
the bill of rights and amendments 11 27 amendments 1 10 proposed by congress september 25 1789.
ratified december 15 1791.
amendment 1.
religious and political freedom 1791 congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
amendment 2.
right to bear arms 1791 a well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.
amendment 3.
quartering troops 1791 no soldier shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without the consent of the owner nor in time of war but in a manner to be prescribed by law.
amendment 4.
search and seizure 1791 the right of the people to be secure in their persons houses papers and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated and no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause supported by oath or affirmation and particularly describing the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized.
amendment 5.
rights of accused persons 1791 no person shall be held to answer for a capital or otherwise infamous crime unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury except in cases arising in the land or naval forces or in the militia when in actual service in time of war or public danger nor shall any person be subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself nor be deprived of life liberty or property without due process of law nor shall private property be taken for public use without just compensation.
analyzing political cartoons federal edifice this 1788 cartoon celebrated the ratification of the constitution by new york the 11th state to ratify it.
this left only north carolina and rhode island to complete all 13 pillars of the federal structure.
skillbuilder analyzing political cartoons 1.
what details in the cartoon convey the unity of the states who have voted for ratification.
how does the cartoonist contrast the states who have voted for ratification with those who have not.
what message does this convey.
the living constitution amendment 6.
right to a speedy public trial 1791 in all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury of the state and district wherein the crime shall have been committed which district shall have been previously ascertained by law and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation to be confronted with the witnesses against him to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor and to have the assistance of counsel for his defense.
amendment 7.
trial by jury in civil cases 1791 in suits at common law where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars the right of trial by jury shall be preserved and no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise reexamined in any court of the united states than according to the rules of the common law.
amendment 8.
limits of fines and punishments 1791 excessive bail shall not be required nor excessive fines imposed nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
amendment 9.
rights of people 1791 the enumeration in the constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.
amendment 10.
powers of states and people 1791 the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution nor prohibited by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people.
the c n t 1 n e l voi ix s on the er eel ion of the eleventh pillar of the great f j litnadomei uit 6tg have re feluitau oag dhi cou i r rife 7 e foundation.
the federal edifice eleven stars in quick lucceflion rife eleven columns orike our wondnng eyes soonoer the fhall fwcll the beauteous dome columbias boaft and freedoms hallow d home.
here fiiall the arts in glorious fplendour ihme.
and agriculture give her llores divine.
commerce refind difpenfe us more than gold and this new world teach wisdom to the old religion here lhall fix her blefl.
arrayd ih mikhteft like its parent god.
justice and law lhall cndlefs peace maintain and jr saturnian age return again.
constitutional insight amendment 6 what are the miranda rights.
the term comes from the supreme courts decision in miranda v arizona 1966 in which the justices established basic rules that the police must follow when questioning a suspect.
if suspected of a crime you must be told that you have a right to remain silent and that anything you say can and will be used against you.
you also need to be informed that you have a right to an attorney and that the attorney may be present during questioning.
see miranda v arizona on page 694.
critical thinking how do the miranda rights protect you.
constitutional insight amendment 7 what are the rules of the common law.
the common law is the body of legal practices and decrees developed in england and english speaking america from a d 1066 through the present.
it includes magna carta 1215 which acknowledges versions of rights affirmed in the fifth sixth and seventh amendments as well as the english bill of rights 1689 which codified rights asserted in the first second seventh and eighth amendments.
the common law also includes the decisions and published opinions of state and federal appeals courts including the u s supreme court.
constitutional insight amendment 9 do you have a right to privacy.
until 1965 no such right had ever been explicitly stated by the courts.
that year in the case of griswold v connecticut the court said there is an implied right of american citizens to make certain personal choices without interference from the government this case concerned the right to use birth control.
years later in roe v wade 1973 the same logic was used to declare unconstitutional a texas law restricting a womans right to an abortion in the first stages of pregnancy.
since that decision both the right to privacy and abortion rights have become the focus of major political controversies.
critical thinking how do you define the right to privacy.
review unit 97 amendments 11 27 amendment 11.
lawsuits against states 1795 passed by congress march 4 1794.
ratified february 7 1795.
note article 3 section 2 of the constitution was modified by the eleventh amendment.
the judicial power of the united states shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity commenced or prosecuted against one of the united states by citizens of another state or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state.
constitutional insight amendment 12 how did the election of 1800 lead to the twelfth amendment.
the election ended in a tie vote between the republican running mates.
the election was decided in jeffersons favor on the houses 36th ballot.
almost immediately alexander hamilton and others designed an amendment that established that the presidential electors would vote for both a presidential and a vice presidential candidate.
this amendment prevents a repeat of the problem experienced in the 1800 election.
critical thinking why is the twelfth amendment important.
election reform a new wave of electoral reform efforts was triggered by the controversial presidential election of 2000 in which george w bushs narrow victory over al gore left many americans questioning the system in which a candidate can lose the popular vote but win the election.
eliminating or reworking the electoral college has been historically the most frequently proposed constitutional amendment.
other reform proposals have included improving access to polling places by allowing voting on weekend hours or making election day a national holiday.
still other proposals would modernize inaccurate polling and counting machines or replace them with computer stations or online voting.
amendment 12.
election of executives 1804 passed by congress december 9 1803.
ratified june 15 1804.
note a portion of article 2 section 1 of the constitution was superseded by the twelfth amendment.
the electors shall meet in their respective states and vote by ballot for president and vice president one of whom at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with themselves they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as president and in distinct ballots the person voted for as vice president and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as president and of all persons voted for as vice president and of the number of votes for each which lists they shall sign and certify and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the united states directed to the president of the senate the president of the senate shall in the presence of the senate and house of representatives open all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted the person having the greatest number of votes for president shall be the president if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed and if no person have such majority then from the persons having the highest numbers not exceeding three on the list of those voted for as president the house of representatives shall choose immediately by ballot the president.
but in choosing the president the votes shall be taken by states the representation from each state having one vote a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two thirds of the states and a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice.
and if the house of representatives shall not choose a president whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them before the fourth day of march next following then the vice president shall act as president as in the case of the death or other constitutional disability of the president.
the person having the greatest number of votes as vice president shall be the vice president if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed and if no person have a majority then from the two highest numbers on the list the senate shall choose the vice president a quorum for the purpose shall consist of two thirds of the whole number of senators and a majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice.
but no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of president shall be eligible to that of vice president of the united states.
amendment 13.
slavery abolished 1865 passed by congress january 31 1865.
ratified december 6 1865.
note a portion of article 4 section 2 of the constitution was superseded by the thirteenth amendment.
the living constitution section 1 neither slavery nor involuntary servitude except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted shall exist within the united states or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
section 2 congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropri ate legislation.
amendment 14.
civil rights 1868 passed by congress june 13 1866.
ratified july 9 1868.
note article 1 section 2 of the constitution was modified by section 2 of the fourteenth amendment.
section 1 all persons born or naturalized in the united states and subject to the jurisdiction thereof are citizens of the united states and of the state wherein they reside.
no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the united states nor shall any state deprive any person of life liberty or property without due process of law nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
section 2 representatives shall be apportioned among the several states according to their respective numbers counting the whole number of persons in each state excluding indians not taxed.
but when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for president and vice president of the united states representatives in congress the executive and judicial officers of a state or the members of the legislature thereof is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such state being twenty one years of age and citizens of the united states or in any way abridged except for participation in rebellion or other crime the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens twenty one years of age in such state.
section 3 no person shall be a senator or representative in congress or elector of president and vice president or hold any office civil or military under the united states or under any state who having previously taken an oath as a member of congress or as an officer of the united states or as a member of any state legislature or as an executive or judicial officer of any state to support the constitution of the united states shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof.
but congress may by a vote of two thirds of each house remove such disability.
section 4 the validity of the public debt of the united states authorized by law including debts incurred for payment of pensions and bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or rebellion shall not be questioned.
but neither the united states nor any state shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against the united states or any claim for the loss or emancipation of any slave but all such debts obligations and claims shall be held illegal and void.
section 5 the congress shall have power to enforce by appropriate legislation the provisions of this article.
constitutional insight amendment 14 section 1 which personal status takes priority that of u s citizen or that of state citizen.
the fourteenth amendment firmly notes that americans are citizens of both the nation and the states but that no state can abridge the privileges or immunities of u s citizens deprive them of life liberty or property without due process of law or deny them equal protection of the laws what does it mean to have equal protection of the laws.
equal protection means that the laws are to be applied to all persons in the same way.
the legal system may discriminate between persons treat them differently or unequally if there are relevant reasons to do so.
for example a persons income and number of dependents are relevant for how much income tax the person should pay a persons gender is not.
the supreme courts 1954 decision in brown v board of education of topeka see page 708 which declared segregated public schools unconstitutional was based on an equal protection claim a childs race is not a relevant reason for the state to assign that child to a particular school.
critical thinking do you agree or disagree with the supreme courts decision that separate educational facilities are unequal.
explain your position.
the lawyers who successfully challenged segregation in the brown v board of education case in 1954 included eft to right george e c hayes thurgood marshall and james m nabrit jr review unit constitutional insight amendment 15 can you be denied the right to vote.
the fifteenth amendment prohibits the united states or any state from keeping citizens from voting because of race or color or because they were once slaves.
however a person convicted of a crime can be denied the right to vote as can someone found to be mentally incompetent.
o critical thinking why do you think so many people do not exercise the right to vote.
constitutional insight amendment 16 how has the ability of congress to impose taxes been amended.
the sixteenth amendment permits a federal income tax and in so doing changes article 1 section 9 clause 4 by stating that congress has the power to levy an income tax which is a direct tax without apportioning such a tax among the states according to their populations.
o critical thinking do you think congress should have the power to impose an income tax on the people of the nation.
explain your answer.
constitutional insight amendment 17 how has the way senators are elected been changed.
the seventeenth amendment changes article 1 section 3 clause 1 by stating that senators shall be elected by the people of each state rather than by the state legislatures.
o critical thinking why is the direct election of senators by the people of each state important.
federal agents enforcing the eighteenth amendment prepare to smash containers of illegal whiskey.
amendment 15.
right to vote 1870 passed by congress february 26 1869.
ratified february 3 1870.
section 1 the right of citizens of the united states to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of race color or previous condition of servitude.
section 2 the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment 16.
income tax 1913 passed by congress july 12 1909.
ratified february 3 1913.
note article 2 section 9 of the constitution was modified by the sixteenth amendment.
the congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes from whatever source derived without apportionment among the several states and without regard to any census or enumeration.
amendment 17.
direct election of senators 1913 passed by congress may 13 1912.
ratified april 8 1913.
note article 2 section 3 of the constitution was modified by the seventeenth amendment.
clause 1 the senate of the united states shall be composed of two senators from each state elected by the people thereof for six years and each senator shall have one vote.
the electors in each state shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the state legislatures.
clause 2 when vacancies happen in the representation of any state in the senate the executive authority of such state shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies provided that the legislature of any state may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct.
clause 3 this amendment shall not be so construed as to affect the election or term of any senator chosen before it becomes valid as part of the constitution.
amendment 18.
prohibition 1919 passed by congress december 18 1917.
ratified january 16 1919.
repealed by amendment 21.
section 1 after one year from the ratification of this article the manu facture sale or transportation of mtoxicating liquors within the impor tation thereof into or the exportation thereof from the united states and all territory subject to the jurisdiction thereof for beverage purposests hereby prohibited.
section 2 the congress and the several states 3hall have concurrent power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
section 3 this article 3hall be inoperative unless it 3hall have been ratified as an amendment to the constitution by the legislatures of the several states as provided in the constitution within seven years from the date of the submission hcrcof to the states by the congress.
10 the living constitution amendment 19.
woman suffrage 1920 passed by congress june 4 1919.
ratified august 18 1920.
clause 1 the right of citizens of the united states to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex.
clause 2 congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment 20.
lame duck sessions 1933 passed by congress march 2 1932.
ratified january 23 1933.
note article 1 section 4 of the constitution was modified by section 2 of this amendment.
in addition a portion of the twelfth amendment was superseded by section 3.
section 1 the terms of the president and vice president shall end at noon on the 20th day of january and the terms of senators and representatives at noon on the 3rd day of january of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified and the terms of their successors shall then begin.
section 2 the congress shall assemble at least once in every year and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 3rd day of january unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
section 3 if at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the president the president elect shall have died the vice president elect shall become president.
if a president shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for the beginning of his term or if the president elect shall have failed to qualify then the vice president elect shall act as president until a president shall have qualified and the congress may by law provide for the case wherein neither a president elect nor a vice president elect shall have qualified declaring who shall then act as president or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected and such person shall act accordingly until a president or vice president shall have qualified.
section 4 the congress may by law provide for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the house of representatives may choose a president whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them and for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the senate may choose a vice president whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them.
section 5 sections 1 and 2 shall take effect on the 15th day of october following the ratification of this article.
section 6 this article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the constitution by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states within seven years from the date of its submission.
amendment 21.
repeal of prohibition 1933 passed by congress february 20 1933.
ratified december 5 1933.
section 1 the eighteenth article of amendment to the constitution of the united states is hereby repealed.
section 2 the transportation or importation into any state territory or possession of the united states for delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors in violation of the laws thereof is hereby prohibited.
constitutional insight amendment 19 when did women first get the right to vote in the united states.
women had the right to vote in the state of new jersey between 1776 and 1807.
in the late 19th century some states and territories began to extend full or limited suffrage to women.
then in 1920 the nineteenth amendment prohibited the united states or any state from denying women the right to vote.
o critical thinking how does the right of women to vote affect politics today.
constitutional insight amendment 20 why is the twentieth amendment usually called the tame duck amendment.
a lame duck is a person who continues to hold office after his or her replacement has been elected.
such a person is called a lame duck because he or she no longer has any strong political influence.
the twentieth amendment reduces the time between the election of a new president and vice president in november and their assumption of the offices which it sets at january 20 instead of march 4.
it also reduces the time new members of congress must wait to take their seats from 4 months to about 2 months.
they are now seated on january 3 following the november election.
as a result the lame duck period is now quite short.
q critical thinking why may the framers have specified a longer lame duck period.
constitutional insight amendment 21 what is unique about the twenty first amendment.
besides being the only amendment that explicitly repeals another it was the first and is so far the only one to have been ratified by the state convention method outlined in article 5.
congress probably fearing that state legislatures would not deal swiftly with the issue of repeal chose to have each state call a special convention to consider the amendment.
the strategy worked well for the elected delegates to the conventions represented public opinion on the issue and ratified the amendment without delay.
critical thinking why is it necessary to pass another amendment to revoke or remove an existing amendment.
review unit 101 congressional term limits in 1995 the supreme court struck down all state laws limiting congressional terms stating that they were unconstitutional.
the court ruled that only a constitutional amendment such as the twenty second which limits the president to two terms could impose term limits on members of congress.
proposed constitutional amendments for congressional term limits were defeated in congress in 1995 and in 1997.
constitutional insight amendment 23 why were residents of the district of columbia without a vote in presidential elections.
first the district was merely an idea at the time the constitution was written.
second no one expected the district to include many residents.
third the framers designed the electoral college on a state framework.
by 1960 however the fact that nearly 800 000 americans living in the nations capital could not vote in presidential elections was an embarrassment.
the twenty third amendment gives washington d c residents the right to vote in presidential elections by assigning them electoral votes.
critical thinking do you think the district of columbia should be made a separate state.
constitutional insight amendment 24 why was the poll tax an issue important enough to require an amendment.
the poll tax was used in some places to prevent african american voters at least the many who were too poor to pay the tax from participating in elections.
as the civil rights movement gained momentum the abuse of the poll tax became a major issue but the national government found it difficult to change the situation because the constitutional provisions in article 1 section 4 leave the qualifications of voters in the hands of the states.
the twenty fourth amendment changed this by prohibiting the united states or any state from including payment of any tax as a requirement for voting.
0 critical thinking what impact do you think the twenty fourth ment has had on elections.
section 3 this article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been rati fled as an amendment to the constitution by conventions in the several states as provided in the constitution within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the states by the congress.
amendment 22.
limit on presidential terms 1951 passed by congress march 21 1947.
ratified february 27 1951.
section 1 no person shall be elected to the office of the president more than twice and no person who has held the office of president or acted as president for more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected president shall be elected to the office of the president more than once.
but this article shall not apply to any person holding the office of president when this article was proposed by the congress and shall not prevent any person who may be holding the office of president or acting as president during the term1 within which thi3 arti cle becomes operative from holding the office of president or acting a3 president during the remainder of such tcrtth section 2 this article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the constitution by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states within seven years from the date of its submission to the states by the congress.
amendment 23.
voting in district of columbia 1961 passed by congress june 17 1960.
ratified march 29 1961.
section 1 the district constituting the seat of government of the united states shall appoint in such manner as congress may direct a number of electors of president and vice president equal to the whole number of senators and representatives in congress to which the district would be entitled if it were a state but in no event more than the least populous state they shall be in addition to those appointed by the states but they shall be considered for the purposes of the election of president and vice president to be electors appointed by a state and they shall meet in the district and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment.
section 2 the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment 24 abolition of poll taxes 1964 passed by congress august 27 1962.
ratified january 23 1964.
section 1 the right of citizens of the united states to vote in any primary or other election for president or vice president for electors for president or vice president or for senator or representative in congress shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or any state by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax.
section 2 the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment 25.
presidential disability succession 1967 passed by congress july 6 1965.
ratified february 10 1967.
note article 2 section 1 of the constitution was affected by the twenty fifth amendment.
he living constitution section 1.
in case of the removal of the president from office or of his death or resignation the vice president shall become president.
section 2 whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the vice president the president shall nominate a vice president who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both houses of congress.
section 3 whenever the president transmits to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the contrary such powers and duties shall be discharged by the vice president as acting president.
section 4 whenever the vice president and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as congress may by law provide transmit to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives their written declaration that the president is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office the vice president shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as acting president.
thereafter when the president transmits to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives his written declaration that no inability exists he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the vice president and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department s or of such other body as congress may by law provide transmit within four days to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives their written declaration that the president is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office.
thereupon congress shall decide the issue assembling within forty eight hours for that purpose if not in session.
if the congress within twenty one days after receipt of the latter written declaration or if congress is not in session within twenty one days after congress is required to assemble determines by two thirds vote of both houses that the president is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office the vice president shall continue to discharge the same as acting president otherwise the president shall resume the powers and duties of his office.
amendment 26.
18 year old vote 1971 passed by congress march 23 1971.
ratified july 1 1971.
note amendment 14 section 2 of the constitution was modified by section 1 of the twenty sixth amendment.
section 1 the right of citizens of the united states who are eighteen years of age or older to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of age.
section 2 the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment 27.
congressional pay 1992 proposed by congress september 25 1789.
ratified may 7 1992.
no law varying the compensation for the services of the senators and representatives shall take effect until an election of representatives shall have intervened.
constitutional insight amendment 26 why was the twenty sixth amendment passed.
granting 18 year olds the right to vote became an issue in the 1960s during the vietnam war when people questioned the justice of requiring 18 year old men to submit to the military draft but refusing them the right to vote.
in 1970 congress passed a voting rights act giving 18 year olds the right to vote in elections.
when the constitutionality of this act was challenged the supreme court decided that states had to honor the 18 year old vote for congressional and presidential elections but could retain higher age requirements for state and local elections.
to avoid confusion at the polls the twenty sixth amendment was passed.
it guarantees 18 year olds the right to vote in national and state elections.
o critical thinking do you think 18 year olds should have the right to vote.
why or why not.
above president richard m nixon signs the twenty sixth amendment to the constitution adopted in 1971.
constitutional insight amendment 27 how long did it take to ratify this amendment.
although the twenty seventh amendment was one of the 12 amendments proposed in 1789 as part of the bill of rights it was not ratified until 1992.
this amendment which deals with congressional compensation allows the members of congress to increase congressional pay but delays the increase until after a new congress is seated.
critical thinking do you think members of congress should be able to vote themselves a pay increase.
explain your answer.
review unit 103 tracing themes voting rights when the american colonists declared their independence from great britain in 1776 their struggle to create a representative government was just beginning.
one of the key elements of that government is the right to vote.
voting is a civic responsibility our democratic system relies on its citizens to participate in politics.
voting is an act of patriotism that reinforces the strength of the republic and its democratic ideals.
it is a part of our national ethos or character.
while the right to vote is not unique to the united states americans take great pride in their democratic history and the efforts that they have made to preserve and protect their voting rights.
however the right to vote has not always been extended to all groups.
as a result excluded groups used various methods to expand suffrage so that they too could exercise this important right.
such methods have included amendments to the u s constitution lobbying nonviolent protests and litigation.
as more americans have been granted this right we have moved closer to the constitutional goal of forming a more perfect union.
amendments in 1870 the fifteenth amendment was ratified as part of reconstruction following the civil war.
it attempted to guarantee african american males the right to vote by stating that the right of u s citizens to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of race color or previous condition of servitude this extension of suffrage added millions of potential new voters.
unfortunately the amendment did not protect against denial of suffrage for reasons other than race so poll taxes grandfather clauses and literacy tests were used to prevent african american males from exercising their voting rights.
the twenty fourth amendment ratified in 1964 abolished poll taxes which extended suffrage yet again.
more recently the twenty sixth amendment ratified in 1971 granted the right to vote to citizens eighteen years of age or older on the whole amendments have been an effective means of expanding voting rights.
5w ib lobbying when the delegates to the seneca falls convention gathered in 1848 to begin their campaign for womens rights they had no idea that it would take them 72 years of organizing lobbying and persuading before they finally won the right to vote.
several organizations took up the banner of womens suffrage such as the national american woman suffrage association nawsa and the national womens party nwp shown lobbying at left.
they used a variety of tactics to achieve their goals.
one tactic was lobbying or exerting pressure on public officials to achieve political goals.
for example the purpose of nawsas congressional committee led by alice paul and lucy burns was to convince congress to pass an amendment granting women the vote.
eventually the lobbying efforts of this and other suffrage groups paid off when the nineteenth amendment ratified in 1920 expanded voting rights to include women.
chapter 2 living constitution nonviolent protests in the 1960s the african american civil rights movement adopted a strategy of nonviolent protest to seek expansion of voting rights.
although the fifteenth amendment guaranteed that voting rights could not be denied due to race states had implemented other methods to discriminate against african americans and keep them from the polls.
members of the civil rights movement staged sit ins boycotts marches and other forms of nonviolent civil action in order to protest discrimination and segregation.
in 1965 martin luther king jr began a campaign of nonviolent protests and marches in selma alabama to gain voting rights for african americans.
in response to these events president johnson asked for the speedy passage of the voting rights act of 1965.
the new law gave the federal government the power to break down longstanding barriers to african american voting rights.
litigation in many instances litigation has been used to protect and reclaim voting rights.
for example in the 1915 decision guinn v united states the u s supreme court struck down oklahomas grandfather clause because it violated the rights guaranteed to african americans in the fifteenth amendment.
litigation has also been used to ensure that minority votes carry equal weight.
in 1973 for instance the mexican american legal defense and educational fund maldef won a victory in white v regester by arguing that reapportionment plans for the texas legislature disenfranchised african american and mexican american voters.
the supreme court upheld a lower court decision requiring certain counties to be redistricted.
through these and other cases litigation has proven to be an important tool for protecting the expansion of hi voting rights in the united states.
review unit 105 the living constitution assessment main ideas article 1.
the legislature 1.
why does the legislative branch of the government represent the people most directly.
what is the principal job of this branch.
why are there more members of the house of representatives than of the senate.
name four powers congress has.
what powers are denied to congress.
to the states.
the executive 5.
what is the main function of the executive branch.
6 who officially elects the president of the united states.
how can the president lose his or her job before election time.
the judiciary 8.
how are supreme court justices appointed.
what kinds of cases go before the supreme court.
why is the courts decision whether to hear a case important.
relations among states 10.
to extradite is to send a fugitive back to the state in which he or she is accused of committing a crime.
how is this an example of relations among states.
amending the constitution 11.
how many states must ratify an amendment for it to become part of the constitution.
why do you think it takes that many.
supremacy of the national government 12.
how does article 6 establish the supremacy of the constitution.
the amendments 13.
does the first amendment allow complete freedom of speech the right to say anything you want at any time anywhere.
explain your answer.
what is the newest amendment.
what protection does that amendment give to the american people.
thinking critically taking notes the powers of the federal government are separated among the three branches.
create a chart like the one below that shows how the constitutions framers used checks and balances to ensure that no one branch of the government could become too much stronger than the others.
executive legislative judicial making inferences how does the constitution reflect the fear of too strong a central government.
evaluating the bill of rights guarantees a defendant a speedy public trial.
do you think it is being observed today.
analyzing motives why did the framers make it so difficult to amend the constitution.
do you agree or disagree with their philosophy.
developing historical perspective review the feature on pages 104 105.
what methods have people used to expand voting rights.
do you think some methods might be more effective than others.
explain your answer.
texas test practice use the cartoon and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 1.
use the quotation and your knowledge of u s history to answer question 2.
the president shall have power by and with the advice and consent of the senate to make treaties provided two thirds of the senators present concur and he shall nominate and by and with the advice and consent of the senate shall appoint ambassadors other public ministers and consuls judges of the supreme court and all other officers of the united states.
constitution art.
2 part 2 2.
the passage describes checks on the power of f the president.
g the senate.
h the judiciary.
j the states.
which of the following must ratify constitutional amendments.
its awful the way theyre trying to influence congress.
why dont they serve cocktails and make campaign contributions like we do in the constitutional convention the framers adopted certain principles to be embodied in the constitution.
which of the following constitutional principles does the cartoon support.
a the federal governments power should be divided into separate branches.
b the federal government should be stronger than the state governments.
c the federal legislature should be responsive to the will of the people.
d the legislature and the president should check each others power.
congress the people the states the president 7 test practice for additional test practice go online for diagnostic tests tutorials j writesmart imagine that it is 1787 and you are a citizen of one of the original thirteen states.
your vote is necessary to ratify the new constitution that has been approved by the convention in philadelphia.
you have studied the seven articles and listened to spirited discussions about how you and your state will be affected.
write a journal entry in which you express your views about this document that is so important for the new united states.
make sure you include references to what you have read and heard about the constitution.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write your journal entry.
multimedia activity xcwwity review the introduction to the tracing themes feature on page 104.
then use the internet to research why voting is important to the democratic process and to our nations continued success.
identify how participation in the democratic process reflects our national ethos our patriotism our civic responsibility and our progress to build a more perfect union create a multimedia presentation to explain your findings to the class.
7 review unit 107 projects for citizenship applying the constitution the united states constitution is admired the worid over.
but a healthy democracy depends on the continuing participation of its citizens including you.
here are four projects that will help you learn the rewards and challenges of responsible citizenship.
research web links visit the links for the constitution for more information that will help you with these projects for citizenship project 1 project 2 becoming an educated voter endorsing a candidate choose a campaign for elective office and learn about the issues and the candidates in the campaign.
after doing your research write an endorsement or a statement in favor of one of the candidates.
learning about the candidates examine news media and news services.
during campaigns some services and publications offer endorsements that explain why particular candidates are worthy of support.
get information from political parties.
they provide information on the candidates but their perspective is biased toward their own candidates.
the major parties have internet sites as do many local groups and individual candidates.
contact interest groups such as the sierra club and the national association of manufacturers.
they often list candidates positions on issues and support candidates who share their beliefs.
look at databases and voters guides published by nonpartisan organizations such as the league of women voters and project vote smart.
as you use each source try to identify any bias.
think about the following questions.
what does the author of this source stand to gain from supporting a particular candidate.
is the information in the source complete and accurate.
does the author use loaded or inflammatory language.
presenting your project expressing political opinions writing a letter to the editor identify an issue that concerns you.
then write a letter or send an e mail message about that issue to the editor of a newspaper or magazine.
writing a persuasive letter find an issue that has been in the news lately and about which you feel strongly.
read recent articles editorials and cartoons in newspapers or magazines.
notice how they have addressed this issue.
compose a letter that clearly and concisely explains your views about the issue you have chosen.
your letter should also include reasons and facts that support your opinion on the issue.
it might also advocate some specific action to be taken to address the issue.
identify the person to whom you should send your letter and note any requirements the newspaper or magazine has for writing letters to the editor.
edit your letter carefully.
be sure to use standard grammar spelling sentence structure and punctuation.
presenting your project present the letter you wrote to the rest of the class.
when you do explain why you chose to write about this issue.
a student expresses her political opinions as she addresses an audience.
after you have written your endorsement you might send it to a media outlet such as a newspaper or a television station or post it on the internet.
or you might send it to your local or school newspaper.
he living constitution project 3 project 4 understanding how to lobby planning a lobbying campaign form a committee with other students to organize a lobbying campaign a campaign to influence legislation or public policy.
create a plan for the campaign that includes materials to be presented to government officials.
in creating your plan keep the following points in mind.
creating a lobbying plan establish a clear goal of what you want to achieve.
make sure all members of the group understand and agree with the established goal.
identify the appropriate people to lobby the people who can best help you to achieve your goal.
for example if your group is planning to lobby to have a bill passed you would lobby the legislators who will vote on the bill.
however if your group wants to lobby for a local improvement such as cleaning up an abandoned factory site you should lobby the local officials who make those decisions.
gather statistics and other information that support your case.
explore a variety of resources including the library the internet and news services.
conduct interviews with appropriate state or local officials.
use the information you gather to develop a brief written report that can be given to the officials you intend to lobby.
organize public opinion in favor of your case.
gather signatures on petitions or conduct a letter writing campaign to encourage people who support your goal to contact government officials.
you can also create fliers calling attention to your cause.
present your case to government officials firmly but politely.
practice your presentation several times before you actually appear before them.
presenting your project share your lobbying plan with the rest of the class in the form of a written proposal that includes materials such as petition forms that you will use in your lobbying effort.
if you implement your lobbying plan describe to the class what response you received from the officials you lobbied.
volunteering in your community making an oral report identify a local community organization that you might want to help.
find out what kinds of volunteer activities the organization has such as answering phones in the office serving food to the homeless or cleaning vacant lots.
then volunteer to participate in one of those activities.
prepare an oral report to present to the rest of the class about your experiences as a volunteer.
keep the following points in mind as you choose which organization to help.
a group of young volunteers in the summer of service project discusses plans with carpenters.
suggestions for volunteering decide what kinds of public service projects might interest you.
you might talk to your parents a teacher friends a local church or a local political organization to learn what kinds of volunteer services are needed in your community.
call local community organizations to find out what kinds of volunteer opportunities they offer and decide whether you would like to volunteer for those projects.
decide what cause you want to support and identify an organization that addresses that cause.
decide what type of work you want to do and work with that organization.
presenting your project deliver an oral report to your class about your experiences as a volunteer.
explain why you chose the specific volunteer activity that you did.
describe the activity you performed.
then explain what effect your volunteering had as well as whether you felt the experience was a good one.
review unit 109 on september 17 constitution day americans celebrate the signing of the united states constitution in 1787.
in texas social studies classrooms also observe celebrate freedom week.
this important celebration focuses on the meaning and significance of the two foundational documents in united states history the declaration of independence and the u s constitution.
the declaration of independence one of the most eloquent and influential documents ever written the declaration of independence gave the reasons the american colonies were willing to fight for independence.
thomas jefferson the main author of the document began by explaining the purpose of government.
part of this first section known as the preamble must be recited by texas students during celebrate freedom week.
it is perhaps the most famous statement from the document l l e hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.
declaration of independence in congress july 4 t77t.
imowtout ecfardten states t t m avtmsst qttftuwn rzrt these powerful words established the idea that governments exist to serve their citizens and that people have basic natural rights that government cannot take away.
throughout our history these words have inspired americans to fight for and expand the definitions of freedom equality and basic rights.
for example women s rights advocates echoed the language of the declaration of independence in 1848 when they demanded the right to vote by declaring that all men and women are created equal.
abolitionists and civil rights leaders also looked to the declaration of independence in their struggles to end slavery and ensure that african americans were guaranteed equal rights.
even beyond america the declaration of independence has inspired independence and prodemocracy movements around the world.
it continues to inspire us today.
independence day each 4th of july americans celebrate the adoption of the declaration of independence with parades fireworks picnics fairs and ceremonies honoring our freedoms and government.
key facts declaration of independence date adopted july 4 1776 by the continental congress key author thomas jefferson intent to announce formally that the 13 american colonies considered themselves independent states no longer part of the british empire to explain and justify the reasons for independence meaning and importance established in writing the principle that all people have certain fundamental rights that no government can take away explained that the purpose of government is to serve citizens influenced the u s constitution and bill of rights has inspired people throughout history in the struggle for equality justice and basic human rights philip gould corbis renzo luo shutterstock 4 i the u s constitution building on the declaration of independence the u s constitution established the system of government that is still in effect today.
another truly groundbreaking document the constitution established the rule of law and made clear that no one including the highest government official is above it.
the document s opening words the preamble elegantly state its purpose we the people of the united states in order to form a more perfect union establish justice insure domestic tranquility provide for the common defense promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity do ordain and establish this constitution for the united states of america.
united states constitution the three opening words we the people which were written so much larger than the others announced dramatically that in the united states the people are the source of all government power and authority.
i to protect people s rights and to balance power the constitution set up a system f that divides power among federal and state governments.
federal power is i supreme and certain powers are shared or reserved for the states.
a system of checks and balances further divides power among three equal branches of government legislative executive and judicial.
1 i the constitution also includes a process by which it can be amended or changed.
it is sometimes referred to as a living document for this reason it can be added to and improved by the people to reflect changes in society.
since it was adopted in 1787 the constitution has been amended 27 times.
these amendments have abolished slavery guaranteed women and minorities the right to vote and to receive equal treatment under the law changed voting and election procedures and made other improvements to our government.
cf3 one of the most important parts of the constitution is the bill of rights the first 10 amendments.
the bill of rights helps protect the rights described in the declaration of independence.
for example the bill of rights protects such basic rights as freedom of speech press and religion as well as due process rights such as the right to a fair trial.
the bill of rights was an important early addition to the constitution because it stated in writing some of the specific individual rights and protections guaranteed for all americans.
key facts bill of rights the constitution date adopted september 17 1787 by the constitutional convention key author james madison intent to establish a new national government of the united states to replace the articles of confederation to safeguard the freedoms of all americans present and future meaning and importance established the supreme law of the land for the united states that is still in effect today identifies the people as the ultimate source of government power sets up a system of power sharing among the federal and state government divides power into three equal branches of government includes an amendment process includes the bill of rights and other amendments that have protected and expanded individual rights and freedoms 1st amendment protects freedom of religion speech press assembly petition 2nd amendment protects the right to keep and bear arms 3rd amendment provides restrictions on quartering soldiers in citizens7 homes 4th amendment bans unreasonable searches or seizures 5th amendment protects citizens against self incrimination and being tried twice for the same crime prohibits government from depriving citizens of life liberty or property without due process of law 6th amendment protects citizens right to a swift and fair trial 7th amendment guarantees right to trial by jury 8th amendment protects citizens against cruel and unusual punishment 9th amendment states that citizens have rights beyond those specifically written in the constitution 10th amendment states that powers not given to the government are reserved to the states or to the people renzo fuo shutterstock research activity as part of celebrate freedom week conduct research on the two most influential documents in u s history.
first read the declaration of independence and explore how it influenced subsequent american history and has inspired people for generations.
in your own words explain how the declaration o independence is still relevant in our lives today.
then review a copy o t e u s constitution to explore how it has been amended throughout our nation s history.
give an example of how the constitution or bill of rights protects your rights and the rights of others.
celebrate freedom week 109 cf4 essential question mynotebook how did the jeffersonian era the age of jackson and manifest destiny contribute to the growth of the nation during the first half of the 19th century.
texas essential knowledge and skills teks 12b 21c 22a 22b 29b section 1 the jeffersonian era main idea during the presidencies of thomas jefferson james madison and james monroe the country grew in both size and prestige.
section 2 the age of jackson main idea during a time of growing sectionalism andrew jackson s election in 1828 ushered in a new era of popular democracy.
section 3 early british colonies main idea through settlement and war the united states greatly expanded its boundaries during the mid 1800s.
section 4 the colonies come of age main idea inventions and economic developments in the early 19th century helped transform american society.
section 5 reforming american society main idea throughout the mid 19th century men and women embarked on a widespread effort to solve problems in american society.
treaty of ghent is signed end ing the war of 1812 j congress passes the missouri compromise.
the port of new orleans louisiana was a major center for the cotton trade.
usa world 1803.
the united states purchases the louisiana territory from france.
1800 18021 toussaint louverture defeats french forces sent to recapture saint domingue haiti.
1810 h ip mexican war 18151 napoleon of independence is defeated at begins.
l821 mexico wins its independ ence from spain.
james john monroe quincy adams presidents thomas jefferson thomas jefferson james madison james madison 162 chapter 6 m tt york 1tbilf lihrarit a divided convention on the ety or order o r cons i derations cincinnati lately instituted by the major generals brigadier generals and other officers of the american army.
proving that it creates a race of hereditary patricians o r nobility.
interspersed with remarks on hi consequences to the paiteom and hanmnsis of the reroute.
addrefted to the people of south carolina and their representatives.
by a 8 8 i p mfr a slippered to he written by jedanus burke efqoire one of thv chief juffieei of the state of sautli carohiis.
jl ne tit trumftt in zlm.
phlladstpgt at mated and sold by robert bell to turi stntt.
price dtmv.
m cc trx ni.
a broadside against nobility this 1783 pamphlet was one of many expressions of the broad democratic sentiment that the revolution unleashed in american society.
the society of the cincinnati was an organization created shortly after the revolution by men who had served as high ranking officers in the patriot army.
to many americans however the society membership in which was to be hereditary looked suspiciously like the inherited aristocracies of england.
this pamphlet printed in philadelphia but intended for south carolinians warns of the dangers the society supposedly posed to the freedom and happiness of the republic fotosearch getty images fifty five men representing all the states except rhode island attended one or more sessions of the convention that sat in the philadelphia state house from may to september 1787.
these founding fathers as they would later become known were relatively young their average age was forty four and only one delegate benjamin franklin then eighty one was of advanced age.
they were well educated by the standards of their time.
most represented the great propertied interests of the country and many feared what one of them called the turbulence and follies of democracy.
yet all were also products of the american revolution and retained the the founding fathers uovninrinmrv qiicnirinn nf concentrated the convention unanimously chose washington to preside over its sessions and then closed its business to the public and the press.
the members then ruled that each state delegation would have a single vote.
major decisions would not require unanimity as they did in congress but only a simple majority.
virginia the most populous state sent the best prepared delegation to philadelphia.
james madison thirty six years old was its intellectual leader.
he had devised a detailed plan for a new national government and the virginians used it to control the agenda from the moment the convention began.
edmund randolph of virginia began the discussion by proposing that a national government ought to be established consisting of a supreme legislative executive and judiciary despite its vagueness it was a drastic proposal.
it called for the creation of a government very different from the existing the virginia confederation which among other things plan had no executive branch.
but so committed were the delegates to fundamental reform that they approved this resolution after only perfunctory debate.
then randolph introduced the details of madisons plan.
the virginia plan as it came to be known called for a new national legislature consisting of two houses.
in the lower house the states would be represented in proportion to their population thus the largest state virginia would have about ten times as many representatives as the smallest delaware.
members of the upper house were to be elected by the lower house under no rigid system of representation thus some of the smaller states might at times have no members in the upper house.
the proposal aroused immediate opposition among delegates from delaware new jersey and other small states.
some responded by arguing that congress had called the convention for the sole and express purpose of revising the articles of confederation and had no authority to do more than that.
eventually however william paterson of new jersey submitted a substantive alternative to the virginia plan a proposal for a federal as opposed to a national government.
the new jersey plan would preserve the existing one house legislature in which each state had equal representation but it gave congress expanded powers to tax and to regulate commerce.
the delegates voted to table paterson s proposal but not without taking note of the substantial support for it among small state representatives.
the constitution and the new republic 163 the virginia plan remained the basis for discussion.
but its supporters realized they would have to make concessions to the small states if the convention was ever to reach a general agreement.
they soon conceded an important point by agreeing to permit the members of the upper house to be elected by the state legislatures rather than by the lower house of the national legislature.
thus each state would always have at least one member in the upper house.
but many questions remained.
would the states be equally represented in the upper house or would the large states have small states more members than the small ones.
would versus large slaves who could not vote be counted as states part of the population in determining the size of a states representation in congress or were they to be considered simple property.
delegates from states with large and apparently permanent slave populations especially those from south carolina wanted to have it both ways.
they argued that slaves should be considered persons in determining representation.
but they wanted slaves to be considered property if the new government were to levy taxes on each state on the basis of population.
representatives from states where slavery had disappeared or was expected soon to disappear argued that slaves should be included in calculating taxation but not representation.
no one argued seriously for giving slaves citizenship or the right to vote.
compromise the delegates bickered for weeks.
by the end of june as both temperature and tempers rose to uncomfortable heights the convention seemed in danger of collapsing.
benjamin franklin the great who remaineb a calm voice of conciliation compromise through the summer warned that if they failed the delegates would become a reproach and by word down to future ages.
and what is worse mankind may hereafter from this unfortunate instance despair of establishing governments by human wisdom and leave it to chance war and conquest partly because of franklins soothing presence the delegates refused to give up.
finally on july 2 the convention agreed to create a grand committee with a single delegate from each state and with franklin as chairman to resolve the disagreements.
tlie imaninpd view of the constitutional convention in 1787 for the weatherwises federal almanack whose title suggested its the grand convention the enqraver john norman created this imagin.
w whvcin iiuh i lie 9.
p iaf4e dhia where the convention took place which gave this engraving a sense of reality even though norman never pro constitution political leanings.
norman was familiar with the interior of the hall in hiilafleipnia wne attended a session of the convention.
hall of representatives washington d c the bn geman r i rary debating the past the meaning of the constitution p f c cons u on has inspired debate from the moment it was drafted.
some people argue jl h u that the constitution is a flexible document intended to evolve in response to society s evolution others argue that it has a fixed meaning rooted in the original intent of the framers and that to move beyond that is to deny its value.
historians too disagree about why the constitution was written and what it meant to some scholars the creation of the federal system was an effort to preserve the ideals of the revolution and to create a strong national government capable of exercising real authority to others the constitution was an effort to protect the economic interests of existing elites even at the cost of betraying the principles of the revolution.
to still others the constitution was designed to protect individual freedom and to limit the power of the federal government.
the first influential exponent of the heroic view of the constitution as the culmination of the revolution was john fiske.
in the critical period of american history 1888 fiske described the many problems that beset the nation under the articles of confederation economic difficulties the weakness and ineptitude of the new national government threats from abroad interstate jealousies and widespread lawlessness.
only the timely adoption of the constitution fiske claimed saved the young republic from disaster.
in an economic interpretation of the constitution of the united states 1913 charles a.
beard challenged fiske s view.
according to beard the 1780s had been a critical period primarily for conservative businessmen who feared that the decentralized political structure of the republic imperiled their financial position.
such men he claimed wanted a government able to promote industry and trade protect private property and make good the public debt much of which was owed to them.
the constitution was beard claimed an economic document drawn with superb skill by men whose property interests were immediately at stake and who won its ratification over the opposition of a majority of the people.
a series of powerful challenges to beards thesis emerged in the 1950s as many scholars began to argue that the constitution was not an effort to preserve property but rather an enlightened effort to ensure stability and order.
examining the debate between the federalists and the antifederalists forrest mcdonald in we the people 1958 concluded that there was no consistent relationship between wealth and property and support for the constitution.
instead opinion on the new system was far more likely to reflect local and regional interests.
the cumulative effect of these challenges greatly weakened beard s argument few historians any longer accepted his thesis without reservation.
committee produced a proposal that became the basis of the great compromise its most important achievement was resolving the difficult problem of representation.
the proposal called for a legislature in which the states would be represented in the lower house on the basis of population.
each slave would count as three fifths of a free person in determining the basis for both representation and direct taxation.
the three fifths formula was based on the false assumption that a slave was three fifths as productive as a free worker and thus contributed only three fifths as much wealth to the state.
the committee proposed that in the upper house the states should be represented equally with two members apiece.
the proposal broke the deadlock.
on july 16 1787 the convention voted to accept the compromise.
over the next few weeks the convention agreed to another important compromise on the explosive issue of slavery.
the representatives of the southern states feared that the power to regulate trade might interfere with their agrarian economy which relied heavily on sales abroad and with slavery.
in response the convention agreed that the new legislature would not be permitted to tax exports congress would also be forbidden to impose a duty of more than 10 a head on imported slaves and it would have no authority to stop the slave trade for twenty years.
to those delegates who viewed the continued 164 existence of slavery as an affront to the principles of the new nation this was a large and difficult concession.
they agreed to it because they feared that without it the constitution would fail.
the convention chose to ignore differences of opinion it was unable to resolve leaving important questions alive that would surface again in later years.
the constitution provided no definition of citizenship.
most important was the absence of a list of individual rights which would restrain the powers of the national government in the way that bills of rights restrained the state governments.
madison opposed the idea arguing that specifying rights that were reserved to the people would in effect limit those rights.
other delegates however feared that without such protections the national government might abuse its new authority.
the constitution of 1787 many people contributed to the creation of the american constitution but the single most important of them was james james madison the most creative political madison thinker of his generation.
perhaps madisons most important achievement was in helping resolve two important philosophical questions that had served as obstacles to the creation of an effective national national archives and records administration j and property and to defend the nation against the dangers of too much liberty.
but if madison and hamilton feared too much liberty they also feared too little.
and that made them receptive to the vigorous demands of the antifederalists for protections of individual rights which culminated in the bill of rights.
the constitution is not rakove argues infinitely malleable.
but neither does it have a fixed meaning that can be a reliable guide to how we interpret it today e om0erstawix amalyze amd evaluate in the 1960s a new group of scholars began to revive an economic interpretation of the constitution one that differed from beard s in important ways but that nevertheless emphasized social and economic factors as motives for supporting the federal system.
jackson turner main argued in the anti federalists 1961 that supporters of the constitution were cosmopolitan commercialists eager to advance the economic development of the nation the antifederalists by contrast were agrarian localists fearful of centralization.
gordon wood in the creation of the american republic 1969 suggested that the debate over the state constitutions in the 1770s and 1780s reflected profound social divisions and that those same divisions helped shape the argument over the federal constitution.
the federalists wood suggested were largely traditional aristocrats deeply concerned over the instability of life un der the articles of confederation and particularly alarmed by the decline in popular deference toward social elites.
the creation of the constitution wood argued was part of a larger search to create a legitimate political leadership based on the existing social hierarchy.
historians have continued to examine the question of intent did the framers intend a strong centralized political system or did they intend to create a decentralized system with a heavy emphasis on individual rights.
the answer according to jack rakove in original meanings 1996 and revolutionaries 2010 is both and many other things as well.
the constitution rakove argues was the result of a long and vigorous debate through which the views of many different groups found their way into the document.
james madison a strong nationalist believed that only a powerful central government could preserve stability in a large nation.
alexander hamilton also saw the constitution as a way to protect order 1.
is the constitution a conservative liberal or radical document.
did the framers consider the constitution something finished with the exception of constitutional amendments or did they consider it a document that would evolve in response to changes in society over time.
which parts of the constitution suggest that the framers intent was to create a strong centralized political system.
which parts suggest that the framers intent was to create a decentralized system with heavy emphasis on individual rights.
although many amendments have been proposed only twenty seven have been added to the constitution.
why do you think so few have been added.
government the question of sovereignty and the question of limiting power.
the question of sovereignty had been one of the chief sources of friction between the colonies and great britain and it continued to trouble americans as they attempted to create their own government.
how could both the national government and the state governments exercise sovereignty the question at same time where did ultimate sov of sovereignty ereignty lie.
the answer madison and his contemporaries decided was that all power at all levels of government flowed ultimately from the people.
thus neither the federal government nor the state governments were truly sovereign.
all of them derived their authority from below.
the opening phrase of the constitution devised by gouverneur morris was we the people of the united statesman expression of the belief that the new government derived its power not from the states but from its citizens.
resolving the problem of sovereignty made possible one of the distinctive features of the constitution its distribution of powers between the national and state governments.
it was madison wrote at the time in strictness neither a national nor a federal constitution but a composition of both the constitution and the government it created were to be the supreme law of the land no state would have the authority to defy it.
the federal government was to have broad powers including the power to tax to regulate commerce to control the currency and to pass such laws as would be necessary and proper for carrying out its other responsibilities.
gone was the stipulation of the articles that each state shall retain every power jurisdiction and right not expressly delegated to the united states in congress assembled on the other hand the constitution accepted the existence of separate states and left important powers in their hands.
in addition to solving the question of sovereignty the constitution produced a solution to a problem troubling to americans the problem of concentrated authority.
nothing so frightened the leaders of the new nation as the prospect of creating a tyrannical government.
that fear had been one of the chief obstacles to the creation of a national government.
drawing from the ideas of the french philosopher baron de montesquieu most americans had long believed that the best way to avoid tyranny was to keep government close to the people.
a republic they thought must remain confined to a small area.
a large nation would breed corruption and despotism because the rulers would be so distant from most of the people that there would be no way to control them.
165 166 chapter 6 in the first years of the new american nation these assumptions had led to the belief that the individual states must remain sovereign and that a strong national government would be dangerous.
madison however helped break the grip of these assumptions by arguing that a large republic would be less not more likely to produce tyranny because it would contain so many different factions that no single group would ever be able to dominate it.
in this he drew from among other sources the separation scottish philosopher david hume.
this of powers idea of many centers of power checking each other and preventing any single despotic authority made possible the idea of a large republic and also helped shape the internal structure of the federal government.
the constitutions most distinctive feature was its separation of powers within the government its creation of checks and balances among the legislative executive and judicial branches.
the array of forces within the government would constantly compete with and often frustrate one another.
congress would have two chambers the senate and the house of representatives each with members elected in a different way and for different terms and each checking the other since both would have to agree before any law could be passed.
the president would have the power to veto acts of congress.
the federal courts would have protection from both the executive and the legislature because judges and justices once appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate would serve for life.
the federal structure of the government which divided power between the states and the nation and the system of checks and bal vi ances which divided power among various elements within the national government were designed to protect the united states from the kind of despotism americans believed had emerged in england.
but they were also designed to protect the nation from another kind of despotism perhaps equally menacing the tyranny of the people.
fear of the mob of an excess of democracy was at least as important to the framers of the constitution as fear of a single tyrant.
shayss rebellion had been only one example they believed of what could happen if a nation did not defend itself against the unchecked exercise of popular will.
thus in the new government only the members of the house of representatives would be elected directly by the people.
senators the president and federal judges would be insulated in varying degrees from the public.
on september 17 1787 thirty nine delegates signed the constitution doubtless sharing the feelings that benjamin franklin expressed at the end thus i consent sir to this constitution because i expect no better and because i am not sure it is not the best k sb.
the limits of the constitution the constitution of 1789 was a document that established a democratic republic for white people mostly white men.
indians and african americans the two largest population groups sharing the lands of the united states with anglo americans enjoyed virtually none of the rights and privileges provided to the white population.
native americans had at least the semblance of a legal status within the nation through treaties that assured them lands that would be theirs forever.
but most of these treaties did not survive for long and the indians found themselves driven farther and farther west with little of the protection that the government had promised them.
among the white leaders of the united states there were eminent figures who believed indians could join the republic as citizens.
jefferson was among them believing that indians could be taught the ways of civilization jefferson and other americans with good intentions sought to teach the indians to live as white americans did.
efforts to teach them anglo farming methods were based on sedentary farms that relied on men doing the farming and women caring for the home.
indians had no interest in such ways and preferred to retain their traditional cultures.
their repudiation of white civilization contributed to the erosion of support among white americans.
indians were not granted citizenship of the united states until the 1920s.
number paoz xvii.
the subjed continued and illuf trated by eximptes to fhw the tendency of federal governments rather to anarchy among the members than tyranny in the head.
the sahjed continued with farther examples.
the subjed continued with farther exsimpcs.
the subjed continued with farther examples.
farther defeds of the prefeat con flitution.
the s sae subjed continued and concluded.
the ne esfiity of a government at lead equally energetic with the one propo d.
the subjed continued with an anfwer to an objedion con cerni ig iundiug armies.
the sahjed continued with the fame view.
the subjed continued with the fame view.
161 xxvii the subject continued with the fame view.
the fame subjed concluded.
xxix concerning the militia.
concerning taxation.
the fame subjed continued.
xxxiu the fame subjed continued.
the fame subjed continued.
the fame subjed continued.
xxxv the fame subjed continued.
xxxvi the fame subjed concluded.
federalist a i d ltssstn to the people of thestate of new york.
n u m it e r j.
introducuc after an unequivocal experience of the ineft cacy of the fubfi ukg fe4ril govfrnroent arc c tied upon to deliberate on a new conliituticn far tnc uaned states of america.
the fabjed fpeakska trnfrci endin n s confluences racing t3n fsc exifo k e of the u n i o n the hfvty ansi welfare of the part of which it is cotn t cv the fate of an empire in many refpeds tlie.
10 thc world.
jt has been frequently jt5 v f k 10 fc beta refcrved to the people of this country.
by their cooduft and example mrn whether focieues of resjl p b e or not of eftablehing good nd choice or whes flbsis kfl ed depend for their political teays fc wwhichwcarearrired ywith propriety beregarded to tbeecra in which a that federalist 1 the federalist papers gathered here i essays letters and articles published in newspapers throughout america during the debate over the constitution.
ils e avs 7s 7 7 7a hamiltn jhn jay were defenders f he constitution and wrote these t77 77tance they rcmain today e the iw american contributions political theory.
the granger collection new york in a book distributed to the people of new york began as the constitution and the new republic 167 far more removed from the guarantees of the constitution were african american slaves who were given virtually none of the rights and protections that the new government provided to white people.
they were one southern official noted not constituent members of our society the french canadian writer hector st john de crevecoeur who after the revolution settled in the united states wrote a famous book letters from an american farmer in 1782.
in it he posed what became a famous question what then is the american this new man crevecoeur answered his own question by noting that individuals of all nations would become melted into a common citizenry.
but he too saw no room for african americans in the community of the new man indeed among the first laws passed by the new united states under the constitution was the naturalization act of 1790 which helped legalize the stream of immigrants coming into the country and allowed them to become citizens.
but it defined citizenry as a status available only to white people.
even free black people were barred from citizenship.
jefferson who had briefly tried without result to give indians a legal status within the new nation had no such aspirations for african americans.
he was an uneasy defender of slavery worrying about excluding a whole race of men from the natural rights that jefferson himself had done so much to promote.
but he could never accept the idea that black men and black women could attain the level of knowledge and intelligence of white people.
jeffersons long romantic relationship with a black woman sally hemmings did nothing to change his mind.
hemmings was a light skinned woman who was a slave on jeffersons plantation in virginia.
jefferson lived with her after the death of his wife and fathered several of her children.
but his intimate relationship with the hemmings family did not ultimately change his postion on slavery.
unlike george washington who stipulated that his slaves be freed after his death jefferson deeply in debt required his heirs to sell his slaves after he died after liberating the hemmings family.
not until the end of the civil war were black men and black women eligible to live as citizens in the united states and even then with only partial rights until a century later.
federalists and antifederalists the delegates at philadelphia had greatly exceeded their instructions from congress and the states.
instead of making simple revisions to the articles of confederation they had produced a plan for a completely different form of government.
they feared therefore that the constitution might never be ratified under the rules of the articles of confederation which required unanimous approval by the state legislatures.
so the convention changed the rules.
the constitution specified that the new government would come into existence among the ratifying states when any nine of the thirteen had ratified it.
the delegates recommended to congress that special state conventions not state legislatures consider the document.
they were required to vote yes or no on the document.
they could make no changes until after the constitution was ratified by the required number of states at which point the constitutions amendment process could be used as it was for the bill of rights.
the old confederation congress now overshadowed by the events in philadelphia passively accepted the constitutional conventions work and submitted it to the states for approval.
all the state legislatures except rhode islands elected delegates to ratifying conventions most of which began meeting by early 1788.
even before the ratifying conventions convened however a great national debate on the new constitution had begun in the state legislatures in mass meetings in the columns of newspapers and in ordinary conversations.
occasionally passions rose to the point that opposing factions came to blows.
in at least one place albany new york such clashes resulted in injuries and death.
supporters of the constitution had a number of advantages.
they were better organized than their opponents and they had the support of the two most eminent men in america franklin and washington.
and they seized an ap.
pealing label for themselves federalists federalist the term that opponents of centralization papers had once used to describe themselves thus implying that they were less committed to a nationalist government than in fact they were.
the federalists also had the support of the ablest political philosophers of their time alexander hamilton james madison and john jay.
those three men under the joint pseudonym publius wrote a series of essays widely published in newspapers throughout the nation explaining the meaning and virtues of the constitution.
they did so in an effort to counter the powerful arguments that those opposed to the constitution those who became known as the antifederalists were making.
without a powerful defense of the new constitution they feared the antifederalists might succeed in several crucial states most notably in new york.
the essays were later issued as a book and they are known today as the federalist papers.
they are among the most important american contributions to political theory.
the federalists called their critics antifederalists implying that their rivals had nothing to offer except opposi yhe tion and chaos.
but the antifederalists antifederalists had serious and intelligent arguments of their own.
they presented themselves as the defenders of the true principles of the revolution.
the constitution they believed would betray those principles by establishing a strong potentially tyrannical center of power in the new national government.
the federal government they claimed would increase taxes obliterate the states wield dictatorial powers favor the well born over the common people and put an end to individual liberty.
but their biggest complaint was that the constitution lacked a bill of rights a concern that revealed one of the most important sources of their opposition a basic mistrust of 168 chapter 6 debating the constitution human nature and of the capacity of human beings to wield power.
the antifederalists argued that any government that centralized authority would inevitably produce despotism.
their demand for a bill of rights was a product of this belief no government could be trusted to protect the liberties of its citizens only by enumerating the natural rights of the people could there be any assurance that those rights would be preserved.
at its heart then the debate between the federalists and the antifederalists was a battle between two fears.
the federalists were afraid above all of disorder anarchy chaos they feared the unchecked power of the masses and they sought in the constitution to create a government that would function at some distance from popular passions.
the antifederalists were not anarchists they too recognized the need for an effective government.
but they were much more concerned about the dangers of concentrated power than about the dangers of popular will.
they opposed the constitution for some of the same reasons the federalists supported it because it placed obstacles between the people and the exercise of power.
despite the antifederalist efforts ratification proceeded quickly although not without occasional difficulty during the winter of 1787 1788.
the delaware convention was the first to act when it ratified the constitution unanimously.
the new jersey and georgia conventions did the same.
in the larger states of pennsylvania and massachusetts the antifederalists put up a determined struggle but lost in the final vote.
new hampshire ratified the document in june 1788 the ninth state to do so.
it was now theoretically possible for the constitution to go into effect.
a new government could not hope to flourish however without the participation of virginia and new york the two most populous states whose conventions remained closely divided.
by the end of june first virginia and then new york had consented to the constitution by narrow margins.
the new york convention yielded to expediency even some of the most staunchly antifederalist delegates feared that the states commercial interests would suffer if once the other states gathered under the new roof new york were to remain outside.
massachusetts virginia and new york all ratified on the assumption that a bill of rights would be added to the constitution.
the north carolina convention adjourned without taking action waiting to see what happened to the amendments.
rhode island whose leaders had opposed the constitution almost from the start did not even call a convention to consider ratification.
completing the structure the first elections under the constitution took place in the early months of 1789.
almost all the newly elected congressmen and senators had favored ratification and many had served as delegates to the philadelphia convention.
there was the bill of rights never any real doubt about who would be the first president.
george washington had presided at the constitutional convention and many delegates who had favored ratification did so only because they expected him to preside over the new government as well.
washington received the votes of all the presidential electors.
john adams a leading federalist became vice president.
after a journey from mount vernon marked by elaborate celebrations along the way washington was inaugurated in new york the national capital for the time being on april 30 1789.
the first congress served in many ways almost as a continuation of the constitutional convention because its principal responsibility was filling in the various gaps in the constitution.
its most important task was drafting a bill of rights.
by early 1789 even madison had come to agree that some sort of bill of rights was essential to legitimize the new government in the eyes of its opponents.
congress approved twelve amendments on september 25 1789 ten of them were ratified by the states by the end of 1791.
what we know as the bill of rights is these first ten amendments to the constitution.
nine of them placed limitations on congress by forbidding it to infringe on certain basic rights freedom of religion speech and the press immunity from arbitrary arrest trial by jury and others.
the tenth amendment reserved to the states all powers except those specifically withheld from them or delegated to the federal government.
on the subject of the federal courts the constitution said only the judicial power of the united states shall be vested in one supreme court and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish it was left to congress to determine the number of supreme court judges to be appointed and the kinds of lower courts to be organized.
in the judiciary act of 1789 congress provided for a supreme court of six members with a chief justice and five associate justices thirteen district courts with one judge apiece and three circuit courts of appeal each to consist of one of the district judges sitting with two of the supreme court justices.
in the same act congress gave the supreme court the power to make the final decision in cases involving the constitutionality of state laws.
the constitution referred indirectly to executive departments but did not specify what or how many there should be.
the first congress created three such departments state trea the cabinet sury anc war and also established the offices of the attorney general and the postmaster general.
to the office of secretary of the treasury washington appointed alexander hamilton of new york who at age thirty two was an acknowledged expert in public finance.
for secretary of war he chose a massachusetts federalist general henry knox.
as attorney general he named edmund randolph of virginia sponsor of the plan on which the constitution had been based.
as secretary of state he chose another virginian thomas jefferson who had recently served as minister to france.
the constitution and the new republic 169 federalists and republicans the resolution of these initial issues however did not resolve the deep disagreements about the nature of the new government.
on the contrary for the first twelve years under the constitution american politics was characterized by a level of acrimony seldom matched in any period since.
the framers of the constitution had dealt with many disagreements not by solving them but by papering them over with a series of vague compromises as a result the conflicts survived to plague the new government.
at the heart of the controversies of the 1790s was the same basic difference in philosophy that had been at the heart of the debate over the constitution.
on one side stood a powerful group that believed america required a strong national gov competing ernment.
that the country s mission was visions to become a genuine nation state with centralized authority a complex commercial economy and a proud standing in world affairs.
on the other side stood another group a minority at first but one that gained strength during the decade that envisioned a far weaker central government.
american society should not this group believed aspire to be highly commercial or urban.
it should remain predominantly rural and agrarian and it should have a central government of modest size and powers that would leave most power in the hands of the states and the people.
the centralizers became known as the federalists and gravitated to the leadership of alexander hamilton.
their opponents took the name republicans and gathered under the leadership of james madison and thomas jefferson.
hamilton and the federalists for twelve years control of the new government remained firmly in the hands of the federalists.
that was in part because george washington had always envisioned a strong national government and as president had quietly supported those who were attempting to create one.
his enormous prestige throughout the nation was one of the federalists greatest assets.
but washington also believed that the presidency should remain above political controversies and so he avoided any personal involvement in the deliberations of congress.
as a result the dominant figure in his administration became his talented secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton who exerted more influence on domestic and foreign policy than anyone else both during his term of office and to an almost equal extent after his resignation in 1794.
of all the national leaders of his time hamilton was one of the most aristocratic in personal tastes and political philosophy ironically perhaps since his own origins as an illegitimate child in the caribbean had been so humble.
far from embracing the republican ideals of the virtue of the people he believed that a stable and effective government alexander hamilton as president george washingtons secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton exerted enormous influence in both domestic and foreign affairs.
hamilton favored the establishment of an enlightened ruling class to govern the new nation.
his plans for the new federal government to assume existing public debt and to establish a national bank were part of his vision of a powerful nation with a vigorous and independent commercial economy a robust industrial sector and a dynamic role in world economic affairs.
de agostini picture library the bridgeman art library required an enlightened ruling class.
thus the new government needed the support of the wealthy and powerful and to get that support it needed to give those elites a stake in its.
hamilton proposed therefore debt t t ie new gvernment take responsi bility for the existing public debt.
many of the miscellaneous uncertain depreciated certificates of indebtedness that the old congress had issued during and after the revolution were now in the hands of wealthy speculators the government should call them in and exchange them for uniform interest bearing bonds payable at definite dates.
this policy was known as funding the debt.
he also recommended that the federal government assume or take over the debts the states had accumulated during the revolution this assumption policy would encourage state as well as federal bondholders to look to the central government for 170 chapter 6 eventual payment.
hamilton did not in other words envision paying off and thus eliminating the debt.
he wanted instead to create a large and permanent national debt with new bonds being issued as old ones were paid off.
the result he believed would be that creditors the wealthy classes most likely to lend money to the government would have a permanent stake in seeing the government survive.
hamilton also wanted to create a national bank.
at the time there were only a few banks in the country located principally in boston philadelphia and new york city.
a new national bank would help fill the void that the absence of a well developed banking system had created.
it would provide loans and currency to businesses.
it would give the government a safe place to deposit federal funds.
it would help collect taxes and disburse the governments expenditures.
the bank would be chartered by the federal government would have a monopoly of the governments own banking business and would be controlled by directors of whom one fifth would be appointed by the government.
it would provide a stable center to the nations small and feeble banking system.
the funding and assumption of debts would require new sources of revenue since the government would now have to pay interest on the loans it was accepting.
up to now most government revenues had come from the sale of public lands in hamiltons west hamilton proposed two new report on kinds of taxes.
one was an excise to be manufacturing paid by distillers of alcoholic liquors a tax that would fall most heavily on the whiskey distillers of the backcountry especially in pennsylvania virginia and north carolina small farmers who converted part of their corn and rye crop into whiskey.
the other was a tariff on imports which not only would raise revenue but also would protect american manufacturing from foreign competition.
in his famous report on manufactures of 1791 hamilton laid out a grand scheme for stimulating the growth of industry in the united states and wrote glowingly of the advantages to the nation of a healthy manufacturing base.
the federalists in short offered more than a vision of how to stabilize the new government.
they offered a vision of the sort of nation america should become a nation with a wealthy enlightened ruling class a vigorous independent commercial economy and a thriving industrial sector a nation able to play a prominent role in world economic affairs.
enacting the federalist program few members of congress objected to hamiltons plan for funding the national debt but many did oppose his proposal to accept the debt at par that is at face value.
the old certificates had been issued to merchants and farmers in payment for debating war supplies during the revolution or to hamiltons officers and soldiers of the revolutionary program army in payment for their services.
but many of these original holders had sold their bonds during the hard times of the 1780s to speculators who had bought them at a fraction of their face value.
many members of congress believed that if the federal government was to assume responsibility for these bonds some of them should be returned to the original purchasers.
james madison now a representative from virginia proposed dividing the federally funded bonds between the original purchasers and the speculators.
but hamiltons allies insisted that such a plan was impractical and that the honor of the government required that it pay the bondholders themselves not the original lenders who had sold their bonds of their own accord.
congress finally passed the funding bill hamilton wanted.
hamiltons proposal that the federal government assume the state debts encountered greater difficulty.
his opponents argued that if the federal government took over the state debts the people of states with few debts would have to pay taxes to service the larger debts of other states.
hamilton and his supporters struck a bargain with the virginians to win passage of the bill.
the deal involved the location of the national capital.
the capital had moved from new york city back to philadelphia in location of 1790.
but the virginians wanted a new the capital capital near them in the south.
hamiton met with thomas jefferson and agreed over dinner to provide northern support for placing the capital in the south in exchange for virginias votes for the assumption bill.
the bargain called for the construction of a new capital city on the banks of the potomac river which divided virginia and maryland on land to be selected by washington himself.
the government would move there by the beginning of the new century.
hamilton argued that creation of a national bank was compatible with the intent of the constitution even though the bank of the document did not explicitly authorize it.
united states but madison jefferson randolph and others argued that congress should exercise no powers that the constitution had not clearly assigned it.
nevertheless both the house and the senate finally agreed to hamiltons bill.
washington displayed some uncertainty about its legality at first but he finally signed it.
the bank of the united states began operations in 1791 under a charter that granted it the right to continue for twenty years.
once enacted hamiltons program had many of the effects he had intended and won the support of influential segments of the population.
it quickly restored public credit the bonds of the united states were soon selling at home and abroad at prices even above their face value.
speculators among them many members of congress reaped large profits as a result.
manufacturers profited from the tariffs and merchants in the seaports benefited from the new banking system.
small farmers who formed the vast majority of the population complained that they had to bear a disproportionate tax burden.
not only did they have to pay property taxes to their state governments but they bore the brunt of the excise tax on distilleries that hamilton had initiated.
they also opposed a 1792 tariff also promoted by hamilton.
many americans came to believe that the federalist the constitution and the new republic 171 program served the interests not of the people but of small wealthy elites.
partly as a result an organized political opposition arose.
the republican opposition the constitution had made no reference to political parties and the omission was not an oversight.
most of the framers george washington in particular believed that organized parties were dangerous and should be avoided.
disagreement on particular issues was inevitable but most of the founders believed that such disagreements need not and should not lead to the formation of permanent factions.
the public good is disregarded in the conflicts of rival parties madison wrote in the federalist papers number 10 perhaps the most influential of all the essays and.
measures are too often decided not according to the rules of justice and the rights of the minor party but by the superior force of an interested and overbearing majority yet within just a few years after ratification of the constitution madison and others became convinced that hamilton and his followers had become just such an interested and overbearing majority the hamiltonians madison and others agreed had worked to establish a national network of influence that embodied all the worst features of a party.
the federalists had used their control over appointments and the awarding of government franchises to reward their supporters and win additional allies.
they had encouraged the formation of local associations largely establishment of the federalist party formation of the republican party aristocratic in nature to strengthen their standing in local communities.
they were doing many of the same things their opponents believed that the corrupt british governments of the early eighteenth century had done.
because the federalists appeared to be creating a menacing and tyrannical structure of power their opponents believed that there was no alternative but to organize a vigorous opposition.
the result was the emergence of an alternative political organization which called itself the republican party.
this first republican party is not an ancestor of the modern republican party which was born in the 1850s.
by the late 1790s the republicans were going to even greater lengths than the federalists to create an apparatus of partisan influence.
in every state they formed committees societies and caucuses.
republican groups corresponded with one another across state lines.
they banded together to influence state and local elections.
and they justified their actions by claiming that they and they alone represented the true interests of the nation that they were fighting to defend the people against a corrupt conspiracy by the federalists.
just as hamilton believed that the network of supporters he was creating represented the only legitimate interest group in the nation so the republicans believed that their party organization represented the best interests of the people.
neither side was willing to admit that it was acting as a party neither would concede the right of the other to exist.
this institutionalized factionalism is known to scholars as the first party system rpntgrv were drawn to tranquil rural scenes symbolic of the jeffersonian vision of a nation of small independent farmers.
the jeffersonian idyll american artists in t e eary nine een farm the simple agrarian republic it depicts was already being transformed by rapid economic growth.
by 1822 when francis alexander painted this pastoral landscape o a p courtesy national gallery of art washington 172 chapter 6 from the beginning the preeminent figures among the republicans were thomas jefferson and james madison.
indeed the two men were such intimate collaborators with such similar political philosophies that it is sometimes difficult to distinguish the contributions of one from those of the other.
but jefferson the more charismatic personality of the two gradually emerged as the most prominent spokesman for the republicans.
jefferson considered himself a farmer.
he was in fact a substantial planter but he had spent little time in recent years at his estate in virginia.
he believed in an agrarian republic most of whose citizens would be sturdy independent farmer citizens tilling their own soil.
jefferson did not scorn commercial activity he assumed farmers would market their crops in the national and even international markets.
nor did he oppose industry he believed the united states should develop some manufacturing capacity.
but he was suspicious of large cities feared urban mobs as sores upon the body politic and opposed the development of an advanced industrial economy because it would he feared increase the number of propertyless workers packed in cities.
in short jefferson envisioned a decentralized society dominated by small property owners engaged largely in agrarian activities.
the difference between the federalist and republican social philosophies was visible in among other things reactions to the french revolution.
as that revolution dlfffrfncfs over the grew increasingly radical in the 1790s french with ts attacks on organized religion the revolution overthrow of the monarchy and eventually the execution of the king and queen the federalists expressed horror.
but the republicans generally applauded the democratic antiaristocratic spirit they believed the french revolution embodied.
some even imitated the french radicals the jacobins by cutting their hair short wearing pantaloons and addressing one another as citizen and citizeness although both parties had supporters in all parts of the country and among all classes there were regional and economic differences.
the federalists were most numerous in the commercial centers of the northeast and in such southern seaports as charleston the republicans were most numerous in the rural areas of the south and the west.
as the 1792 presidential election the nation s second approached both jefferson and hamilton urged washington to run for another term.
the president reluctantly agreed.
but while most americans considered washington above the partisan battle he was actually much more in sympathy with the federalists than with the republicans.
and during his presidency hamilton remained the dominant figure in government.
establishing national sovereignty the federalists consolidated their position and for a time attracted wide public support for the new national govern ment by dealing effectively with two problems the old confederation had been unable fully to resolve.
they helped stabilize the nations western lands and they strengthened america s international position.
securing the frontier despite the northwest ordinance the confederation congress had largely failed to tie the outlying western areas of the country firmly to the government.
farmers in western massachusetts had risen in revolt settlers in vermont kentucky and tennessee had toyed with the idea of separating from the union.
the new government under the constitution inherited these problems.
in 1794 farmers in western pennsylvania raised a major challenge to federal authority when they refused to pay a whiskey excise tax and began terrorizing the tax collectors much as colonists had done at the time of the stamp act.
but the federal government did not leave settlement of the so called whiskey rebellion to pennsylvania as the confederation whiskey congress had left shayss rebellion to rebellion massachusetts.
at hamiltons urging washington called out the militias of three states raised an army of nearly 15 000 a larger force than he had commanded against the british during most of the revolution and personally led the troops into pennsylvania.
as the militiamen approached pittsburgh the center of the resistance the rebellion quickly collapsed.
the federal government won the allegiance of the whiskey rebels by intimidating them.
it won the loyalties of other frontier people by accepting their territories as new states in the union.
the last of the original thirteen colonies joined the union once the bill of rights had been appended to the constitution north carolina in 1789 and rhode island in 1790.
then vermont which had had its own state government since the revolution became the fourteenth state in 1791 after new york and new hampshire finally agreed to give up their claims to it.
next came kentucky in 1792 when virginia gave up its claim to that region.
after north carolina finally ceded its western lands to the union tennessee became first a territory and in 1796 a state.
native americans and the new nation the new government faced a greater challenge also inherited from the confederation in the more distant areas of the northwest and the southwest where indians occasionally in alliance with the british and spanish fought to retain tribal lands that the u s government claimed for itself.
the ordinances of 1784 1787 had produced a series of border conflicts with indian tribes resisting white settlement in what they considered their lands.
although the united states eventually defeated virtually every indian challenge if often at great cost it was clear that the larger question of who was to control the lands of the west the united states or the indian nations remained unanswered.
these clashes revealed another issue the constitution had done little to resolve the place of the indian nations within the constitution and the new republic 173 the new federal structure.
the constitution barely mentioned native americans.
article i excluded indians not taxed from indians being counted in the population totals and the that determined the number of seats constitution states would receive in the house of representatives and it gave congress the power to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several states and with the indian tribes article vi bound the new government to respect treaties negotiated by the confederation most of which had been with the tribes.
but none of this did much to clarify the precise legal standing of indians or indian nations within the united states.
on the one hand the constitution seemed to recognize the existence of the tribes as legal entities.
on the other hand it made clear that they were not foreign nations in the same sense that european countries were nor were their members citizens of the united states.
the tribes received no direct representation in the new government.
above all the constitution did not address the major issue that would govern relations between whites and indians land.
indian nations lived within the boundaries of the united states yet they claimed and the white government at times agreed that they had some measure of sovereignty within their own lands.
but neither the constitution nor common law offered any clear guide to the rights of a nation within a nation or to the precise nature of tribal sovereignty which ultimately depended on control of land.
thus the relationship between the tribes and the united states remained to be determined by a series of treaties agreements and judicial decisions in a process that has continued for more than 200 years.
maintaining neutrality not until 1791 eight years after the end of the revolution did great britain send a minister to the united states and then only because madison and the republicans were threatening to place special trade restrictions on british ships.
that was one of many symbols of the difficulty the new government had in establishing its legitimacy in the eyes of the british.
another crisis in anglo american relations emerged in 1793 when the new french government created by the revolution of 1789 went to war with great britain and its allies.
both the president and congress took steps to establish american neutrality in that conflict.
but the neutrality quickly encountered severe tests.
the first challenge to american neutrality came from revolutionary france and its first diplomatic representative to america the brash and youthful edmond genet.
instead of landing at philadelphia and presenting himself immediately to the president genet disembarked at charleston.
there he made plans to use american ports to outfit french warships citizen genet encouraged american shipowners to serve as french privateers and commissioned the aging george rogers clark to lead a military expedition against spanish lands to the south.
spain was at the time an ally of great britain and an enemy of france.
in all of this genet was brazenly ignoring washingtons policies and flagrantly violating the neutrality act.
his conduct infuriated washington who provided citizen genet as he was known with an icy reception in philadelphia and the federalists it also embarrassed all but the most ardent admirers of the french revolution among the republicans.
washington eventually demanded that the french government recall him but by then genets party was out of power in france.
the president granted him political asylum in the united states and he settled with his american wife on a long island farm.
the neutrality policy had survived its first serious test.
a second and even greater challenge came from great britain.
early in 1794 the royal navy began seizing hundreds of american ships engaged in trade in the french west indies a comment on the whiskey rebellion although thomas jefferson and other republicans claimed to welcome occasional popular uprisings the federalists were horrified by such insurgencies as shays s rebellion in massachusetts and later the whiskey rebellion in pennsylvania.
this federalist cartoon portrays the rebels as demons who pursue and eventually hang an unfortunate exciseman tax collector who has confiscated two kegs of rum.
philadelphia history museum at the atwater kent the bridgeman art library 174 chapter 6 outraging public opinion in the united states.
anti british feeling rose still higher at the report that the governor general of canada had delivered a warlike speech to the indians on the northwestern frontier encouraging them to challenge u s dominance there.
hamilton was deeply concerned.
war would mean an end to imports from england and most of the revenue for maintaining his financial system came from duties on those imports.
jay s treaty and pinckneys treaty this was hamilton believed no time for ordinary diplomacy.
he did not trust the state department to reach a settlement with britain.
jefferson had resigned as secretary of state in 1793 to devote more time to his political activities but his successor edmund randolph was even more ardently pro french than jefferson had been.
so hamilton persuaded washington to name a special commissioner to england john jay chief justice of the united states supreme court and a staunch new york federalist.
jay was instructed to secure compensation for the recent british assaults on american shipping to demand withdrawal of british forces from the frontier posts and to negotiate a new commercial treaty.
the long and complex treaty jay negotiated in 1794 failed to achieve these goals.
but it was not without merit.
it settled the conflict with britain and helped prevent what had seemed likely to become a war between the two nations.
it established jay s treaty undisputed american sovereignty over the entire northwest.
and it produced a reasonably satisfactory commercial relationship with britain whose trade was important to the united states.
nevertheless when the terms became public in america there were bitter public denunciations of it for having failed to extract enough promises from the british.
jay was burned in effigy in various parts of the country.
opponents of the treaty nearly all the republicans and even some federalists encouraged by agents of france went to extraordinary lengths to defeat it in the senate.
the american minister to france james monroe and even the secretary of state edmund randolph joined the desperate attempt to prevent ratification.
but in the end the senate ratified what was by then known as jays treaty.
among other things the treaty made possible a settlement of americas conflict with the spanish because it raised fears in spain that the british and the americans might now join pinckneys together to challenge spanish possessions treaty in north america.
when thomas pinckney arrived in spain as a special negotiator he had no difficulty in gaining nearly everything the united states had sought from the spaniards for more than a decade.
under pinckney s treaty signed in 1795 spain recognized the right of americans to navigate the mississippi to its mouth and to deposit goods at new orleans for reloading on oceangoing ships agreed to fix the northern boundary of florida where americans always had insisted it should be along the 31st parallel and required spanish authorities to prevent the indians in florida from launching raids across the border.
the downfall of the federalists the federalists impressive triumphs did not ensure their continued dominance in the national government.
on the contrary success seemed to produce problems of its own problems that led to their downfall.
since almost all americans in the 1790s agreed that there was no place in a stable republic for an organized opposition the emergence of the republicans as powerful contenders for popular favor seemed to the federalists a grave threat to national stability.
beginning in the late 1790s when international perils confronted the government as well the federalists could not resist the temptation to move forcefully against the opposition.
facing what they believed was a stark choice between respecting individual liberties and preserving stability the federalists chose stability.
the result was political disaster.
after 1796 the federalists never won another election.
the popular respect for the institutions of the federal government which they had worked so hard to 3 wasnington lavished enormous attention on t thev hold ly.
imprtin9 materials and wrkmen from eurpe a tasc t iers and 7 t e ele9ant un ry hmes f like many wealthy lives.
paul rocteeau er strve b9 refinement and 9en ililv10 lheir the constitution and the new republic 175 produce among the people survived.
but the federalists themselves gradually vanished as an effective political force.
the election of 1796 despite strong pressure from his many admirers to run for a third term as president george washington insisted on retiring from office in 1797.
in his farewell address to the american people actually a long letter composed in part by hamilton and published in a philadelphia newsletter he reacted sharply to the washingtons republicans his reference to the insidi farewell ous w es f foreign influence was not just address an abstract warning against international entanglements it was also a specific denunciation of those republicans who had been conspiring with the french to frustrate the federalist diplomatic program.
with washington out of the running no obstacle remained to an open expression of the partisan rivalries that had been building over the previous eight years.
jefferson was the uncontested candidate of the republicans in 1796.
the federalists faced a more difficult choice.
hamilton the personification of federalism had created too many enemies to be a credible john adams john adams s illustrious career as revolutionary leader diplomat and president marked the beginning of four generations of public distinction among members of his family.
his son john quincy adams served as secretary of state and president.
his grandson charles francis adams was one of the great diplomats of the civil war era.
his great grandson henry adams was one of americas most distinguished historians and writers.
courtesy national gallery of art washington d c candidate.
so vice president john adams who had been directly associated with none of the unpopular federalist measures became his partys nominee for president.
the federalists were still clearly the dominant party and there was little doubt of their ability to win a majority of the presidential electors.
but without washington to mediate they fell victim to fierce factional rivalries that almost led to their undoing.
hamilton and many other federalists especially in the south were not reconciled to adamss candidacy and favored his running mate thomas pinckney instead.
and when as expected the federalists elected a majority of the presidential electors some of these pinckney supporters declined to vote for adams he managed to defeat jefferson by only three electoral votes.
because a still larger number of adamss supporters declined to vote for pinckney jefferson finished second in the balloting and became vice president.
until the twelfth amendment was adopted in 1804 the constitution provided for the candidate receiving the second highest number of electoral votes to become vice president hence the awkward result of men from different parties serving in the nations two highest elected offices.
adams thus assumed the presidency under unhappy circumstances.
he presided over a divided party which faced a divided strong and resourceful republican opposi federalists tion committed to its extinction.
adams was not even the dominant figure in his own party hamilton remained the most influential federalist and adams was never able to challenge him effectively.
the new president was one of the countrys most accomplished and talented diplomats but he had few skills as a politician.
austere rigid aloof he had little talent at conciliating differences soliciting support or inspiring enthusiasm.
he was a man of enormous indeed intimidating rectitude and he seemed to assume that his own virtue and the correctness of his positions would be enough to sustain him.
the quasi war with france american relations with great britain and spain improved as a result of jays and pinckneys treaties.
but the nations relations with revolutionary france quickly deteriorated.
french vessels captured american ships on the high seas and at times imprisoned the crews.
when the south carolina federalist charles cotesworth pinckney brother of thomas pinckney arrived in france the government refused to receive him as the official representative of the united states.
some of president adamss advisers favored war most notably secretary of state thomas pickering a stern new englander who detested france.
but hamilton recommended conciliation and adams agreed.
in an effort to stabilize relations adams appointed a bipartisan commission consisting of charles cotesworth pinckney the recently rejected minister john marshall a virginia federalist later chief justice of the supreme court and elbridge gerry a massachusetts republican but a friend of the president to negotiate with france.
when the americans arrived in paris in 1797 three 176 chapter 6 agents of the french foreign minister prince talleyrand demanded a loan for france and a bribe for french officials before any negotiations could begin.
pinckney responded no.
not a sixpence when adams heard of the incident he sent a message to congress denouncing the french insults and urging preparations for war.
he then turned the report of the american commissioners over to congress after deleting the names of the the xyz three french agents and designating them affair only as messrs x y and z when the re port was published it created widespread popular outrage at france s actions and strong support for the federalists response.
for nearly two years after the xyz affair as it became known the united states found itself en gaged in an undeclared war with france.
adams persuaded congress to cut off all trade with france and to authorize american vessels to capture french armed the quasi ships on the high seas.
in 1798 congress war created a department of the navy and ap propriated money for the construction of new warships.
the navy soon won a number of duels with french vessels and captured eighty five ships including armed merchantmen.
the united states also began cooperating closely with the british and became an ally of britain in the war with france.
in the end france chose to conciliate the united states before the conflict grew.
adams sent another commission to paris in 1800 and the new french government headed now by first consul napoleon bonaparte agreed to a treaty with the united states that canceled the old agreement of 1778 and established new commercial arrangements.
as a result the quasi war came to a reasonably peaceful end.
repression and protest the conflict with france helped the federalists increase their majorities in congress in 1798.
armed with this new strength alien and they be8an to consider ways to silence the sedition acts republican opposition.
the result was some of the most controversial legislation in american history the alien and sedition acts.
the alien act placed new obstacles in the way of foreigners who wished to become american citizens and it strengthened the presidents hand in dealing with aliens.
the sedition act allowed the government to prosecute those who engaged in sedition against the government.
in theory only libelous or treasonous activities were subject to prosecution but since such activities were open to widely varying definitions the law made it possible for the federal government to stifle almost any opposition.
the republicans interpreted the new laws as part of a federalist campaign to destroy them and fought back.
president adams signed the new laws but was cautious in implementing them.
he did not deport any aliens and he the xyz affair directory of the french government he s demanding money money money from the three diplomats at left who le p cen er represen s he monster at the top right is operating a guillotine a symbol of the violence and terror of the later staoes nf h c u pans representi 9 the united stales.
the stages of the french revolution.
0 the granger collection new york.
the constitution and the new republic 177 prevented the government from launching a major crusade against the republicans.
but the legislation had a significant repressive effect nevertheless.
the alien act helped discourage immigration and encouraged some foreigners already in the country to leave.
and the administration made use of the sedition act to arrest and convict ten men most of them republican newspaper editors whose only crime had been to criticize the federalists in government.
republican leaders pinned their hopes for a reversal of the alien and sedition acts on the state legislatures.
the supreme virginia and court had not yet established its sole right kentucky to nullify congressional legislation and resolutions there were many republican leaders who believed that the states had that power too.
the republicans laid out a theory for state action in two sets of resolutions in 1798 1799 one written anonymously by jefferson and adopted by the kentucky legislature and the other drafted by madison and approved by the virginia legislature.
the virginia and kentucky resolutions as they were known used the ideas of john locke to argue that the federal government had been formed by a compact or contract among the states and possessed only certain delegated powers.
whenever the federal government exercised any undelegated powers its acts were unauthoritative void and of no force if the parties to the contract the states decided that the central government had exceeded those powers the kentucky resolution claimed they had the right to nullify the appropriate laws.
such claims emerged again in the south in the decades before the civil war.
the republicans did not win wide support for nullification only virginia and kentucky declared the congressional statutes void.
the republicans did however succeed in elevating their dispute with the federalists to the level of a national crisis.
by the late 1790s the entire nation was deeply and bitterly divided politically.
state legislatures at times resembled battlegrounds.
even the united states congress was plagued with violent disagreements.
in one celebrated incident in the chamber of the house of representatives matthew lyon a republican from vermont responded to an insult from roger griswold a federalist from connecticut by spitting in griswolds face.
griswold attacked lyon with his cane.
lyon fought back with a pair of fire tongs and the two men ended up wrestling on the floor.
the revolution of 1800 these bitter controversies shaped the 1800 presidential election.
adams and jefferson were again the opposing candidates.
but the the election campaign of 1800 was very different from of 1800 the one preceding it.
indeed it may have been the ugliest in american history.
adams and jefferson themselves displayed reasonable dignity but their supporters showed no such restraint.
the federalists accused jefferson of being a dangerous radical and his followers of being wild men who if they came to power would bring on a reign of terror comparable to that of the french revolution.
the republicans portrayed adams as a tyrant conspiring to become king and they accused the federalists of plotting to subvert human liberty and impose slavery on the people.
there was considerable personal invective as well.
for example it was during this campaign that the story of jeffersons romantic involvement with a slave woman on his plantation was first widely aired.
recent dna evidence has proven that the story was true.
the election was close and the crucial contest was in new york.
there aaron burr had mobilized an organization of congressional brawlers this cartoon lampoons a celebrated fight on the floor of the house of representatives in 1798 between matthew lyon a republican from vermont and roger griswold a federalist from connecticut.
the conflict began when griswold insulted lyon by attacking his military record in the revolutionary war.
lyon replied by spitting in griswolds face.
two weeks later griswold attacked lyon with his cane and lyon seized a pair of fire tongs and fought back.
that later scene is depicted and ridiculed here.
other members of congress are portrayed as enjoying the spectacle.
on the wall is a picture titled royal sport showing animals fighting.
the library of congress lc dig ppmsca 31832 178 chapter 6 revolutionary war veterans the tammany society to serve as a republican political machine.
and through tammanys efforts the republicans carried the city by a large majority and with it the state.
jefferson was apparently elected.
but an unexpected complication soon jeopardized the republican victory.
the constitution called for each elector to vote by ballot for two persons the normal practice was for an elector to cast one vote for his partys presidential candidate and another for the vice presidential candidate.
to avoid a tie between jefferson and aaron burr the republican vice presidential candidate the republicans had intended for one elector to refrain from voting for burr.
but the plan went awry.
when the votes were counted jefferson and burr each had 73.
no candidate had a majority.
according to the constitution the house of representatives had to choose between the two leading candidates when no one had a majority in this case that meant deciding between jefferson and burr.
each state delegation would cast a single vote.
the new congress elected in 1800 with a republican majority was not to convene until after the inauguration of the president so it was the federalist congress that had to decide the question.
some federalists hoped to use the situation to salvage the election for their party others wanted to strike a bargain with burr and elect him.
but after a long deadlock several leading federalists most prominent among them alexander looking back the writing of the constitution of 1787 was the single most important political event in the history of the united states and a notable event in the political history of the modern world.
in creating a federal system of dispersed and divided authority authority divided among national and state governments authority divided among an executive a legislature and a judiciary the young nation sought to balance its need for an effective central government against its fear of concentrated and despotic power.
the ability of the delegates to the constitutional convention to compromise to produce the ultimate structure gave evidence of the deep yearning among them for a stable political system.
the same willingness to compromise allowed the greatest challenge to the ideals of the new democracy slavery to survive intact.
hamilton concluded that burr whom many suspected of having engineered the deadlock in the first place was too unreliable to trust with the presidency.
on the thirty sixth ballot jefferson was elected.
after the election of 1800 the only branch of the federal government left in federalist hands was the judiciary.
the adams administration spent its last months in office taking steps to make the partys hold on the courts secure.
by the judiciary act of the judiciary 180 x passed bythe lame duck con8ress the act of 1801 federalists reduced the number of supreme court justiceships by one but greatly increased the number of federal judgeships as a whole.
adams quickly appointed federalists to the newly created positions.
indeed there were charges that he stayed up until midnight on his last day in office to finish signing the new judges commissions.
these officeholders became known as the midnight appointments even so the republicans viewed their victory incorrectly as almost complete.
the nation they believed had been saved from tyranny.
a new era could now begin one in which the true principles on which america had been founded would once again govern the land.
the exuberance with which the victors viewed the future and the importance they attributed to the federalists defeat was evident in the phrase jefferson later used to describe his election the revolution of 1800 it remained to be seen how revolutionary it would really be.
the writing and ratifying of the constitution settled some questions about the shape of the new nation.
the first twelve years under the government created by the constitution solved others.
and yet by the year 1800 a basic disagreement about the future of the nation a disagreement personified by the differences between committed nationalist alexander hamilton and the self proclaimed champion of democracy thomas jefferson remained unresolved and was creating bitter divisions and conflicts within the political world.
the election of thomas jefferson to the presidency that year opened a new chapter in the nations public history.
it also brought to a close at least temporarily savage political conflicts that had seemed to threaten the nations future.
key terms people places events alexander hamilton 161 alien and sedition acts 176 antifederalists 167 bill of rights 168 checks and balances 166 citizen genet affair 173 federalists 167 federal structure 166 great compromise 164 james madison 164 jays treaty 174 john adams 175 new jersey plan 162 pinckneys treaty 174 quasi war 176 republicans 169 revolution of 1800 177 separation of powers 166 sovereignty 165 the federalist papers 167 virginia and kentucky resolutions 177 virginia plan 162 whiskey rebellion 172 xyz affair 176 the constitution and the new republic 179 recall and reflect significant events 1.
how did the constitution of 1787 attempt to resolve the weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
what role did the federalist papers play in the battle over ratification of the constitution.
what were the main tenets of alexander hamiltons financial program.
what diplomatic crises did the united states face in the first decade of its existence and how did the new government respond to these crises.
what was the revolution of 1800 and in what way was it a revolution.
1786 annapolis conference meets 1787 1788 states ratify constitution 1791 hamilton issues report on manufactures first bank of the united states chartered 1787 constitution adopted september 17 constitutional convention in philadelphia meets 1789 washington becomes first president bill of rights adopted by congress judiciary act of 1789 passed french revolution begins 1792 washington reelected without opposition 1793 citizen genet affair challenges american neutrality 1795 pinckney s treaty signed 1794 whiskey rebellion quelled in pennsylvania jay s treaty signed 1796 john adams elected president 1798 xyz affair precipitates state of quasi war with france alien and sedition acts passed virginia and kentucky resolutions passed 1801 jefferson becomes president after congress confirms election judiciary act of 1801 passed 1800 jefferson and burr tie vote in electoral college 7 the jeffersonian era the burning of washington this dramatic engraving somewhat exaggerates the extent of the blazes in looking ahead washington when the british occupied the city in august 1814.
but the invaders did set fire to the capitol the white house and other.
u c public buildings in retaliation for the american burning and looting 1.
how successful was jefferson s effort to create a republican society of the canadian capital at york the grange collection.
new yrok i dominated by sturdy independent farmers.
how did the napoleonic wars affect the united states.
what events and issues led to the war of 1812.
the jeffersonian vision setting the stage.
upiri thomas jefferson and his followers assumed control of the national government in 1801 as the champions of a distinctive vision of america a vision sharply different from that of andrew hamilton and other federalists.
they envisioned a society of sturdy independent farmers happily free from the workshops industrial towns and city mobs of europe.
they promoted a cultural outlook that emphasized localism and republican simplicity.
and they proposed a federal government of sharply limited power with most authority remaining at the state level.
almost nothing worked out as they planned.
for during their years in power the young republic was developing in ways that made much of their vision obsolete.
the american economy became steadily more diversified and complex.
growing cities surging commerce and expanding industrialism made the ideal of a simple agrarian society impossible to maintain.
american cultural life far from reflecting localism and simplicity reflected a vigorous and ambitious nationalism.
the republicans did manage to translate some of their political ideals into reality.
jefferson dismantled much of the bureaucratic power structure the federalists had erected in the 1790s and he helped ensure for a time that in many respects the federal government would remain a relatively unimportant force in american life.
yet he also frequently encountered situations that required him to exercise strong national authority as for example when he arranged the greatest single increase in the size of the united states in its history.
the republicans did not always like these nationalizing and modernizing trends but for the most part they adjusted to them and in doing so became agents of the transformation of american life they had once resisted.
the rise of cultural nationalism in many respects american cultural life in the early nineteenth century seemed to reflect the republican vision of the nation s future.
opportunities for education increased the nation s literary and artistic life began to free itself from european influences and american religion began to confront and adjust to the spread of enlightenment rationalism.
in other respects however the new culture was posing a serious challenge to republican ideals.
patterns of education central to the republican vision of america was the concept of a virtuous and enlightened citizenry.
jefferson himself called emphatically for a national crusade against ignorance republicans believed therefore in the establishment of a nationwide system of public importance of sch00js to create the educated electorate they believed a republic required.
acitizenrys a11 white male citizens the nation s prospective voters should they argued receive free education.
some states endorsed the principle of public education for all in the early years of the republic but none actually created a working system of free schools.
a massachusetts law of 1789 reaffirmed the colonial laws by which each town was obligated to support a school but there was little enforcement.
in virginia the state legislature ignored jeffersons call for universal elementary education and for advanced education for the gifted.
as late as 1815 not a single state had a comprehensive public school system.
instead schooling became primarily the responsibility of private institutions most of which were open only to those who could afford to pay for them.
in the south and in the mid atlantic states religious groups ran most of the schools.
in new england and elsewhere private private academies were usually secular many of them modeled on schools schooling founcjecj by the phillips family at andover massachusetts in 1778 and at exeter new hampshire three years later.
by 1815 there were thirty such private secondary schools in massachusetts thirty seven in new york and several dozen more scattered throughout 181 100.
chapter 4 further there was considerable overlapping and confusion of authority among the departments.
few of the london officials moreover had ever visited america few knew very much about conditions there.
what information they did gather came in large part from agents sent to england by the colonial assemblies to lobby for american interests.
these agents naturally did nothing to encourage interference with colonial affairs.
the best known of them benjamin franklin represented not only his own colony pennsylvania but also georgia new jersey and massachusetts.
it was not only the weakness of administrative authority in london and the policy of neglect that weakened englands hold on the colonies.
it was also the character of the royal officials in america among them the governors the collectors of customs and naval officers.
some of these officeholders were able and intelligent most were not.
appointments generally came as the result of bribery or favoritism not as a reward for merit.
many appointees remained in england and with part of their salaries hired substitutes to take their places in america.
such deputies received paltry wages and thus faced great temptations to augment their incomes with bribes.
few resisted the temptation.
customs collectors for example routinely waived duties on goods when merchants paid them to do so.
even honest and well paid officials usually found it expedient if they wanted to get along with their neighbors to yield to the colonists resistance to trade restrictions.
resistance to imperial authority centered in the colonial legislatures.
by the 1750s the american assemblies had claimed the right to levy taxes make appropriations approve appointments and pass laws for their respective colonies.
powerful their legislation was subject to veto by colonial the gvernor or the privy council.
but the legislatures assemblies had leverage over the governor through their control of the colonial budget and they could circumvent the privy council by repassing disallowed laws in slightly altered form.
the assemblies came to look upon themselves as little parliaments each practically as sovereign within its colony as parliament itself was in england.
the colonies divided despite their frequent resistance to the authority of london the colonists continued to think of themselves as loyal english subjects.
in many respects in fact they felt stronger ties to england than they did to one another.
tire and water an english traveler wrote are not more heterogeneous than the different colonies in north america new englanders and virginians viewed each other as something close to foreigners.
a connecticut man denounced the merchants of new york for their frauds and unfair practices while a new yorker condemned connecticut because of the low craft and cunning so incident to the people of that country only an accident of geography it seemed connected these disparate societies to one another.
an appeal for colonial unity this sketch one of the first american editorial cartoons appeared in benjamin franklins philadelphia newspaper the pennsylvania gazette on may 9 1754.
it was meant to illustrate the need for intercolonial unity and in particular for the adoption of franklin s albany plan.
the library of congress lc uszc4 5315 yet for all their differences the colonies could scarcely avoid forging connections with one another.
the growth of the colonial population produced an almost continuous line of settlement along the seacoast and led to the gradual construction of roads and the rise of intercolonial trade.
the colonial postal service helped increase communication.
in 1691 it had operated only from massachusetts to new york and pennsylvania.
in 1711 it extended to new hampshire in the north in 1732 to virginia in the south and ultimately all the way to georgia.
still the colonists were loath to cooperate even when in 1754 they faced a common threat from their old rivals the albany plan french and frances indian allies.
a conference of colonial leaders with delegates from pennsylvania maryland new york and new england was meeting in albany in that year to negotiate a treaty with the iroquois as the british government had advised the colonists to do.
the delegates stayed on to talk about forming a colonial federation for defense against the indians.
benjamin franklin proposed and the delegates tentatively approved a plan by which parliament would set up in america one general government for all the colonies except georgia and nova scotia.
each colony would retain its present constitution but would grant to the new general government such powers as the authority to govern all relations with the indians.
the central government would have a president general appointed and paid by the king just as colonial governors were and a legislature a grand council elected by the colonial assemblies.
war with the french and indians was already beginning when this albany plan was presented to the colonial assemblies.
none approved it.
everyone cries a union is necessary franklin wrote to the massachusetts governor but when they come to the manner and form of the union their weak noodles are perfectly distracted the empire in transition 101 the struggle for the continent in the late 1750s and early 1760s a great war raged through north america changing forever the balance of power both on the continent and throughout much of the world.
the war in america was part of a titanic struggle between england and france for dominance in world trade and naval power.
the british victory in that struggle known in europe as the seven years war rearranged global power and cemented englands role as the worlds great commercial and imperial nation.
it also cemented its control of most of the settled regions of north america.
in america however the conflict was the final stage in a long battle among the three principal powers in northeastern an uneasy north america the english the french balance of and the iroquois.
for more than a century power prior to the conflict known in america as the french and indian war these three groups had maintained an uneasy balance of power.
the events of the 1750s upset that balance produced a prolonged and open conflict and established a precarious dominance for the english societies throughout the region.
the french and indian war was important to the english colonists in america for another reason as well.
by bringing the americans into closer contact with british authority than ever before it raised to the surface some of the underlying tensions in the colonial relationship.
new france and the iroquois nation the french and the english had coexisted peacefully in north america for nearly a century.
but by the 1750s religious and commercial tensions began to produce new conflicts.
the crisis began in part because of the expansion of the french presence in america in the late seventeenth century a result of new sources louis xivs search for national unity and of conflict increased world power.
the lucrative fur trade drew immigrant french peasants deeper into the wilderness while missionary zeal drew large numbers of french jesuits into the interior in search of potential converts.
the bottomlands of the mississippi river valley attracted french farmers discouraged by the short growing season in canada.
by the mid seventeenth century the french empire in america comprised a vast territory.
louis joliet and father jacques marquette french explorers of the 1670s journeyed together by canoe from green bay on lake michigan as far south as the junction of the arkansas and mississippi rivers.
a year later rene robert cavelier sieur de la salle began the explorations that in 1682 took him to the delta of the mississippi where he claimed the surrounding country for france and named it louisiana in the kings honor.
subsequent traders and missionaries wandered to the southwest as far as the rio grande and the explorer pierre gaultier de varennes sieur de la verendrye pushed westward in 1743 from lake superior to a point within sight of the rocky mountains.
the french had by then revealed the outlines of and laid claim to almost the whole continental interior.
to secure their hold on these enormous claims they founded a string of widely separated communities fortresses france s missions and trading posts.
fort louis north bourg on cape breton island guarded the american approach to the gulf of st lawrence.
empire would be feudal lords established large estates seigneuries along the banks of the st lawrence river and on a high bluff above the river stood the fortified city of quebec the center of the french empire in america.
to the south was montreal and to the west sault sainte marie and detroit.
on the lower mississippi emerged plantations much like those in the southern colonies of english america worked by black slaves and owned by creoles white immigrants of french descent.
new orleans founded in 1718 to service the french plantation economy soon was as big as some of the larger cities of the atlantic seaboard biloxi and mobile to the east completed the string of french settlement.
but the french were not of course alone in the continental interior.
they shared their territories with a large and powerful indian population in regions now often labeled the middle grounds see p 60 and their relations with the natives were crucial to the shaping of their empire.
they also shared the interior with a growing number of english traders and settlers who had been moving beyond the confines of the colonial boundaries in the east.
both the french and the english were aware that the battle for control of north america would be determined in part by which group could best win the allegiance of native tribes as trading partners and at times as military allies.
the indians for their part were principally concerned with protecting their independence.
whatever alignments they formed with the european societies growing up around them were generally marriages of convenience determined by which group offered the most attractive terms.
the english with their more advanced commercial economy could usually offer the indians better and more plentiful goods.
but the french offered something that was often more important tolerance.
unlike the english settlers most of whom tried to impose their own social norms on the native americans they encountered the french settlers in the interior generally adjusted their own behavior to indian patterns.
french fur traders frequently married indian women and adopted tribal ways.
jesuit missionaries interacted comfortably with the natives and converted them to catholicism by the thousands without challenging most of their social customs.
by the mid eighteenth century therefore the french had better and closer relations with most of the tribes of the interior than did the english.
the most powerful native group however had a different relationship with the french.
the iroquois confederacy the five indian nations mohawk seneca cayuga onondaga and oneida that had formed a defensive alliance in the fifteenth 102.
chapter 4 century had been the most powerful tribal presence in the northeast since the 1640s when they had fought and won a the iroquois bitter war against the hurons.
once their confederacy major competitors were largely gone from the region the iroquois forged an important commercial relationship with the english and dutch along the eastern seaboard although they continued to trade with the french as well.
indeed the key to the success of the iroquois in maintaining their independence was that they avoided too close a relationship with either group and astutely played the french and the english against each other.
as a result they managed to maintain an uneasy balance of power in the great lakes region and beyond.
the principal area of conflict among these many groups was the ohio valley.
the french claimed it.
several competing indian tribes many of them refugees from lands farther east driven into the valley by the english expansion lived there.
english settlement was expanding into it.
and the iroquois were trying to establish a presence there as traders.
with so many competing groups jostling for influence the ohio valley quickly became a potential battleground.
european seeds of conflict anglo french conflicts as long as england and france remained at peace in europe and as long as the precarious balance in the north american interior survived the tensions among the english french and iroquois remained mild.
but after the glorious revolution in england the english throne passed to one of louis xivs principal enemies william iii who was also the stadholder chief magistrate of the netherlands and who had long opposed french expansionism.
williams successor queen anne the daughter of james ii ascended the throne in 1702 and carried on the struggle against france and its new ally spain.
the result was a series of anglo french wars that continued intermittently in europe for nearly eighty years.
the wars had important repercussions in america.
king williams war 1689 1697 produced a few indecisive clashes between the english and french in northern new england.
queen annes war which began in 1701 and continued for nearly twelve years generated substantial conflicts border fighting with the spaniards in the south as well as with the 7 7 kj the siege of louisbourg 1758 the fortress of louisbourg on cape breton island in nova scotia was one of the principal french outposts in eastern canada during the french and indian war.
it took a british fleet of 157 ships nearly two months to force the french garrison to surrender.
we had not had our batteries against the town above a week wrote a british soldier afte the victory tho we were ashore seven weeks the badness of the country prevented our approaches.
it was necessary to make roads for the cannon which was a great labour and some loss of men but the spirits the army was in is capable of doing any thing.
the new brunswick museum saint john nb french and their indian allies in the north.
the treaty of utrecht which brought the conflict to a close in 1713 transferred substantial areas of french territory in north america to the english including acadia nova scotia and newfoundland.
two decades later european rivalries led to still more conflicts in america.
disputes over british trading rights in the spanish colonies produced a war between england and spain and led to clashes between the british in georgia and the spaniards in florida.
it was in the context of this conflict that the last english colony in america georgia was founded in 1733 see pp.
the anglo spanish conflict soon merged with a much larger european war in which england and france lined up on opposite sides of a territorial dispute between frederick the great of prussia and maria theresa of austria.
the english colonists in america were soon drawn into the struggle which they called king georges war and between 1744 and 1748 they engaged in a series of conflicts with the french.
new englanders captured the french bastion at louisbourg on cape breton island but the peace treaty that finally ended the conflict forced them in bitter disappointment to abandon it.
in the aftermath of king georges war relations among the english french and iroquois in north america quickly deteriorated.
the iroquois in what in retrospect appears a major blunder began to grant trading concessions in the interior to english merchants.
in the context of the already tense anglo french relationship in america the decision to side with the british set in motion a chain of events disastrous for the iroquois confederacy.
the french feared that the english were using the concessions as a first step toward expansion into french lands which to some extent they were.
they began in 1749 to construct new fortresses in the ohio valley.
the english interpreted the french activity as a threat to their western settlements.
they protested and began making military preparations and building fortresses of their own.
the balance of power that the iroquois had striven to maintain for so long rapidly disintegrated and the five indian nations allied themselves with the british and assumed an essentially passive role in the conflict that followed.
for the next five years tensions between the english and the french increased.
in the summer of 1754 the governor of virginia sent a militia force under the command of an fort inexperienced young colonel george necessity washington into the ohio valley to challenge french expansion.
washington built a crude stockade fort necessity not far from the larger french outpost fort duquesne on the site of what is now pittsburgh.
after the virginians staged an unsuccessful attack on a french detachment the french countered with an assault on fort necessity trapping washington and his soldiers inside.
after a third of them died in the fighting washington surrendered.
that clash marked the beginning of what became the french and indian war the american part of the much larger seven years war that spread through europe at the same time.
it was the climactic event in the long anglo french struggle for empire.
the empire in transition 103 the great war for the empire the french and indian war lasted nearly nine years and it proceeded in three distinct phases.
the first phase lasted from the fort necessity debacle in 1754 until the expansion of the war to europe in 1756.
it was primarily a north american conflict which the english colonists managed largely on their own.
the british provided modest assistance during this period but they provided it so ineptly that it had little impact on the braddock struggle.
the british fleet failed to prevent defeated the landing of large french reinforcements in canada and the newly appointed commander in chief of the british army in america general edward braddock failed miserably in a major effort in the summer of 1755 to retake the crucial site at the forks of the ohio river where washington had lost the battle at fort necessity.
a french and indian ambush a few miles from the fort left braddock dead and his remaining forces in disarray.
the local colonial forces meanwhile were preoccupied with defending themselves against raids on their western settlements by the indians of the ohio valley.
virtually all of the tribes except the iroquois were now allied with the french having interpreted the defeat of the virginians at fort duquesne as evidence of british weakness.
even the iroquois who were nominally allied with the british remained fearful of antagonizing the french.
they engaged in few hostilities and launched no offensive into canada even though they had under heavy english pressure declared war on the french.
by late 1755 many english settlers along the frontier had withdrawn to the east of the allegheny mountains to escape the hostilities.
the second phase of the struggle began in 1756 when the governments of france and england formally opened hostilities and a truly international conflict the seven years war began.
in europe the war was marked by a realignment within the complex system of alliances.
france allied with its former enemy austria england joined frances former ally prussia.
the fighting now spread to the west indies india and europe.
but the principal struggle remained the one in north america where so far england had suffered nothing but frustration and defeat.
beginning in 1757 william pitt the english secretary of state and future prime minister began to transform the war william pitt effort in america by bringing it for the first takes charge time fully under british control.
pitt himself began planning military strategy for the north american conflict appointing military commanders and issuing orders to the colonists.
military recruitment had slowed dramatically in america after the defeat of braddock.
to replenish the army british commanders began forcibly enlisting colonists a practice known as impressment.
officers also began to seize supplies and equipment from local farmers and tradesmen and compelled colonists to offer shelter to british troops all generally without compensation.
the americans had long ago become accustomed to running their own affairs and had been fighting for over two years without the first global war m tj tj french and indian war in north america was only a small part of a much larger con 1 ll uflict.
known in europe as the seven years war it was one of the longest most widespread and most important wars in modern history.
ministers in this country where every part of the world affects us in some way or another should consider the whole globe the duke of newcastle wrote in britain in 1758 reflecting the international achievements and war aims of the british in the mid eighteenth century.
two centuries later winston churchill the former british prime minister wrote of the seven years war as the first world war.
in north america the war was a result of tensions along the frontiers of the british empire but a larger war resulted from conflicts among the great powers in europe.
it began in the 1750s with what historians have called a diplomatic revolution.
well established alliances between britain and the austro hungarian empire and between france and prussia collapsed replaced by new alliances that set britain and prussia against france and austria.
the instability that these changing alliances produced helped speed the european nations toward war.
the one thing that did not change was the continuing rivalry between britain and france.
the austrian british alliance collapsed because austria suffered a series of significant defeats at the hands of the prussians.
to the british government these failures suggested that the austro hungarian empire was now too weak to help britain balance french power.
as a result britain sought new partnerships with the rising powers of northern germany austria s enemies.
seeking protection from the power of their former british allies the austrians allied with france.
russia concerned about the austro hungarian empire s possible dominance in central europe allied with britain and prussia.
the tensions that these complicated realignments created eventually led to war just as the complicated alliances in europe in the early twentieth century helped produce world war i.
the european part of the war was a result of the continuing conflict between prussia and austria and the effect of those wars on the allies of both.
the seven years war soon spread across much of the world engaging not only most of the great powers in europe from england to russia but also the emerging 104 the empire in transition 105 colonial world india west africa the caribbean and the philippines as the powerful british navy worked to strip france and eventually spain of their valuable colonial holdings.
like most modern conflicts the seven years war was a struggle for economic power.
colonial possessions many european nations believed were critical to their future wealth well worth fighting for.
the war s outcome affected not only the future of america but also the distribution of power through much of the world.
it destroyed the french navy and much of the french empire and it elevated great britain to undisputed preeminence among colonial powers especially when at the conclusion of the war india and all of eastern north america fell firmly under english control.
the war also reorganized the balance of power in europe with britain now preeminent among the great powers and prussia later to become the core of modern germany rapidly rising in wealth and military power.
the seven years war was not only one of the first great colonial wars it was also one of the last great wars of religion.
it extended the dominance of protestantism in europe.
in what is now canada the war replaced french with british rule and thus catholic with protestant rule.
the vatican no longer a military power itself had relied on the great catholic empires spain france and austria hungary as bulwarks of the vatican s power and influence.
the shift of power toward protestant governments in europe and north america weakened the catholic church and reduced its geopolitical influence.
the conclusion of the seven years war strengthened britain and germany and weakened france.
but it did not provide any lasting solution to the rivalries among the great colonial powers.
in north america a dozen years after the end of the war the american revolution the origins of which were in many ways a direct result of the seven years war stripped the british empire of one of its most important and valuable colonial appendages.
by the time the american revolution came to an end the french revolution had sparked another lengthy period of war culminating in the napoleonic wars of the early nineteenth century which once again redrew the map of europe and for a while the world.
much assistance or direction from the british.
they resented these new impositions and firmly resisted them at times as in a 1757 riot in new york city violently.
by early 1758 the friction between the british authorities and the colonists was threatening to bring the war effort to a halt.
beginning in 1758 therefore pitt initiated the third and final phase of the war by relaxing many of the policies that americans found oppressive.
he agreed to reimburse the colonists for all supplies requisitioned by the army.
he returned control over military recruitment to the colonial assemblies which resulted in an immediate and dramatic increase in enlistments.
and he dispatched large numbers of additional troops to america.
finally the tide of battle began to turn in england s favor.
the french had always been outnumbered by the british colonists after 1756 the french colonies suffered as well from a series of poor harvests.
as a result they were unable to sustain their early military successes.
by mid 1758 the british regulars who did the bulk of the fighting and the colonial militias were siege of seizing one french stronghold after another.
quebec two brilliant english generals jeffrey amherst and james wolfe captured the fortress at louisbourg in july 1758 a few months later fort duquesne fell without a fight.
the next year at the end of a siege of quebec supposedly impregnable atop its towering cliff the army of general james wolfe struggled up a hidden ravine under cover of darkness surprised the larger forces of the b ic kekst ftl boston alyianack.
fur the year of our lord i 7 7 2.
being leap year.
understand analyze and evaluate 1.
how did the seven years war change the balance of power among the nations of europe.
who gained and who lost in the war.
what effect did the war s outcome have on the european colonies in north america.
why is the seven years war described as one of the most important wars in modern history.
pail firrt of patriots i whbfe exteofive mind revolves the vitft concernments of mankind contending realms accept controul from thee and britoss glory hangs on thy decree deals deflru ton peace her.
olive brings as thy fnpreme dire ion governs kings.
whreer thou bid ll the wreaths of conqiteft tall the guide the f iend the guardian of us all.
11111 q 8 t x primed by john flkmlkg aad to be sold at hi 85 v xlfcc street oppolte the af the roh h hovse.
rprke favea copper j haile and 251 old tenor p 4 d uw lthr do en.
r j william pitt the elder this dedication on the cover of the bickerstaff boston almanac in 1772 honors the british statesman who voiced his support for the american colonialists in the years leading to the revolution.
corbis 106 chapter 4 marquis de montcalm and defeated them in a battle in which both commanders died.
the dramatic fall of quebec on september 13 1759 marked the beginning of the end of the american phase of the war.
a year later in september 1760 the french army formally surrendered to amherst in montreal.
not all aspects of the struggle were as romantic as wolfes dramatic assault on quebec.
the british resorted at times to such brutal military expedients as population dispersal.
in nova scotia for example they uprooted several thousand french inhabitants whom they suspected of disloyalty and scattered them throughout the english colonies.
some of these acadians eventually made their way to louisiana where they became the ancestors of the present day cajuns.
elsewhere english and colonial troops inflicted even worse atrocities on the indian allies of the french for example offering scalp bounties to those who could bring back evidence of having killed a native.
the french and their indian allies retaliated and hundreds of families along the english frontier perished in brutal raids on their settlements.
peace finally came after the accession of george iii to the british throne and the resignation of pitt who unlike the new king wanted to continue hostilities.
the british achieved most of pitts aims nevertheless in the peace of peace of paris paris signed in 1763.
under its terms the french ceded to great britain some of their west indian islands and most of their colonies in india.
they also transferred canada and all other french territory east of the mississippi except new orleans to great britain.
they ceded new orleans and their claims west of the mississippi to spain thus surrendering all title to the main land of north america.
the french and indian war had profound effects on the british empire and the american colonies.
it greatly expanded englands territorial claims in the new world.
at the same time it greatly enlarged britains debt financing the vast war had been a major drain on the treasury.
it also generated substantial resentment toward the americans among british british victory french victory 1british advance french advance v british forces led by wolfe capture quebec on sept 18 1759 french surrender montreal t on sept 8 1760 ya british trqops capture ta fort carillorr ticonderoga 13.
fort frontenac captured by on ju y 8 1758j a n the british on august 28 1758 7 colonial troops defeated m.
crown point fal.
of 175 r british surrender fortwillliam x lqy.
henry on august 9 1757 7 ft n h f t oswego niagara albany.
boston maine of mass.
british deport 6 000 acadian farmers and disperse them among the colonies summer of 1755 o c i a n braddock defeated by french and indian troops at fort duquesne on july 9 175.
new york pennsylvania washington surrenders at tjort necessity on july 4 1754 marylafsj virginia philadelphia x delaware mass.
r h z n j 4 x pi lax.
f havana a etenqbvh o sugar islands senegal 1758 france and britain pondicherry 1761 szszt in the pennsyivania backcountry he brifeh was worldwide with naval superiority providing the j french waged their final contest for supremacy in north needed edge to britain.
the empire in transition 107 leaders many of whom were contemptuous of the colonists for what they considered american military ineptitude during the war.
they were angry as well that the colonists had made so few financial contributions to a struggle waged largely for american benefit they were particularly bitter that some colonial merchants had been selling food and other goods to the french in the west indies throughout the conflict.
all these factors combined to persuade many english leaders that a major reorganization of the empire giving london increased authority over the colonies would be necessary in the aftermath of the war.
the war had an equally profound but very different effect on the american colonists.
it forced them for the first time to act in concert against a common foe.
the friction of 1756 1757 over british requisition and impressment policies and consequences of the seven years war the 1758 return of authority to the colonial assemblies established an important precedent in the minds of the colonists it seemed to confirm the illegitimacy of english interference in local affairs.
for thousands of americans the men who served in the colonial armed forces the war was an important socializing experience.
the colonial troops unlike the british regiments generally viewed themselves as part of a peoples army the relationship of soldiers to their units was the soldiers believed in some measure voluntary their army was a communal not a coercive or hierarchical organization.
the contrast with the british regulars whom the colonists widely resented for their arrogance and arbitrary use of power was striking and in later years the memory of that contrast helped to shape the american response to british imperial policies.
for the indians of the ohio valley the third major party in the french and indian war the british victory was disastrous.
those tribes that had allied themselves with the french had earned the enmity of the victorious english.
the iroquois confederacy which had allied with britain fared only slightly better.
english officials saw the passivity of the iroquois during the war a result of their effort to hedge their bets and avoid antagonizing the french as evidence of duplicity.
in the aftermath of the peace settlement the iroquois alliance with the british quickly unraveled and the iroquois confederacy itself began to crumble from within.
the iroquois nations would continue to contest the english for control of the ohio valley for another fifty years but increasingly divided and increasingly outnumbered they would seldom again be in a position to deal with their white rivals on terms of military or political equality.
the new imperialism with the treaty of 1763 england found itself at peace for the first time in more than fifty years.
but saddled with enormous debts and responsible for vast new lands in the new world the imperial government could not long avoid expanding its involvement in its colonies.
burdens of empire versus territorial imperialists the experience of the french and indian war suggested that such increased involvement would not be easy to achieve.
not only had the colonists proved so resistant to british control that pitt had been forced to relax his policies in 1758 but the colonial assemblies had continued after that to respond to british needs slowly and grudgingly.
unwilling to be taxed by parliament to support the war effort the colonists were generally reluctant to tax themselves as well.
defiance of imperial trade regulations and other british demands continued and even increased through the last years of the war.
the problems of managing the empire became more difficult after 1763 because of a basic shift in britains imperial design.
in the past the english had viewed their colonial em commercial pire primar y terms of trade they had opposed acquisition of territory for its own sake.
but by the mid eighteenth century a growing number of english and american leaders including william pitt and benjamin franklin were beginning to argue that land itself was of value to the empire because of the population it could support the taxes it could produce and the imperial splendor it would confer.
the debate between the old commercial imperialists and the new territorial ones came to a head at the conclusion of the french and indian war.
the mercantilists wanted england to return canada to france in exchange for guadeloupe the most commercially valuable of the french sugar islands in the west indies.
the territorialists however prevailed.
the acquisition of the french territories in north america was a victory for among others benjamin franklin who had long argued that the american people would need these vast spaces to accommodate their rapid and he believed limitless growth.
with the territorial annexations of 1763 the area of the british empire was suddenly twice as great as it had been and the problems of governing it were thus considerably more complex.
some british officials argued that the empire should restrain rapid settlement in the western territories.
to allow europeans to move into the new lands too quickly they warned would run the risk of stirring up costly conflicts with the indians.
restricting settlement would also keep the land available for hunting and trapping.
many colonists wanted to see the new territories opened for immediate development but they disagreed among themselves about who should control the western lands.
colonial governments made fervent and often conflicting claims of jurisdiction.
other colonists argued that control should remain in england and that the territories should be considered entirely new colonies unlinked to the existing settlements.
there were in short a host of problems and pressures that the british could not ignore.
at the same time the government in london was running out of options in its effort to find a way to deal with its staggering war debt.
landlords and merchants in england itself were objecting strenuously to increases in what they already considered 108 chapter 4 hudsons bay company carolina.
columbia k gston 6 augusta.
m claimed by spain and britain i x disputed territory georgia y harles town savannah non indian settlement before 1700 1700 1763 frontier line proclamation line of 1763 fort provincial capital t 250 500 km the thirteen colonies in 1763 this map is a close up of the thirteen colonies at the end of the seven years war.
it shows the line of settlement established by the proclamation of 1763 the red line as well as the extent of actual settlement in that year the blue line.
note that in the middle colonies north carolina virginia maryland and southern pennsylvania settlement had already reached the red line and in one small area of western pennsylvania moved beyond it by the time of the proclamation of 1763.
note also the string of forts established beyond the proclamation line.
how do the forts help to explain the efforts of the british to restrict settlement.
and how does the extent of actual settlement help explain why it was so difficult for the british to enforce their restrictions.
excessively high taxes.
the necessity of stationing significant numbers of british troops on the indian border after 1763 was britains adding even more to the cost of defending staggering the american settlements.
and the half war debt hearted response of the colonial assemblies to the war effort had suggested that in its search for revenue england could not rely on any cooperation from the colonial governments.
only a system of taxation administered by london the leaders of the empire believed could effectively meet englands needs.
at this crucial moment in anglo american relations with the imperial system in desperate need of redefinition george iii became king in 1760 on the death of his grandfather.
he brought two particularly unfortunate qualities to the office.
the empire in transition 109 first he was determined unlike his two predecessors to be an active and responsible monarch.
in part because of pressure from his ambitious mother he removed from power the long standing and stable coalition of whigs who had under pitt and others governed the empire for much of the century and whom the new king mistrusted.
in their place he created a new coalition of his own through patronage and bribes and gained an uneasy control of parliament.
the new ministries that emerged as a result of these changes were unstable each lasting in office only about two years.
second the king had serious intellectual and psychological limitations that compounded his political difficulties.
he suffered apparently from a rare disease that produced intermittent bouts of insanity.
indeed in the last years of his long reign he was according to most accounts deranged george iifs confined to the palace and unable to per shortcomings form any official functions.
yet even when george iii was lucid and rational which in the 1760s and 1770s was most of the time he was painfully immature he was only twenty two when he ascended the throne and insecure striving constantly to prove his fitness for his position but time and again finding himself ill equipped to handle the challenges he seized for george hi george iii was twenty two years old when he ascended the throne in 1760 and for many years almost all portraits of him were highly formal with the king dressed in elaborate ceremonial robes.
this less formal painting dates from much later in his reign after he had begun to suffer from the mental disorders that eventually consumed him.
after 1810 he was blind and permanently deranged barred from all official business by the regency act of 1811.
his son later king george iv served as regent in those years until he became king after his fathers death in 1820.
the granger collection new york himself.
the king s personality therefore contributed to both the instability and the intransigence of the british government during these critical years.
more immediately responsible for the problems that soon emerged with the colonies however was george grenville whom the king made prime minister in 1763.
grenville did not share his brother in law william pitts sympathy with the american point of view.
he agreed instead with the prevailing opinion within britain that the colonists had been too long indulged and that they should be compelled to obey the laws and to pay a part of the cost of defending and administering the empire.
he promptly began trying to impose a new system of control upon what had been a loose collection of colonial possessions in america.
the british and the tribes the western problem was the most urgent.
with the departure of the french settlers and traders from the english colonies moved immediately into the upper ohio valley.
the indians of the region objected to this intrusion and an alliance of tribes under the ottawa chieftain pontiac struck back.
to prevent an escalation of the fighting that might threaten western trade the british government issued a ruling the proclamation of 1763 forbidding settlers to advance beyond a line drawn along the appalachian mountains.
proclamation the proclamation of 1763 was appealing of 1763 to the british for several reasons.
it would allow london rather than the provincial governments and their land hungry constituents to control the westward movement of the white population.
hence westward expansion would proceed in an orderly manner and conflicts with the tribes which were both militarily costly and dangerous to trade might be limited.
slower western settlement would also slow the population exodus from the coastal colonies where englands most important markets and investments were.
and it would reserve opportunities for land speculation and fur trading for english rather than colonial entrepreneurs.
although the tribes were not enthusiastic about the proclamation which required them to cede still more land to the white settlers many tribal groups supported the agreement as the best bargain available to them.
the cherokee in particular worked actively to hasten the drawing of the boundary hoping to end white encroachments.
relations between the western tribes and the british improved in some areas after the proclamation partly as a result of the work of the indian superintendents the british appointed.
john stuart was in charge of indian affairs in the southern colonies and sir william johnson in the northern ones.
both were sympathetic to native american needs and lived among the tribes johnson married a mohawk woman mary brant who was later to play an important role in the american revolution.
in the end however the proclamation of 1763 failed to meet even the modest expectations of the native americans.
it had some effect in limiting colonial land speculation in the west and 110 chapter 4 in controlling the fur trade but on the crucial point of the line of settlement it was ineffective.
white settlers continued to white swarm across the boundary and to claim encroachment lands farther and farther into the ohio valley.
the british authorities tried repeatedly to establish limits to the expansion but continually failed to prevent the white colonists from pushing the line of settlement still farther west.
the colonial response the grenville ministry soon moved to increase its authority in the colonies in more direct ways.
regular british troops london announced would now be stationed permanently in america and under the mutiny act of 1765 the colonists were required to assist in provisioning and maintaining the army.
ships of the british navy were assigned to patrol american waters and search for smugglers.
the customs service was reorganized and enlarged.
royal officials were ordered to take up their colonial posts in person instead of sending substitutes.
colonial manufacturing was to be restricted so that it would not compete with the rapidly expanding industry of great britain.
the sugar act of 1764 designed in part to eliminate the illegal sugar trade between the continental colonies and the french and spanish west indies strengthened enforce sugar rnent of the duty on sugar while low currency ering the duty on molasses further and stamp damaging the market for sugar grown acts in the colonies.
it also established new vice admiralty courts in america to try accused smugglers thus depriving them of the benefit of sympathetic local juries.
the currency act of 1764 required the colonial assemblies to stop issuing paper money a widespread practice during the war and to retire on schedule all the paper money already in circulation.
most momentous of all the stamp act of 1765 imposed a tax on most printed documents in the colonies newspapers almanacs pamphlets deeds wills licenses.
the new imperial program was an effort to reapply to the colonies the old principles of mercantilism.
and in some ways it proved highly effective.
british officials were soon collecting more than ten times as much annual revenue from america as before 1763.
but the new policies created many more problems than they solved.
the colonists may have resented the new imperial regulations but at first they found it difficult to resist them effectively.
americans continued to harbor as many grievances against one another as against the authorities in london.
often the conflicts centered around tensions between the paxton boys established societies of the atlantic coast and the backcountry farther west whose residents often felt isolated from and underrepresented in the colonial governments.
these western settlers sometimes felt resentful because they lived closer to the worlds of the indian tribes than the societies of the east.
in regulator movement 1763 for example a band of people from western pennsylvania known as the paxton boys descended on philadelphia with demands for relief from colonial not british taxes and for money to help them defend themselves against indians the colonial government averted bloodshed only by making con cessions to them.
in 1771 a small scale civil war broke out as a result of the so called regulator movement in north carolina.
the regulators were farmers of the carolina upcountry who organized in opposition to the high taxes that local sheriffs appointed by the colonial governor collected.
the western counties were badly underrepresented in the colonial assembly and the regulators failed to win redress of their grievances there.
finally they armed themselves and began resisting tax collections by force.
to suppress the revolt governor william tryon raised an army of militiamen mostly from the eastern counties who defeated a band of 2 000 regulators in the battle of alamance.
nine on each side were killed and many others were wounded.
afterward six regulators were hanged for treason.
the bloodshed was exceptional but bitter conflicts within the colonies were not.
after 1763 however the new policies of the british government began to create common grievances among virtually all colonists that to some degree counterbalanced these internal divisions.
indeed there was something in the grenville program to antagonize everyone.
northern merchants believed they would suffer from restraints on commerce closing opportunities for manufacturing and increased taxes.
settlers in the northern backcountry resented the closing of the west to land speculation and fur trading.
southern planters in debt to english merchants feared having to pay additional taxes and losing their ability to ease their debts by speculating in western land.
professionals ministers lawyers professors and oth ers depended on merchants and planters for their livelihood and thus shared their concerns about the effects of english law.
small farmers the largest group in the colonies believed they would suffer from increased taxes and from the abolition of paper money which had enabled them to pay their loans.
workers in towns opposed the restraints on manufacturing.
the new restrictions came moreover at the beginning of an economic depression.
the british government by pouring postwar money into the colonies to finance the depression fighting had stimulated a wartime boom.
when the flow of funds stopped after the peace in 1763 an economic bust followed.
the imperial policies would many colonists feared doom them to permanent economic stagnation and a declining standard of living.
in reality most americans soon found ways to live with or circumvent the new british policies.
the american economy was not in fact being destroyed.
but economic anxieties were rising in the colonies nevertheless and they created a growing sense of unease.
whatever the economic consequences of the british government s programs the political consequences were in the the empire in transition 111 arctic ocean greenland bering sea as a c i c pacif1c ocean fc 0 hudson bay if r french fishing a rights 11 r yj nezc r hudsons bay spanish florida st pierre and miquelon.
a nova ivir a sc0tia mass.
atlantic ocean io yf gulf of mexico belize jcuba.
st dominigue jamaica c a r i b b e a n s e a santo domingo puerto rico mosquito coast iorth america in 1763 the victory of the english over the french in the seven years war or as it was known in america the french and indian war reshaped the map of colonial north merica.
britain gained a vast new territory formerly controlled by france canada and a large area west of the mississippi river thus more than doubling the size of the british empire in america rench possessions in the new world dwindled to a few islands in the caribbean.
spain continued to control a substantial empire in the north american interior.
the red line along the western borders f the english colonies represents the line of settlement established by britain in 1763.
white settlers were not permitted to move beyond that line.
why did the british wish to restrict settlement of the western lands.
eyes of the colonists far worse.
perhaps nowhere else in the late eighteenth century world did so large a proportion of the people take an active interest in public affairs.
that was partly because anglo americans were deeply attached to broad powers of self government and the colonists were determined to protect those powers.
the keys to self government they believed were the provincial assemblies and the key to the power of the provincial assemblies was their long established political consequences of the grenville program right to give or withhold appropriations for the colonial governments a right the british were now challenging.
home rule therefore was not something new and different that the colonists were striving to attain but something old and familiar that they desired to keep.
the movement to resist the new imperial policies a movement for which many would ultimately 112 chapter 4 preparing to meet the paxton boys the paxton boys were residents of western pennsylvania who were declared outlaws by the assembly in philadelphia after they launched an unauthorized attack on neighboring conestoga indians.
instead of surrendering they armed themselves and marched on philadelphia.
this engraving satirizes the haphazard military preparations in the city for the expected invasion.
an accompanying poem expressing the contempt some colonists felt toward the urbanized pacifist quakers of philadelphia commented to kill the paxtomans they then did advance with guns on their shoulders but how did they prance benjamin franklin finally persuaded the paxton rebels not to attack in return for greater representation in the legislature.
fotosearch getty images fight and die was at the same time democratic and conservative.
it was a movement to conserve liberties americans believed they already possessed.
stirrings of revolt by the mid 1760s a hardening of positions had begun in both england and america that would bring the colonies into increasing conflict with the mother country.
the victorious war for empire had given the colonists a heightened sense of their own importance and a renewed commitment to protecting their political autonomy.
but it had also given the british a strengthened belief in the need to tighten administration of the empire and use the colonies as a source of revenue.
the result was a series of events that more rapidly than anyone had imagined shattered the british empire in america.
the stamp act crisis even if he had tried prime minister grenville could not have devised a better method for antagonizing and unifying the effects of the colonies than the stamp act of 1765.
stamp act the sugar act of a year earlier had affected few people other than the new england merchants.
but the new tax fell on all americans and it evoked particular opposition from some of the most powerful members of the population.
merchants and lawyers were obliged to buy stamps for ships papers and legal documents.
tavern owners often the political leaders of their neighborhoods were required to buy stamps for their licenses.
printers the most influential group in distributing information and ideas in colonial society had to buy stamps for their newspapers and other publications.
the actual economic burdens of the stamp act were relatively light the stamps were not expensive.
what made the law offensive to the colonists was the precedent it seemed to set.
in the past americans had rationalized the taxes and duties on colonial trade as measures to regulate commerce not raise money.
some americans had even managed to persuade themselves that the sugar act which was in fact designed primarily to raise money was not fundamentally different from the traditional imperial duties.
the stamp act however they could interpret in only one way it was a direct attempt by england to raise revenue in the colonies without the consent of the colonial assemblies.
if this new tax passed without resistance the door would be open for more burdensome taxation in the future.
few colonists believed that they could do anything more than grumble and buy the stamps until the virginia house of the empire in transition 113 the alternatives of william burg in the aftermath of the boston tea party and in response to the coercive acts great britain enacted to punish the colonists the first continental congress called on americans to boycott british goods until the acts were repealed.
in this drawing a prosperous virginia merchant is seen signing a pledge to honor the nonimportation agreement not surprising given the alternative visible in the background of the picture tar and feathers hanging from a post labeled a cure for the refractory the colonial williamsburg foundation burgesses sounded what one colonist called a trumpet of sedition that aroused americans to action almost everywhere.
the trumpet was the collective voice of a group of young virginia aristocrats.
they hoped among other things to challenge the power of tidewater planters who in alliance with the royal governor dominated virginia politics.
foremost among the malcontents was patrick henry who had already achieved fame for his fiery oratory and his occasional defiance of british authority.
henry made a dramatic speech to the house of burgesses in may 1765 concluding with a vague prediction that if present policies were not revised george iii like earlier tyrants might lose his head.
there were shocked cries of treason and according to one witness an immediate apology from henry although many years later he was quoted as having made the defiant reply if this be treason make the most of it.
henry introduced a set of resolutions declaring that americans possessed the same rights as the english especially virginia the ri ht to be caxed by resolves representatives that virginians should pay no taxes except those voted by the virginia assembly and that anyone advocating the right of parliament to tax virginians should be deemed an enemy of the colony.
the house of burgesses defeated the most extreme of henrys resolutions.
all of them however were printed and circulated as the virginia resolves creating an impression in other colonies that the people of virginia were more militant than they actually were.
in massachusetts at about the same time james otis persuaded his fellow members of the colonial assembly to call an intercolonial congress for action against the new tax.
in october 1765 the stamp act congress met in new york with delegates from nine colonies and decided to petition the king and the two houses of parliament.
their petition conceded that americans owed to parliament all due subordination but it denied that the colonies could rightfully be taxed except through their own provincial assemblies.
meanwhile in several colonial cities crowds began taking the law into their own hands.
during the summer of 1765 sons of serious riots broke out up and down liberty the coast the largest of them in boston.
men belonging to the newly organized sons of liberty terrorized stamp agents and burned the stamps.
the agents themselves americans hastily resigned and the sale of stamps in the continental colonies ceased.
in boston a crowd also attacked such pro british aristocrats as the lieutenant governor thomas hutchinson who had privately opposed passage of the stamp act but who as an officer of the crown felt obliged to support it once it became law.
the protesters pillaged hutchinsons elegant house and virtually destroyed it.
the stamp act crisis was a dangerous moment in the relationship between the colonies and the british government.
but the crisis subsided largely because england backed down.
the authorities in london changed their attitude not because of the colonists defiance but because of economic pressure.
even before the stamp act many new englanders had stopped buying english goods to protest the sugar act of 1764.
now the colonial boycott spread and the sons of liberty intimidated colonists who were reluctant to participate in it.
the merchants of england feeling the loss of much of their colonial market begged parliament to repeal the stamp act and stories of unemployment poverty and discontent arose from english seaports and manufacturing towns.
the marquis of rockingham who succeeded grenville as prime minister in july 1765 tried to appease both the english merchants and the american colonists and he finally con parliament vinced the king to kill the stamp act.
retreats on march 18 1766 parliament re pealed it.
rockinghams opponents were strong and vociferous and they insisted that unless england compelled the colonists to obey the stamp act they would soon cease to obey any laws of parliament.
so on the same day to satisfy such critics parliament passed the declaratory act asserting parliaments authority over the colonies in all cases whatsoever in their rejoicing over the repeal of the stamp act most americans paid little attention to this sweeping declaration of power.
114 chapter 4 internal rebellions the conflicts with britain were not the only uprisings emerging in the turbulent years of the 1760s.
in addition to the stamp act crisis and other challenges to london there were internal rebellions that had their roots in the class system in new york and new england.
in the hudson valley in new york great estates had grown up whose owners had rented their land to small farmers.
the revolutionary fervor of the time led many of these tenants to demand ownership of the land they worked.
to emphasize their determination they stopped paying rents.
the challenge to landownership soon failed.
but other challenges to landownership continued in other colonies.
in vermont which still was governed by new york insurgent farmers challenged landowners many of them the same owners whom tenants had challenged on the hudson by taking up arms and demanding ownership of the land they torys day of judgment a mob of american patriots hoists a loyalist neighbor up a flagpole in this woodcut which is obviously sympathetic to the victim.
the crowd is shown as fat rowdy and drunken.
public humiliations of tories were not infrequent during the war.
more common however was seizure of their property.
library of congress worked.
ethan allen later a hero of the revolutionary war and himself a land speculator took up the cause of the green mountain farmers and accused the landowners of trying to enslave a free people allen eventually succeeded in making vermont into a separate state which broke up some of the large estates.
the townshend program the reaction in england to the rockingham governments policy of appeasement was less enthusiastic than it was in america.
english landlords a powerful political force angrily protested that the government had sacrificed the landed gentlemen to the interests of traders and colonists they feared that backing down from taxing the colonies would lead the government to increase taxes on them.
the king finally bowed to their pressure and dismissed the rockingham ministry.
to replace it he called upon the aging but still powerful william pitt to form a government.
pitt had been a strong critic of the stamp act and had a reputation in america as a friend of the colonists.
once in office however pitt now lord chatham was so hobbled by gout and at times so incapacitated by mental illness that the actual leadership of his administration fell to the chancellor of the exchequer charles townshend a brilliant flamboyant and at times reckless politician known to his contemporaries variously as the weathercock and champagne charlie among townshends first challenges was dealing with the continuing american grievances against parliament now mutiny act most notably the mutiny or quartering act of 1765 which required the colonists to provide quarters and supplies for the british troops in america.
the british considered this a reasonable requirement.
the troops were stationed in north america to protect the colonists from indian or french attack and to defend the frontiers lodging the troops in coastal cities was simply a way to reduce the costs to england of supplying them.
to the colonists however the law was another assault on their liberties.
they did not so much object to quartering the troops or providing them with supplies they had been doing that voluntarily ever since the last years of the french and indian war.
they resented that these contributions were now mandatory and they considered it another form of taxation without consent.
the massachusetts assembly refused to vote the mandated supplies to the troops.
the new york assembly soon did likewise posing an even greater challenge to imperial authority since the army headquarters were in new york city.
to enforce the law and to try again to raise revenues in the colonies townshend steered two inflammatory measures through parliament in 1767.
the first disbanded the internal and new yor assembly until the colo external nists agreed to obey the mutiny act.
taxes by singling out new york townshend thought he would avoid grenvilles the empire in transition 115 mistake of arousing all the colonies at once.
the second levied new taxes known as the townshend duties on various goods imported to the colonies from england lead paint paper and tea.
the colonists could not logically object to taxation of this kind townshend reasoned because it met standards they themselves had accepted.
benjamin franklin as a colonial agent in london trying to prevent the passage of the stamp act had long ago argued for the distinction between internal and external taxes and had denounced the stamp duties as internal taxation.
townshend himself had considered the distinction laughable but he was nevertheless imposing duties on what he believed were clearly external transactions.
yet townshends efforts to satisfy colonial grievances were to no avail.
he might call them external taxes but they were no more acceptable to colonial merchants than the stamp act.
their purpose americans believed was the same as that of the stamp act to raise revenue from the colonists without their consent.
and the suspension of the new york assembly far from isolating new york aroused the resentment of all the colonies.
they considered this assault on the rights of one provincial government a precedent for the annihilation of the rights of all of them.
the massachusetts assembly took the lead in opposing the new measures by circulating a letter to all the colonial governments urging them to stand up against every tax external or internal imposed by parliament.
at first the circular evoked little response in some of the legislatures and ran into strong opposition in pennsylvanias.
then lord hillsborough secretary of state for the colonies issued a circular letter of his own from london in which he warned that assemblies endorsing the massachusetts letter would be dissolved.
massachusetts defiantly reaffirmed its support for the circular.
the vote in the assembly was 92 to 17 and for a time ninety two became a patriotic rallying cry throughout british america.
the other colonies including pennsylvania promptly rallied to the support of massachusetts.
in addition to his other unpopular measures townshend tried to strengthen enforcement of commercial regulations in the colonies by among other things establishing a new board of customs commissioners in america.
townshend hoped the new board would stop the rampant corruption in the colonial customs houses and to some extent his hopes were fulfilled.
the new commissioners ended smuggling in boston their headquarters although smugglers continued to carry on a busy trade in other colonial seaports.
the boston merchants accustomed to loose enforcement of the navigation acts and doubly aggrieved now that the new commission was diverting the lucrative smuggling trade were colonial indignant and took the lead in organiz boycotts ing another boycott.
in 1768 the mer chants of philadelphia and new york joined them in a nonimportation agreement and later some southern merchants and planters also agreed to cooperate.
colonists boycotted british goods subject to the townshend duties and throughout the colonies american homespun and other domestic products became fashionable overnight while english luxuries fell from favor.
late in 1767 charles townshend suddenly died before the consequences of his ill conceived program had become fully apparent.
the question of dealing with colonial resistance to the townshend duties fell therefore to the new prime minister lord north.
hoping to break the nonimportation agreement and divide the colonists lord north secured the repeal of all the townshend duties except the tax on tea in march 1770.
the boston massacre competition for scarce employment the withdrawal of the townshend duties never had a chance to pacify colonial opinion.
before news of the repeal reached america an event in massachusetts raised colonial resentment to a new level of intensity.
the colonists harassment of the new customs commissioners in boston had grown so intense that the british government had placed four regiments of regular troops inside the city.
the presence of the redcoats was a constant affront to the colonists sense of their independence and a constant reminder of what they considered british oppression.
in addition british soldiers poorly paid and poorly treated by the army wanted jobs in their off duty hours and they competed with local workers in an already tight market.
clashes between them were frequent.
on the night of march 5 1770 a few days after a particularly intense skirmish between workers at a ship rigging factory and british soldiers who were trying to find work there a crowd of dockworkers liberty boys and others began pelting the sentries at the customs house with rocks and snowballs.
hastily captain thomas preston of the british regiment lined up several of his men in front of the building to protect it.
there was some scuffling one of the soldiers was knocked down and in the midst of it all apparently several british soldiers fired into the crowd killing five people among them a mulatto sailor crispus attucks.
this murky incident almost certainly the result of panic and confusion was quickly transformed by local resistance leaders into the boston massacre a graphic symbol of british oppression and brutality.
the victims became popular martyrs the event became the subject of many lurid and inaccurate accounts.
a famous engraving by paul revere widely reproduced and circulated falsely portrayed the massacre as a carefully organized calculated assault on a peaceful crowd.
a jury of massachusetts colonists found two british soldiers guilty of manslaughter and acquitted six others.
colonial pamphlets and newspapers however convinced many americans that all of the soldiers were guilty of official murder.
year after year resistance leaders marked the anniversary of the massacre with demonstrations and speeches.
the leading figure in fomenting public outrage over the boston massacre was samuel adams the most effective radical in the colonies.
adams a distant cousin of john adams 116 chapter 4 the boston massacre 1770 by paul revere this is one of many sensationalized engravings by revere and others of the conflict between british troops and boston laborers that became important propaganda documents for the patriot cause in the 1770s.
among the victims of the massacre listed by revere was crispus attucks probably the first black man to die in the struggle for american independence.
library of congress second president of the united states was born in 1722 and samuel adams was thus somewhat older than other leaders of colonial protest.
as a member of an earlier generation with strong ties to new englands puritan past he was particularly inclined to view public events in stern moral terms.
a failure in business he became an unflagging voice expressing outrage at british oppression.
england he argued had become a morass of sin and corruption only in america did public virtue survive.
he spoke frequently at boston town meetings and as one unpopular english policy followed another the townshend duties the placement of customs commissioners in boston the stationing of british troops in the city with its violent results his message attracted increasing support.
in 1772 he proposed the creation of a committee of correspondence in boston to publicize the grievances against england throughout the colony.
he became its first head.
other colonies followed massachusettss lead and a loose network of political organizations grew up that kept the spirit of dissent alive through the 1770s.
the empire in transition 117 the philosophy of revolt a superficial calm settled on the colonies for approximately three years after the boston massacre.
but the crises of the 1760s had helped arouse enduring ideological challenges to england and had produced powerful instruments for publicizing colonial grievances.
gradually a political outlook gained a following in america that would ultimately serve to justify revolt.
the ideas that would support the revolution emerged from many sources.
some were drawn from religious particularly puritan sources or from the political experiences of the colonies.
others came from abroad.
most important perhaps were the radical ideas of those in great britain who stood in opposition to their government.
some were scots who considered the english state tyrannical.
others were embittered country whigs who felt excluded from power and considered the existing political system corrupt and oppressive.
drawing from some of the great philosophical minds of earlier generations most notably john locke these english dissidents framed a powerful argument against their government.
central to this emerging ideology was a new concept of what government should be.
because humans were inherently corrupt and selfish government was necessary to protect individuals from the evil in one another.
but because any government was run by corruptible people the people needed safeguards against its possible abuses of power.
most people in both england and america had long considered the english constitution the best system ever devised to meet these necessities.
by distributing power among the three elements of society the monarchy the aristocracy and the common people the english political system ensured that no individual or group could exercise authority unchecked by another.
yet by the mid seventeenth century dissidents in both england and america had become convinced that the constitution was in danger.
a single center of power the king and his ministers was becoming so powerful that it could not be effectively checked.
the system the dissidents believed was becoming a corrupt and dangerous tyranny.
such arguments found little sympathy in most of england.
the english constitution was not a written document or a fixed set of unchangeable rules.
it was a general sense of the way things are done and most people in england were willing to accept changes in it.
americans by contrast drew from their experience with colonial charters in which the shape and powers of government were permanently inscribed on paper.
they resisted the idea of a flexible changing set of basic principles.
one basic principle americans believed was the right of people to be taxed only with their own consent a belief that gradually took shape in the widely repeated slogan no taxation without representation this clamor about representation made little sense to the english.
according to englands balanced constitution cruel fate of the loyalists this british cartoon published near the end of the american revolution shows three indians representing american revolutionaries murdering six loyalists four by hanging one by scalping and one appealing to fate about to be killed by an axe wielding native.
by using indians to represent anglo american soldiers the british were trying to equate the presumed savagery of native americans with the behavior of the revolutionaries.
the library of congress lc usz62 1540 english constitutional theory members of parliament did not represent individuals or particular geographic areas.
instead each member represented the interests of the whole nation and indeed the whole empire no matter where the member came from.
the many boroughs of england that had no representative in parliament the whole of ireland and the colonies thousands of miles away all were thus represented in the parliament at london even though they elected no representatives of their own.
this was the theory of virtual representation.
but americans drawing from their experiences with their town meetings and their colonial assemblies believed in actual representation every community was entitled to its own representative elected by the people of that community and directly responsible to them.
since the colonists had none of their own representatives in parliament it followed that they were not represented there.
instead americans believed that the colonial assemblies played the same role within the colonies that parliament did within england.
the british empire the americans began to argue was a sort of federation of commonwealths each with its own legislative body all tied together by common loyalty to the king.
such ideas illustrated a fundamental difference of opinion between england and america over the nature of sovereignty virtual versus over the question of where ultimate power lay.
by arguing that parliament had the right to legislate for england and for the empire as a whole but that only the provincial assemblies could legislate for the individual colonies americans were in effect arguing for a division of sovereignty.
parliament would be sovereign in some matters the assemblies would be sovereign in others.
to the british such an argument was absurd.
in any system of government actual representation 118 chapter 4 there must be a single ultimate authority.
and since the empire was in their view a single undivided unit there could be only one authority within it the english government of king and parliament.
the tea excitement the relatively calm first years of the 1770s disguised a growing sense of resentment at the increasingly heavy handed british enforcement of the navigation acts.
the customs commissioners who remained in the colonies despite the repeal of the townshend duties were mostly clumsy intrusive and arrogant officials.
they harassed colonial merchants and seamen constantly with petty restrictions and they also enriched themselves through graft and illegal seizures of merchandise.
colonists also kept revolutionary sentiment alive through writing and talking.
dissenting leaflets pamphlets and books circulated widely through the colonies.
in towns and cities revolutionary men gathered in churches schools discourse town squares and above all in taverns see patterns of popular culture pp.
122 123 to discuss politics and express their growing disenchantment with english policy.
the rise of revolutionary ideology was not simply a result of the ideas of intellectuals.
it was also a product of a social process by which ordinary people heard discussed and absorbed new ideas.
the popular anger lying just beneath the surface was also visible in occasional acts of rebellion.
at one point colonists seized a british revenue ship on the lower delaware river.
and in 1772 angry residents of rhode island boarded the british schooner gaspee set it afire and sank it in narragansett bay.
the british response to the gaspee affair further inflamed american opinion.
instead of putting the accused attackers on trial in colonial courts the british sent a special commission to america with power to send the defendants back to england for trial.
what finally revived the revolutionary fervor of the 1760s however was a new act of parliament one that the english government had expected to be relatively uncontroversial.
it involved the business of selling tea.
in 1773 britain s east india company which had an official monopoly on trade with the far east was on the verge of bankruptcy and sitting on large stocks of tea that it could not sell in england.
in an effort to save the company the government passed the tea act of 1773 which gave the company the right to export its merchandise directly to the colonies without paying any of the navigation taxes that were imposed on the colonial merchants who had traditionally served as the middlemen in such transactions.
with these privileges the east india company could undersell american merchants and monopolize the colonial tea trade.
the tea act angered many colonists for several reasons.
first it enraged influential colonial merchants who feared being replaced and bankrupted by a powerful monopoly.
the east india company s decision to grant franchises to certain american merchants for the sale of its tea created further re the tea act sentments among those excluded from this lucrative trade.
more important however the tea act revived american passions about the issue of taxation without representation.
the law provided no new tax on tea.
but it exempted the east india company from having to pay the normal customs duties.
that put colonial m mdky minting ember 37 1773 he tea shu king jmvru.
e cry inhdtbannl who wither to litr liberty aiuencjt n ueumi tv meet uth hom i he muntu prcvuely fen vcloeh.
bii whm b bcit tvi be dune 00 tins ahruung cttid.
to the public.
k enfe of he city relative to the landing the indi ompany s tea being fignified to captain lockyer b committee neverthelefs it is the delire of a numbt 01 the citizens that at his departure from hence he lhould fe nwl1 ey s their 9ete ation of the meafures purfued b die mimftry and the india company to enflave this country this yv ill be declared by the convention of the people at his d parture from this city which will be on next satu day morn nf about nine oclocfc when no doubt every friend to this count.
z b f 37 be h wdl ive the notice about an hour b roie he embarks from murrays wharf.
new york armi.
order of the committbb.
f1 f i the boston tea party the artist ramberg produced this wash drawing of the boston tea party in 1773.
a handbill i new york the folbwtng april illustrate how quickly the spirit of resistance spread to other colonies.
le t the granger collect 0 peter newark american pictures the bridgeman art library bottom right bettmann corbis philadelphia newspaper ten days later and another distributed in new york top right private collection the empire in transition 119 merchants at a grave competitive disadvantage.
british prime minister lord north assumed that most colonists would welcome the new law because it would reduce the price of tea to consumers by removing the middlemen.
but resistance leaders in america argued that it was another insidious example of the results of an unconstitutional tax.
many colonists responded by boycotting tea.
the boycott was an important event in the history of colonial resistance.
unlike earlier protests most of which had involved small numbers of people the boycott mobilized large segments of the population.
it also helped link the colonies in a common experience of mass popular protest.
particularly important to the movement were the activities of colonial women who were among the principal consumers of tea and now became leaders of the effort to boycott it.
women had played a significant role in resistance activities from the beginning.
several women most prominently mercy otis warren had been important in writing the dissident literature in warrens case satirical plays that did much to fan colonial resentments in the 1760s.
women had participated actively in anti british riots and crowd activities in the 1760s they had formed an informal organization the daughters of liberty that occasionally mocked their male counterparts as insufficiently militant.
now as the sentiment for a boycott grew some women mobilized as never before determined as the daughters of liberty had written that rather than freedom well part with our tea in the last weeks of 1773 with strong popular support leaders in various colonies made plans to prevent the east india company from landing its cargoes in colonial ports.
in philadelphia and new york city determined colonists kept the tea from leaving the companys ships.
in charles town they stored it in a public warehouse.
in boston after failing to turn back the three ships in the harbor local patriots staged a spectacular drama.
on the evening of december 16 1773 three companies of fifty men each masquerading as mohawks passed through a tremendous crowd of spectators which served to protect them from official interference went aboard the three ships broke open the tea chests and heaved them into the harbor.
as the electrifying news of the boston yea party spread other seaports followed the example and staged similar acts of resistance.
when the bostonians refused to pay for the property they had destroyed george iii and lord north decided on a policy of coercion to be applied only against massachusetts the chief center of resistance.
in four acts of 1774 parliament closed the port of boston drastically reduced colonial self government permitted royal officers to be tried in other colonies or in england when accused of crimes and provided for the quarter boston tea party ing of troops in the colonists barns and empty houses.
parliament followed these coercive acts or as they were more widely known in america intolerable acts with the cofrcvf actc quebec act which was separate from coercive acts quite different in purpose.
its object was to provide a civil government for the paying the exciseman this eighteenth century satirical drawing by a british artist depicts bostonians forcing tea down the throat of a customs official whom they have tarred and feathered.
in the background colonists are dumping tea into the harbor presumably a representation of the 1773 boston tea party and on the tree at right is a symbol of the stamp act which the colonists had defied eight years earlier.
gl archive alamy french speaking roman catholic inhabitants of canada and the illinois country.
the law extended the boundaries of quebec to include the french communities between the ohio and mississippi rivers.
it also granted political rights to roman catholics and recognized the legality of the roman catholic church within the enlarged province.
in many ways it was a tolerant and long overdue piece of legislation.
but in the inflamed atmosphere of the time many people in the thirteen english speaking colonies considered it a threat.
they were already alarmed by rumors that the church of england was scheming to appoint a bishop for america who would impose anglican authority on all the various sects.
since the line between the church of england and the church of rome had always seemed to many americans dangerously thin the passage of the quebec act convinced some of them that a plot was afoot in london to subject americans to the tyranny of the pope.
those interested in western lands moreover believed that the act would hinder westward expansion.
the coercive acts far from isolating massachusetts made it a martyr to residents of other colonies and sparked new resistance up and down the coast.
colonial consequences legislatures passed a series of resolves i w consider the source 4 tea parties the boston tea party of 1773 was a revolt against taxation without representation.
the poem tea destroyed by indians celebrates the action of the boston tea party expresses the colonists resentments and complaints against the distant london government and calls upon boston patriots to continue to resist british actions.
the twenty first century tea party movement became prominent in 2009.
although not an official political party members tend to endorse republican candidates.
the modern tea party movement has borrowed its name from the boston event that took place over 200 years ago and has picked up some although not all of the ideas of the 1773 boston tea party hostility to distant authority london then washington now and resentment of taxes imposed by britain then and by washington now.
although taxation in our time does not really take place without representation today s tea partiers certainly feel that contemporary taxation is as illegitimate as the bostonians felt it was in 1773.
boston tea party 1773 tea destroyed by indians poem honoring the boston tea party dec 1773 chorus bostonians sons keep up your courage good or dye like martyrs in fair free born blood.
ye glorious sons of freedom brave and bold that has flood forth fair liberty to hold though you were indians come from distant shores like men you acted not like savage moors.
chorus our liberty and life is now invaded and freedoms brightest charms are darkly shaded but we will stand and think it noble mirth to dart the man that dare oppress the earth.
chorus how grand the scene no tyrant shall oppose the tea is sunk in spite of all our foes.
a noble sight to see th accursed tea mingled with mud and ever for to be for king and prince shall know that we are free.
chorus must we be still and live on blood bought ground and not oppose the tyrants cursed found.
we scorn the thought our views are well refind we scorn those slavish shackles of the mind we ve souls that were not made to be confind chorus could our fore fathers rise from their cold graves and view their land with all their children slaves what would they say.
how would their spirits rend and thunder strucken to their graves descend.
chorus let us with hearts of steel now stand the task throw off all darksome ways nor wear a mask.
may our noble zeal support our frame and brand all tyrants with eternal shame.
chorus bostonian s sons keep up your courage good and sink all tyrants in their guilty blood.
source j understand analyze and evaluate 1.
what is the prevailing tone of the document.
to whom is the poem addressed.
what specific complaints or re sentments against the british government are expressed in the poem.
how does the style of the document contribute to the sentiments it expresses.
why might this style have been more effect ag the 0ist feelings abm lhe tea par y.
lhb rf 0 tea party movement 2010 although the tea party movement has no centralized leadership one organization that claims to be the official home of the american tea party movement is teaparty org.
a description and set of core beliefs provided by this organization appear below.
teaparty org description and core beliefs what is the tea party.
the tea party is a grassroots movement that calls awareness to any issue that challenges the security sovereignty or domestic tranquility of our beloved nation the united states of america.
from our founding the tea party is the voice of the true owners of the united states we the people.
many claim to be the founders of this movement however it was the brave souls of the men and women in 1773 known today as the boston tea party who dared defy the greatest military might on earth.
we are the beneficiaries of their courage.
by joining the tea party you are taking a stand for our nation.
you will be upholding the grand principles set forth in the u s constitution and bill of rights.
non negotiable core beliefs illegal aliens are here illegally.
pro domestic employment is indispensable.
stronger military is essential.
special interests eliminated.
gun ownership is sacred.
government must be downsized.
national budget must be balanced.
deficit spending will end.
bail out and stimulus plans are illegal.
reduce personal income taxes a must.
reduce business income taxes is mandatory.
political offices available to average citizens intrusive government stopped.
english as core language is required.
traditional family values are encouraged.
common sense constitutional.
conservative self governance.
source tea party 1773 tea party make connections 1.
how does the statement from teaparty org echo the sentiments expressed in the broadside about the boston tea party of 1773.
the message from teaparty org makes a specific connection to the boston tea party of 1773.
do you think teaparty org is justified in claiming a connection to the original tea party.
taverns in revolutionary massachusetts colonial massachusetts as in many other american colonies in the 1760s and 1770s taverns or public houses or pubs as they came to be known were crucial to the development of popular resistance to british rule.
the puritan culture of new england created some resistance to taverns and there were continuing efforts by reformers to regulate or close them to reduce the problems caused by public drunkenness lewd behavior and anarchy.
but as the commercial life of the colonies expanded and as increasing numbers of people began living in towns and cities tav erns became a central institution in american social life and eventually in its political life as well.
taverns were appealing of course because they provided alcoholic drinks in a culture where the craving for alcohol and the extent of drunkenness was very high.
but taverns had other attractions as well.
there were few other places where people could meet and talk openly in public and to many colonists the life of the tavern came to seem the most democratic experience available to them.
gradually many began to see the attacks on the public houses as efforts to increase the power of existing elites and suppress the freedoms of ordinary people.
the tavern was a mostly male institution just as politics was considered a mostly male concern.
and so the fusion of male camaraderie and political discourse emerged naturally out of the tavern culture.
as the revolutionary crisis deepened taverns and pubs became the central meeting places for discussions of the ideas that fueled resistance to british polices.
educated and uneducated men alike joined in animated discussions of events.
those who could not read and there were many could learn about the contents of revolutionary pamphlets from listening to tavern discussions.
they could join in the discussion of the new republican ideas emerging in the americas by participating in tavern celebrations of for example the anniversaries of resistance to the stamp act.
those anniversaries inspired elaborate toasts in public houses throughout the colonies.
such toasts were the equivalents of political speeches and illiterate men could learn much from them about the political concepts that were circulating through the colonies.
the scales of justice this sign for a hartford tavern promises hospitality from the charming patroness and entertainment as well as food and drink.
co the connecticut historical society gift of mrs morgan brainard supporting massachusetts.
womens groups throughout the colonies mobilized to extend the boycotts of british goods and to create substitutes for the tea textiles and other commodities they were shunning.
cooperation and war revolutions do not simply happen.
they need organizers and leaders.
beginning in 1765 colonial leaders developed a variety of organizations for converting popular discontent into direct action organizations that in time formed the basis for an independent government.
new sources of authority the passage of authority from the royal government to the colonists themselves began on the local level where the tradition of autonomy was already strong.
in colony after colony local institutions responded to the resistance movement by simply seizing authority on their own.
at times entirely new extralegal bodies emerged semispontaneously and began to perform some of the functions of government.
in massachusetts in 1768 for example samuel adams called a convention of delegates from the towns of the colony to sit in place of the general court which the governor had dissolved.
the sons of liberty which adams had helped organize in massachusetts and which sprang up elsewhere as well became another source of power.
its members at times formed disciplined bands of vigilantes who made certain that all colonists respected the boycotts and other forms of popular resistance.
and in most colonies committees of prominent citizens began meeting to perform additional political functions.
the most effective of these new groups were the committees of correspondence which adams had inaugurated in first massachusetts in 1772.
virginia later continental established the first intercolonial com congress mittees of correspondence which made possible continuous cooperation among the colonies.
virginia also took the greatest step of all toward united action in 1774 when after the royal governor dissolved the assembly a special session met in the raleigh tavern at williamsburg declared that the intolerable acts menaced the liberties of every colony and issued a call for a continental congress.
variously elected by the assemblies and by extralegal meetings delegates from all the thirteen colonies except georgia were present when in september 1774 the first 122 tfl taverns were important sources of information in an age before any wide distribution of newspapers.
tavernkeepers were often trusted informants and confidants to the sons of liberty and other activists and they were fountains of information about the political and social turmoil of the time.
taverns were also the settings for political events.
in 1770 for example a report circulated through the taverns of danvers massachusetts about a local man who was continuing to sell tea despite the colonial boycott.
the sons of liberty brought the seller to the bell tavern and persuaded him to sign a confession and apology before a crowd of defiant men almost all politicians found it necessary to visit taverns in colonial massachusetts if they wanted any real contact with the public.
samuel adams spent considerable time in the public houses of boston where he sought to encourage resistance to british rule while taking care to drink moderately taverns and politics the green dragon tavern is where protestors planned the boston tea party.
the granger collection new york so as not to erode his stature as a leader.
his cousin john adams was somewhat more skeptical of taverns more sensitive to the vices they encouraged.
but he too recognized their political value.
in taverns he once said bastards and legislatores are frequently begotten.
understand analyze and evaluate 1.
why were taverns so important in educating colonists about the relationship with britain.
the tavern is described as a mostly male institution yet women often participated in political activities.
where might women have gathered and discussed political ideas if not in the tavern.
what gathering places today serve the same purposes that taverns did in colonial america.
to all brave healthy able bodied and well disposed young men in this neighbourhood who have any inclination to join the troops now raising under general washington for the defence k liberties and indepewence of the united states againft the hoftile deftgnsk foreign enemies takenotice cruiting patriots this revolutionary war recruiting poster attracted recruits by appealing to their riotism asking them to defend the liberties and independence of the united states their vam y y s n9 ndsome clothing and impressive bearing of soldiers and their greed by offering hem a bounty of twelve dollars i sixty dollars a year.
library of congress continental congress convened in carpenters hall in philadelphia.
they made five major decisions.
first in a very close vote they rejected a plan proposed by joseph galloway of pennsylvania for a colonial union under british authority much like the earlier albany plan.
second they endorsed a statement of grievances whose tortured language reflected the conflicts among the delegates between moderates and extremists.
the statement seemed to concede parliaments right to regulate colonial trade and addressed the king as most gracious sovereign but it also included a more extreme demand for the repeal of all the oppressive legislation passed since 1763.
third they approved a series of resolutions recommending among other things that the colonists make military preparations for defense against possible attack by the british troops in boston.
fourth they agreed to nonimportation nonexportation and nonconsumption as means of stopping all trade with great britain and they formed a continental association to enforce the agreements.
and fifth when the delegates 123 124 chapter 4 the battles of lexington and concord 1775 this map shows the fabled series of events that led to the first battle of the american revolution.
on the night of april 18 1775 paul revere and william dawes rode out from boston to warn the outlying towns of the approach of british troops.
revere was captured just west of lexington but dawes escaped and returned to boston.
the next morning british forces moved out of boston toward lexington where they met armed american minutemen on the lexington common and exchanged fire.
the british dispersed the americans in lexington.
but they next moved on to concord where they encountered more armed minutemen clashed again and were driven back toward boston.
all along their line of march they were harassed by riflemen.
what impact did the battles of lexington and concord and the later battle of bunker hill also shown on this map have on colonial sentiment toward the british.
paul revere s ride night of april 18 1775 william dawes s ride april 18 1775 troop movements g american forces i british forces battles and entrenchments american victory british victory american entrenchment road adjourned they agreed to meet again the next spring thus indicating that they considered the continental congress a continuing organization.
through their representatives in philadelphia the colonies had in effect reaffirmed their autonomous status within the empire and declared something close to economic war to maintain that position.
the more optimistic of the americans hoped that this economic warfare alone would win a quick and bloodless victory but the more pessimistic had their doubts.
t expect no redress but on the contrary increased resentment and double vengeance john adams wrote to patrick henry we must fight and henry replied by god i am of your opinion during the winter the parliament in london debated proposals for conciliating the colonists.
lord chatham william pitt the former prime minister urged the withdrawal of troops from america.
edmund burke called for the repeal of the coercive acts.
but their efforts the conciliatory propositions were in vain.
lord north finally won approval early in 1775 for a series of measures known as the conciliatory propositions but they were far less conciliatory than the approaches burke or chatham had urged.
parliament now proposed that the colonies instead of being taxed directly by parliament would tax themselves at parliaments demand.
with this offer lord north hoped to divide the american moderates who he believed represented the views of the majority from the extremist minority.
but his offer was too little and too late.
it did not reach america until after the first shots of war had been fired.
lexington and concord for months the farmers and townspeople of massachusetts had been gathering arms and ammunition and training as minutemen preparing to fight on a minutes notice.
the continental congress had approved preparations for a defensive war and the citizen soldiers awaited an aggressive move by the british regulars in boston.
the empire in transition.
125 the retreat jhm i uvrd te t r ifin i f rr smu.
7fiz jhj i iritis jfyirtfc fy ihf js a r hrunan.
fld t i jkjeevttrs.
l muaar ts.
j e tt jt j arrt a jtiw rxafid jsumt fyia y m the british retreat from concord 1775 this american cartoon satirizes the retreat of british forces from concord after the battle there on april 19 1775.
patriot forces are lined up on the left and the retreating british forces portrayed with dog heads perhaps because many of the soldiers were wild irish straggle off at right some fleeing in panic others gloating over the booty they have plundered from the burning homes above.
in its crude and exaggerated way the cartoon depicts the success of patriot forces at the old north bridge in concord in repulsing a british contingent under the command of lord percy.
as the redcoats retreated to lexington and then to boston they continued to encounter fire from colonial forces not arrayed in battle lines as shown here but hidden along the road.
one british soldier described the nightmarish withdrawal we were fired on from houses and behind trees the country was full of hills woods stone walls which the rebels did not fail to take advantage of.
anne s k brown military collection brown university library in boston general thomas gage commanding the british garrison knew of the military preparations in the countryside general thomas but considered his army too small to do gage anything until reinforcements arrived.
he resisted the advice of less cautious officers who assured him that the americans would never dare actually to fight that they would back down quickly before any show of british force.
major john pitcairn for example insisted that a single small action such as the burning of a few towns would set everything to rights general gage still hesitated when he received orders from england to arrest the rebel leaders sam adams and john hancock known to be in the vicinity of lexington.
but when gage heard that the minutemen had stored a large supply of gunpowder in concord eighteen miles from boston he finally decided to act.
on the night of april 18 1775 he sent a detachment of about 1 000 soldiers out from boston on the road to lexington and concord.
he intended to surprise the colonials and seize the illegal supplies without bloodshed.
but patriots in boston were watching the british movements closely and during the night two horsemen william dawes and paul revere rode out to warn the villages and farms.
when the british troops arrived in lexington the next day several dozen minutemen awaited them on the town common.
shots were fired and minutemen fell eight of them were killed and ten more wounded.
advancing to concord the british discovered that the americans had hastily removed most of the powder supply but the british burned what was left of it.
all along the road from concord back to boston farmers hiding behind trees rocks and stone fences harassed the british with continual gunfire.
by the end of the day the british had lost almost three times as many men as the americans.
the first shots the shots heard round the world as americans later called them had been fired.
but who had fired them.
according to one of the minutemen at lexington major pitcairn had shouted to the colonists on his arrival disperse ye rebels when the americans ignored the command he had given the order to fire.
british officers and soldiers told a different story.
they claimed that the minutemen had fired first that only after seeing the flash of american guns had the british begun to shoot.
whatever the truth the rebels succeeded in circulating their account well ahead of the british version adorning it with lurid tales of british atrocities.
the effect was to rally to the rebel cause thousands of colonists north and south who previously had had little enthusiasm for 126 chapter 4 war.
jeremy lister a minuteman in lexington wrote later we got all over the bay and landed on the opposite shore betwixt twelve and one oclock and was on our march by one which was at first through some swamps and slips of the sea till we got into the road leading to lexington soon after which the country people begun to fire their alarm guns light their beacons to raise the country.
to the best of my recollection about 4 oclock in the morning being the 19th of april the 5 front compys.
was ordered to load which we did it was not immediately clear to the british and even to many americans that the skirmishes at lexington and concord were the first battles of a war.
many saw them as simply another example of the tensions that thf revolution had been afflictin anglo american re begins lations for years.
but whether they rec ognized it at the time or not the british and the americans had taken a decisive step.
the war for independence had begun.
looking back when the french and indian war ended in 1763 it might have seemed reasonable to expect that relations between the english colonists in america and great britain itself would have been cemented more firmly than ever.
america and britain had fought together in a great war against the french and their indian allies.
they had won impressive victories.
they had vastly expanded the size of the british empire.
but the end of the french and indian war altered the imperial relationship forever in ways that ultimately drove americans to rebel against english rule and begin another war for independence.
to the british the lesson of the war was that the colonies in america needed firmer control from london.
the empire was now much bigger and it needed better administration.
the war had produced great debts and the americans among the principal beneficiaries of the war should help pay them.
and so for more than a decade after the end of the fighting the british tried one strategy after another to tighten control over and extract money from the colonies all of them in the end failures.
to the colonists this effort to tighten imperial rule was both a betrayal of the sacrifices they had made in the war and a challenge to their long developing assumptions about the rights of english people to rule themselves.
gradually white americans came to see in the british policies evidence of a conspiracy to establish tyranny in the new world.
and so throughout the 1760s and 1770s the colonists developed ever more overt and effective forms of resistance.
by the time the first shots were fired in the american revolution in 1775 britain and america once bonded so closely to one another that most white americans considered themselves just as english as any resident of london had come to view each other as two very different societies.
their differences which came to seem irreconcilable propelled them into a war that would change the course of history.
key t erms people places events albany plan 100 benjamin franklin 100 boston massacre 115 boston tea party 119 charles townshend 114 coercive acts 119 committees of correspondence 123 creoles 101 currency act 111 daughters of liberty 119 first continental congress 123 george grenville 109 impressment 103 iroquois confederacy 101 lord north 115 mutiny act 110 patrick henry 113 proclamation of 1763 109 quebec act 119 samuel adams 116 sons of liberty 122 stamp act 111 stamp act congress 113 sugar act 113 tea act 118 townshend duties 115 virginia resolves 113 william pitt 103 recall and reflect 1.
how did the seven years war and its outcome affect britains attitude and policies toward its north american colonies.
which native american tribes fought in the french and indian war and how did the wars outcome affect them.
what were the wars effects on native americans.
how and why did the colonists attitude toward britain change from the time of the seven years war to the beginning of the american revolution.
what were the philosophical underpinnings of the colonists revolt against britain.
what did the slogan no taxation without representation mean and why was it a rallying cry for the colonists.
the empire in transition 127 significant events 1754 albany plan for intercolonial cooperation rejected french and indian war begins in north america 1756 seven years war begins in europe 1771 regulator movement quelled in north carolina 1770 boston massacre most townshend duties repealed 1760 george iii becomes king french army surrenders to amherst at montreal 1764 sugar act passed currency act passed 1773 tea act passed bostonians stage tea party 1772 committees of correspondence established in boston gaspee incident in rhode island 1765 stamp act crisis mutiny act passed 1766 stamp act repealed declaratory act passed 1775 clashes at lexington and concord begin american revolution j774 intolerable acts passed first continental congress meets at philadelphia 1767 townshend duties imposed the american revolution looking ahead 1.
what were the military strategies both british and american of each of the three phases of the american revolution.
how successful were these strategies during each phase.
surrender of cornwallis on october 19 1781 lord charles cornwallis surrendered to george washington at yorktown.
this painting by james s baillie depicts the event that ended the hostilities between britain and the united states.
gilder lehrman collection new york usa the bridgeman art library 2.
how did the american revolution become an international conflict not just a colonial war against the british.
how did the new national government of the united states reflect the assumptions of republicanism.
setting the stage two struggles occurred simultaneously during the seven years of war that began in april 1775.
one was the military conflict with great britain.
the second was a political battle within america.
the military conflict was by the standards of later wars relatively modest.
by the standards of its own day however it was unusually savage pitting not only army against army but also the civilian population against an external force.
the shift of the war from a traditional conventional struggle to a new kind of conflict a revolutionary war for liberation made it possible for the american army finally to defeat the vastly more powerful british.
at the same time americans were wrestling with the great political questions the conflict necessarily produced first whether to demand independence from britain second how to structure the new nation they had proclaimed and third how to deal with questions the revolution had raised about slavery the rights of indians the role of women and limits of religious tolerance in the new american society.
only the first question had been resolved when the british surrendered at yorktown in 1781.
but by then the united states had already established itself as a new kind of nation one dedicated to enlightened ideals.
neither at the time nor later did the united states always follow those ideals.
at the same time that revolutionaries were celebrating the rights of man they were consolidating the enslavement of african americans depriving loyalists american colonists who supported the british during the revolution of rights and property barring women from participation in public life and denying indian tribes the limited rights the british had accorded them.
yet despite these contradictions they believed that the nation should try to live up to the ideals proclaimed in the revolution as a continuing influence on the future history of the united states.
the states united although many americans had been anticipating a military conflict with britain for months even years the actual beginning of hostilities in 1775 found the colonies generally unprepared for the enormous challenges awaiting them.
america was an unformed nation with a population less than a third as large as the 9 million of great britain and with vastly inferior economic and military resources.
it faced the task of mobilizing for war against the worlds greatest armed power at the same time americans were deeply divided about what they were fighting for.
defining american war aims three weeks after the battles of lexington and concord the second continental congress met in the state house in philadelphia with delegates from every colony except georgia which sent no representative until the following autumn.
the members agreed to support the war but they disagreed at times profoundly about its purpose.
at one pole was a group led by the adams cousins john and samuel richard henry lee of virginia and others who favored complete independence from great britain.
at the other pole was a group led by such moderates as john dickinson of pennsylvania who hoped for modest reforms in the imperial relationship that would permit an early reconciliation with great britain.
most of the delegates tried to find some middle ground between these positions.
they demonstrated their uncertainty in two very different declarations which they adopted in quick succession.
they approved one last conciliatory appeal to the king the olive branch ch petition which the british government rejected.
then on july 6 1775 they adopted an antagonistic declaration of the causes and necessity of taking up arms it proclaimed that the british government had left the american people with only two alternatives unconditional submission to the tyranny of irritated ministers or resistance by force 129 130 chapter 5 the attitude of much of the public mirrored that of the congress.
at first most americans believed they were fighting not for independence but for a redress of grievances within the british empire.
during the first year of fighting however many of them began to change their minds for several reasons.
first the costs of the war human and financial were so high that the original war aims began to seem too modest to justify them.
second what lingering affection american patriots retained for england greatly diminished when the british began trying to recruit indians african slaves and foreign mercenaries the hated hessians against them.
third and most important colonists came to believe that the british government was forcing them toward independence by rejecting the olive branch petition and instead enacting a prohibitory act it closed the colonies to all overseas trade and made no concessions to american demands except an offer to pardon repentant rebels.
the british enforced the prohibitory act with a naval blockade of colonial ports.
but the growing support for independence remained to a large degree unspoken until january 1776 when an impassioned pamphlet appeared that galvanized many americans.
it was called simply common sense.
its author unmentioned on the title page was thirty eight year old thomas paine who thomas paine paine emigrated to america in 1774 and quickly became involved in the revolutionary circles in philadelphia.
early in 1776 he published an anonymous pamphlet titled common sense which called for an end to british rule in america.
he served in the american army during the revolution in new jersey while also writing additional tracts promoting independence.
in later years he joined the french revolution and published the rights of man in 1791 1792.
corbis had emigrated from england to america fifteen months before.
r he barely survived the transatlantic voyage common sense y to america.
for much of his life he lived in poverty and he was ostracized because he openly ridiculed christianity.
but his pamphlets influenced the developing ideals of the united states.
a failure in various trades paine now proved a brilliant success as a revolutionary propagandist.
his common sense helped change the american outlook toward the war.
paine wanted to turn the anger of americans away from the specific parliamentary measures they were resisting and toward what he considered the root of the problem the english constitution itself.
it was not enough he argued for americans to continue blaming their problems on particular ministers or even on parliament.
it was the king and the system that permitted him to rule that was to blame.
it was he argued simple common sense for americans to break completely with a government that could produce so corrupt a monarch as george iii a government that could inflict such brutality on its own people a government that could drag americans into wars in which america had no interest.
the island kingdom of england was no more fit to rule the american continent paine claimed than a satellite was fit to rule the sun.
the decision for independence common sense sold more than 100 000 copies in its first few months.
to many of its readers it was a revelation.
although sentiment for independence remained far from unanimous support for the idea grew rapidly in the first months of 1776.
at the same time the continental congress was moving slowly and tentatively toward a final break with england.
it declared american ports open to the ships of all nations except great britains.
it entered into communication with for eign powers it recommended to the various colonies that they establish new governments independent of the british empire as most already were doing.
congress also appointed a commit tee to draft a formal declaration of independence.
on july 2 1776 it adopted a resolution that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states thai jhe they are absolved from all allegiance tc declaration of r e british crown and that all politica independence connexion between them and the state o great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved.
two days later on july 4 congress approved the declaration of independence which provided the formal justi fications for the actions the delegates had in fact taken twc days earlier.
thomas jefferson a thirty three year old delegate from virginia wrote most of the declaration with help from benjamin franklin and john adams.
as adams later observed jefferson said little in the document that was new.
its power lay in the eloquence with which it expressed beliefs already widespread in america.
in particular it repeated ideas that had been voiced throughout the colonies in the preceding months in the form of at least ninety local declarations of independence declarations drafted up and down the coast by town meetings artisan and militia organizations county officials grand juries sons of liberty and colonial assemblies.
jefferson borrowed heavily from these texts both for the ideas he expressed and to some extent for the precise language he used.
the document was in two parts.
in the first the declaration restated the familiar contract theory of john locke that governments were formed to protect the rights of life liberty and property jefferson gave the theory a more idealistic tone by replacing property with the pursuit of happiness in the second part the declaration listed the alleged crimes of the king who with the backing of parliament had violated his contract with the colonists and thus had forfeited all claim to their loyalty.
the declarations ringing endorsement of the idea that all men are created equal a phrase borrowed from an earlier document by jeffersons fellow virginian george mason later helped inspire movements of liberation and reform of many kinds in the united states and abroad among them the french revolutions own declaration of the rights of man.
more immediately the declaration and its bold claim that the american colonies were now a sovereign nation the united states of america led to increased foreign aid for the struggling rebels and prepared the way for frances intervention on their side.
the declaration also encouraged american patriots as those opposing the british called themselves to fight on and to reject the idea of a peace that stopped short of winning independence.
at the same time it created deep divisions within american society.
responses to independence at the news of the declaration of independence crowds in philadelphia boston and other places gathered to cheer fire guns and cannons and ring church bells.
but there were many in america who did not rejoice.
some had disapproved of the war from the beginning.
others had been willing to support it only so long as its aims did not conflict with their basic loyalty to the king.
such people were a minority but a substantial one.
they called themselves loyalists supporters of independence called them tories.
in the aftermath of the declaration of independence the colonies began to call themselves states a reflection of their belief that each province was now in some respects a separate and sovereign entity.
even before the declaration colonies were beginning to operate independently of royal authority.
divided the parliament ln london had suspended americans representative government in america.
that suspension did not end colonial self government.
it increased it since the colonial assemblies continued to meet now independent of imperial law.
after the declaration of 1776 the former colonies marked their independence by writing formal constitutions for themselves.
by 1781 most of the new states had produced such constitutions which established republican governments.
some of these constitutions survived for many decades without signif icant change.
the american revolution 131 at the national level however the process of forming a government was more halting and less successful.
for a time americans were uncertain whether they even wanted a real national government the continental congress had not been much more than a coordinating mechanism and virtually everyone considered the individual colonies now states the real centers of authority.
yet fighting a war required a certain amount of central direction.
americans began almost immediately to do something they would continue to do for more than two centuries balance the commitment to state and local autonomy against the need for some centralized authority.
in november 1777 congress adopted the articles of confederation which were not finally ratified until 1781.
they did little more than confirm the weak decentralized system already in operation.
the continental congress articles of would survive as the chief coordinating confederation agency of the war effort.
its powers over the individual states would be very limited.
indeed the articles did not make it entirely clear that the congress was to be a real government.
as a result the new nation had to fight a war for its own survival with a weak and uncertain central government never sure of its own legitimacy.
mobilizing for war the new governments of the states and the nation faced a series of overwhelming challenges raising and organizing armies providing them with supplies and equipment and finding a way to pay for it all.
without access to the british markets on which the colonies had come to depend finding necessary supplies was exceptionally difficult.
america had many gunsmiths but they could not come close to meeting the wartime demand for guns and ammunition let alone the demand for heavy arms.
although congress created a government arsenal at springfield massachusetts in 1777 the americans managed to manufacture only a small fraction of the equipment they needed.
instead they relied heavily on weapons and materiel they were able to capture from the british.
but they got most of their war supplies from european nations mainly from france.
financing the war proved in many ways the most nettle some problem.
congress had no authority to levy taxes directly on the people it had to requisition funds from the state governments.
but hard money was scarce in america and the states were little better equipped to raise it than congress was.
none of them contributed more than a small part of their expected share.
congress tried to raise money by selling longterm bonds but few americans could afford them and those who could generally preferred to invest in more profitable ventures such as privateering.
in the end the government had no choice but to issue paper money.
continental currency came from the printing presses in large and repeated batches.
the states printed sizable amounts of paper currency of their own.
debating the past the american revolution hp t t t.
long standing debate over the origins of the american revolution has tended to reflect 1 jli u two broad schools of interpretation.
one sees the revolution largely as a political and intellectual event and argues that the revolt against britain was part of a defense of ideals and principles.
the other views the revolution as a social and economic phenomenon and contends that material interests were at its heart the revolutionary generation itself portrayed the conflict as a struggle over ideals and their interpretation prevailed through most of the nineteenth century.
but in the early twentieth century historians influenced by the reform currents of the progressive era 1873 1920 began to identify social and economic forces that they believed had contributed to the rebellion.
in a 1909 study of new york carl becker wrote that two questions had shaped the revolution the first was the question of home rule the second was the question of who should rule at home.
not only were the colonists fighting the british they were also engaged in a kind of civil war a contest for power between radicals and conservatives that led to the democratization of american politics and society.
other progressive historians elaborated on becker s thesis.
in the american revolution considered as a social movement 1926 j franklin jameson argued that many economic desires many social aspirations were set free by the political struggle many aspects of society profoundly altered by the forces thus let loose.
in a 1917 book arthur m schlesinger maintained that colonial merchants motivated by their own interest in escaping the restrictive policies of british mercantilism aroused american resistance in the 1760s and 1770s.
beginning in the 1950s a new generation of scholars began to re emphasize the role of ideology and to de em phasize the role of economic interests.
robert e brown in 1955 and edmund s morgan in 1956 both argued that most eighteenth century white americans shared basic political principles and that the social and economic conflicts the progressives had identified were not severe.
the rhetoric of the revolution they suggested was not propaganda but rather a real reflection of the colonists ideas.
bernard bailyn in the ideological origins of the american revolution 1967 demonstrated the complex roots of the ideas behind the revolution and argued that this carefully constructed political stance was not a disguise for economic interests but a genuine ideology rooted in deeply held convictions about rights and power by the late 1960s however a group of younger historians were challenging the ideological interpretation again by illuminating social and economic tensions within colonial society that they claimed helped shape the revolutionary struggle.
jesse lemisch and dirk hoerder the result predictably was inflation.
prices rose to fantastic heights and the value of paper money plummeted.
many financing the american farmers and merchants began to war prefer doing business with the british who could pay for goods in gold or silver coin.
that was one reason why george washingtons troops suffered from severe food shortages at valley forge in the winter of 1777 1778 many philadelphia merchants would not sell to them.
congress tried and failed repeatedly to stem the inflationary spiral.
in the end the new american government was able to finance the war effort only by borrowing heavily from other nations.
after the first great surge of patriotism faded in 1775 few americans volunteered for military service.
as a result the states had to resort to persuasion and force to paying bounties to attract new recruits and to drafting them.
even when it was possible to recruit substantial numbers of militiamen they re general mained under the control of their respec george rive states.
congress quickly recognized washington the disadvantages of this decentralized system and tried with some success to correct it.
in the spring of 1775 it created a continental army with a single commander in chief.
george washington the forty three year old virginia planter aristocrat who had commanded colonial forces during the french and indian war and despite his defeat at the battle at fort necessity in 1754 possessed more experience than any other american born officer available.
he had also been an early advocate of independence.
above all he was admired respected and trusted by nearly all patriots.
he was the unanimous choice of the delegates and he took command in june 1775.
congress had chosen well.
throughout the war washington never flagged despite difficulties and discouragements that would have daunted a lesser man.
there were serious problems of morale among soldiers who consistently received short rations and low pay.
open mutinies broke out in 1781 among the pennsylvania and new jersey troops.
the continental congress always seemed too little interested in supplying him with manpower and equipment and too much interested in interfering with his conduct of military operations.
washington had some shortcomings as a military commander.
but he was in the end a great war leader.
with the foreign f foreign military experts such as the assistance marquis de lafayette from france and baron von steuben from prussia he succeeded in building and holding together an army of fewer than 10 000 men that along with state militias ultimately pointed to the actions of mobs in colonial cities as evidence of popular resentment of both american and british elites.
joseph ernst reemphasized the significance of economic pressures on colonial merchants and tradesmen.
gary nash lnm 1 2 3 c jp along ckplate qoodbi.
q aa i 4 ubbin2 froo t keydoodi aadihereir eap0p unflljl and every t aeyfeampe k ljw u yaukey dowifc ac.
1 1 hnle barret r x n de offerer i1 ir d 1 uie jubs.
and calld ih folktogether.
s 1 y an key doodle ac.
and there waa tapnln wathington i and gentlefolks ab ihim they fay he j uriwt proud 8i he will not rid wiijjout hem.
yankcy dyuj e ac.
he ajot him on hi meeting clothe i upoi am s w b jj he s th w rlj along in rows la hendreh and i millions.
yanlc y ddodie he.
theflimin rtssmt i mi hit th y lookd f taring fine ah f wanted pick iy to get to dve to mv j tv n i.
y kiy doodle ac.
i i fee an vh r fa tri of t t jiii i.
grava t ioid pie.
aavunt la taroa tl ep y te me 1 th ih i 1 hgld me.
r tank daodle 6 ta fo 1 hook ll it off iftfipv as i remember rell ahull till l got home 0 4 up in mothet a chamber yankay doodle t doodle takhere e fte a thoufind jfiiulie david.
tttefifej greaienwy day 4n wloter t f md ttaftn ftp a wimping gao a load for fetlurii cutie.
thnkcy doodle itc.
ariowtjr tfae thsy fo 01 kff itirtwafcornofporder and nuke a note like father1 gu n a iwtioatonte.
6 yaokey doodle st iwsntmijgk to onemyfclf aadfufaf srnt w nigh again it httkadnct.
yaafcay doodle ki.
d the granger collection new york in the urban crucible 1979 emphasized the role of growing economic distress in colonial cities in creating a climate in which revolutionary sentiment could flourish.
some newer social interpretations of the revolution attempt to break free of the old debate pitting ideas against interests.
the two things are not in competition with but rather reinforce each other more recent scholars argue.
everyone has economic interests gary nash has written and everyone has an ideology.
only by exploring the relationships between the two can historians hope fully to understand either.
also as linda kerber has written newer interpretations have reinvigorated the progressive focus on social conflict between classes and extended it to include the experience not only of rich and poor but of a wide variety of interest groups marginal communities and social outsiders.
that extension of focus to previously little studied groups includes work by mary beth norton on women silvia frey on slaves and colin calloway on native americans.
gordon wood in the radicalism of the american revolution 1992 and empire of liberty 2009 helped revive a once popular interpretation of the revolution that had fallen out of fashion that it was a genuinely radical event which led to the breakdown of such long standing patterns of society as deference patriarchy and traditional gender relations.
cass conflict and radical goals may not have caused the revolution but the revolution had a profound even radical ideological impact on society nevertheless.
understand analyze and evaluate 1.
how has the debate over the origins of the american revolution shifted over time.
what are some reasons for the changing interpretations.
in what way was the american revolution an ideological struggle.
in what way was the american revolution a social and economic conflict.
was the american revolution a radical event.
why or why not.
prevailed against the greatest military power in the world.
even more important in a new nation still unsure of either its purposes or its structure with a central government both weak and divided washington provided the army and the people with a symbol of stability around which they could rally.
he may not have been the most brilliant of the countrys early leaders but in the crucial years of the war at least he was the most successful in holding the new nation together.
the war for independence on the surface at least all the advantages in the military struggle between america and great britain appeared to lie with the british.
they possessed the greatest navy and the best equipped army in the world.
they had access to the resources of an empire.
they had a coherent structure of command.
the americans by contrast were struggling to create a new army and a new government at the same time that they were trying to fight a war.
yet the united states had advantages that were not at first apparent.
americans were fighting on their own ground while the english were far from home and from their own resources.
american the american patriots were on the advantages whole deeply committed to the conflict the british people only halfheartedly supported the war.
as thomas paine said at the time they cannot defeat an idea with an army beginning in 1777 moreover the americans had the benefit of substantial aid from abroad when the american war became part of a larger world contest in which great britain faced the strongest powers of europe most notably france in a struggle for imperial supremacy.
the american victory was not however simply the result of these advantages nor even of the remarkable spirit and resourcefulness of the people and the army.
it was a result too of a series of egregious blunders and miscalculations by the british in the early stages of the fighting when england could and probably should have won.
and it was finally a result of the transformation of the war which proceeded in three different phases into a new kind of conflict that the british military for all its strength could not win.
the first phase new england for the first year of the fighting the british remained uncertain about whether or not they were actually engaged in a 133 134 chapter 5 voting for independence the continental congress actually voted in favor of independence from great britain on july 2 1776.
july 4 the date americans now celebrate as independence day is when the congress formally ratified the declaration of independence.
this painting by edgar pine savage re creates the scene in philadelphia as delegates from the various colonies made their momentous decision.
philadelphia history museum at the atwater kent courtesy of historical society of pennsylvania collection the bridgeman art library war.
many english authorities continued to believe that british forces were simply attempting to quell pockets of rebellion in the contentious area around boston.
gradually however colonial forces took the offensive and made almost the entire territory of the american colonies a battleground.
after the british withdrawal from concord and lexington in april 1775 american forces besieged the army of general bunker hill thomas gage in boston.
the patriots suffered severe casualties in the battle of bunker hill actually fought on breeds hill on june 17 1775 and were ultimately driven from their position there.
but they inflicted much greater losses on the enemy than the enemy inflicted on them.
indeed the british suffered their heaviest casualties of the entire war at bunker hill.
after the battle the patriots continued to tighten the siege.
by the first months of 1776 the british had concluded that boston was not the best place from which to wage war.
not only was it in the center of the most fervently anti british region of the colonies it was also tactically indefensible a narrow neck of land easily isolated and besieged.
by late winter in fact patriot forces had surrounded the city and occupied strategic positions on the heights.
on march 17 1776 a date still celebrated in boston as evacuation day the british departed boston for halifax in nova scotia with hundreds of loyalist refugees.
less than a year after the firing of the first shots the massachusetts colonists had driven the british temporarily from american soil.
elsewhere the war proceeded fitfully and inconclusively.
to the south at moores creek bridge in north carolina a band of patriots crushed an uprising of loyalists on february 27 1776 and in the process discouraged a british plan to invade the southern states.
the british had expected substantial aid from local tories in the south they realized now that such aid might not be as effective as they had hoped.
to the north americans launched an invasion of canada hoping to remove the british threat and win the canadians to their cause.
benedict arnold the revolutionary soldiers jean baptiste de verger a nineteen year old french officer serving in america during the revolution kept a journal of his experiences illustrated with watercolors.
here he portrays four american soldiers carrying different kinds of arms a black infantryman with a light rifle a musketman a rifleman and an artilleryman.
anne s k brown military collection brown university library invasion of commander of a small american force canada threatened quebec in late 1775 and early 1776 after a winter march of incredible hardship.
richard montgomery coming to his assistance combined his forces with arnold s and took command of both.
montgomery died in the assault on the city and although a wounded arnold kept up the siege for a time the quebec campaign ended in frustration.
congress sent a civilian commission to canada headed by the seventy year old benjamin franklin.
but franklin also failed to win the allegiance of the northern colonists.
canada did not become part of the new nation.
the british evacuation of boston in 1776 was not therefore so much a victory for the americans as a reflection of changing english assumptions about the war.
by the spring of 1776 it had become clear to the british that england must be prepared to fight a much larger and longer conflict.
the departure of the british therefore signaled the beginning of a new phase in the war.
the second phase the mid atlantic region the next phase of the war which lasted from 1776 until early 1778 was when the british were in the best position to win.
indeed had it not been for a series of blunders and misfortunes they probably would have crushed the rebellion then.
during this period the struggle became for the most part a traditional conventional war.
and in that the americans were woefully overmatched.
the british regrouped quickly after their retreat from boston.
during the summer of 1776 in the weeks immediately following the declaration of independence the waters around new york city grew crowded with the most formidable military force great britain had ever sent abroad.
hundreds of man of war vessels and troopships and 32 000 disciplined soldiers arrived under the command of the affable william howe.
howe felt no particular hostility toward the americans.
he hoped to awe them into submission rather than fight them and he believed that most of them if given a chance would show their loyalty to the king.
in a meeting with commissioners from congress he offered them a choice between submission with royal pardon and a battle against overwhelming odds.
to oppose howes impressive array washington could muster only about 19 000 poorly armed and lightly trained soldiers even after combining the continental army with state militias he had no navy at all.
even so the americans quickly 136 chapter 5 the battle of germantown the battle of germantown a campaign intended by washington to liberate philadelphia from british occupation took place on october 4 1777.
in this painting by alonzo chappel 1828 1887 battle of germantown attack on judge chews house 1860 washington s much larger force cannot defeat the 120 british infantrymen who barricaded themselves in the summer home of loyalist benjamin chew.
twelve thousand american troops were forced to retreat into nearby montgomery county.
chicago history museum usa the bridgeman art library british take rejected howes offer and chose to con new york tinue the war a decision that led inevitably to a succession of rapid defeats.
the british pushed the defenders off long island compelled them to abandon manhattan and then drove them in slow retreat over the plains of new jersey across the delaware river and into pennsylvania.
for eighteenth century europeans warfare was a seasonal activity.
fighting generally stopped in cold weather.
the british settled down for the winter at various points in new jersey leaving an outpost of hessians german mercenaries at trenton on the delaware river.
but washington did not sit still.
on christmas night 1776 he boldly recrossed the icy river surprised and scattered the hessians and occupied the town.
then he advanced to princeton and drove a british force from their base in the college there.
but washington was unable to hold either princeton or trenton and he finally took refuge for the rest of the winter in the hills around morristown new jersey.
for their campaigns of 1777 the british devised a strategy to cut the united states in two.
howe would move north from britains new york city up the hudson to albany strategy while another british force would come south from canada to meet him.
one of the younger british officers the dashing john burgoyne secured command of this northern force and planned a two pronged attack along both the mohawk and the upper hudson approaches to albany.
but after setting this plan in motion howe himself abandoned it.
he decided instead to launch an assault on the rebel capital philadelphia an assault that would he hoped discourage the patriots rally the loyalists and bring the war to a speedy conclusion.
he removed the bulk of his forces from the american revolution 137 british forces american forces british victory the revolution in the north 1775 1776 after initial battles in and around boston the british forces left massachusetts and after a brief stay in halifax canada moved south to new york.
in the meantime american forces moved north in an effort to capture british strongholds in montreal and quebec with little success.
why would the british have considered new york a better base than boston.
new york by sea landed at the head of the chesapeake bay brushed washington aside at the battle of brandywine creek on september 11 and proceeded north to philadelphia which he was able to occupy with little resistance.
meanwhile washington after an unsuccessful october 4 attack at germantown just outside philadelphia went into winter quarters at valley forge.
the continental congress now dislodged from its capital reassembled at york pennsylvania.
howes move to philadelphia left burgoyne to carry out the campaign in the north alone.
burgoyne sent colonel barry st leger up the st lawrence river toward lake ontario and the headwaters of the mohawk while burgoyne himself advanced directly down the upper hudson valley.
he got off to a flying start.
he seized fort ticonderoga easily and with it an enormous store of powder and supplies this caused such dismay in congress that the delegates removed general philip schuyler from command of american forces in the north and replaced him with horatio gates.
by the time gates took command burgoyne had already experienced two staggering defeats.
in one of them at oriskany new york on august 6 a patriot band of german farmers led by nicholas herkimer held off a force of indians and tories commanded by st leger.
that gave benedict arnold time to go to the relief of fort stanwix and close off the mohawk valley to st legers advance.
in the other battle at bennington vermont on august 16 new england militiamen under the bunker hill veteran john stark severely mauled a british detachment that burgoyne had sent out to seek supplies.
short of materials with all help cut off burgoyne fought several costly engagements and then withdrew to saratoga where gates surrounded him.
on october 17 1777 burgoyne ordered what was left of his army nearly 5 000 men to surrender to the americans.
to the patriots and peoples watching from around the patriot world the new york campaign was a remarkable victory.
the british surrender at saratoga became a major turning point in the war above all perhaps because it led directly to an alliance between the united states and france.
the british failure to win the war during this period a period in which they had overwhelming advantages was in large part victory at saratoga british a result of their own mistakes.
and in assess blunders ing them the role of william howe looms large.
he abandoned his own most important strategic initiative the northern campaign leaving burgoyne to fight alone.
and even in pennsylvania where he chose to 138 chapter 5 the battle of bunker hill 1775 british troops face patriot forces outside boston on june 17 1775 in the first great battle of the american revolution.
the british ultimately drove the americans from their positions on breeds hill and bunker hill but only after suffering enormous casualties.
general gage the british commander reported to his superiors in london after the battle these people show a spirit and conduct against us they never showed against the french this anonymous painting reveals the array of british troops and naval support and also shows the bombardment and burning of charles town from artillery in boston.
private collection peter newark american pictures bridgeman images engage the enemy he refrained from moving in for a final attack on the weakened continental army even though he had several opportunities.
instead he repeatedly allowed washington to retreat and regroup and he permitted the american army to spend a long winter unmolested in valley forge where weak and hungry they might have been easy prey for a british attack.
some british critics believed that howe did not want to win the war that he was secretly in sympathy with the american cause.
his family had close ties to the colonies and he was linked politically to those forces within the british government that opposed the war.
others pointed to personal weaknesses howes apparent alcoholism his romantic attachment he spent the winter of 1777 1778 in philadelphia with his mistress when many of his advisers were urging him to move elsewhere.
but the most important problem it seems clear was his failure to understand the nature of the war that he was fighting or even to understand that it was truly a war.
the iroquois and the british the campaign in upstate new york was not just a british defeat.
it was also a setback for the ambitious efforts of several iroquois leaders who had hoped to involve indian forces in the english military effort believing that a british victory would help stem white movement onto tribal lands.
the iroquois confederacy had declared itself neutral in the war in 1776 but not all its members were content to remain passive in the northern campaign.
among those who worked to expand the native american role in the war were a mohawk brother and sister joseph brant and mary brant.
both were people of stature within the mohawk nation joseph was a celebrated warrior mary was a charismatic woman and the widow of sir william johnson the british superintendent of indians who had achieved wide popularity among the tribes.
the brants persuaded their own tribe to contribute to the british cause and attracted the support of the seneca and cayuga as well.
they played an important role in burgoynes unsuccessful campaigns in the north.
but the alliance was also a sign of the growing divisions within the iroquois confederacy.
only three of the six nations of the confederacy supported the british.
the oneida and the tuscarora backed the americans the onondaga split into several factions.
the three century old divisions in the iroquois confederacy the american revolution 139 the revolution in the middle colonies 1776 1778 these maps illustrate the major campaigns of the revolution in the middle colonies new york new jersey and pennsylvania between 1776 and 1778.
the large map on the left shows the two prongs of the british strategy first a movement of british forces south from canada into the hudson valley and second a movement of other british forces under general william howe out from new york and south into new jersey and pennsylvania.
the strategy was designed to trap the american army between the two british movements.
the two smaller maps on the right show detailed pictures of some of the major battles.
the upper one reveals the surprising american victory at saratoga.
the lower one shows a series of inconclusive battles between new york and philadelphia in 1777 and 1778.
what movements of howe helped thwart that plan.
confederacy weakened by the aftermath of the french and indian war continued to unravel.
the alliance had other unhappy consequences for the iroquois.
a year after oriskany indians joined british troops in a series of raids on outlying white settlements in upstate new york.
months later patriot forces under the command of general john sullivan harshly retaliated wreaking such destruction on tribal settlements that large groups of iroquois fled north into canada to seek refuge.
many never returned.
securing aid from abroad the failure of the british to crush the continental army in the mid atlantic states combined with the stunning american victory at saratoga was a turning point in the war.
it transformed the conflict and ushered it into a new and final phase.
central to this transformation of the war was american success in winning support from abroad indirectly from several european nations and directly from france.
even before the declaration of independence congress dispatched representatives to the capitals of europe to negotiate commercial treaties with the governments there if america was to leave the british empire it would need to cultivate new trading partners.
such militia treaties would of course require european diplomats governments to recognize the united states as an independent nation.
john adams called the early american representatives abroad militia diplomats unlike the diplomatic regulars of europe they had little experience with the formal art and etiquette of old world diplomacy.
since transatlantic communication was slow and uncertain it took from one to three months for a message to cross the atlantic they had to interpret the instructions of congress very freely and make crucial decisions entirely on their own.
140 chapter 5 the most promising potential ally for the united states was france.
king louis xvi who had come to the throne in 1774 and his astute foreign minister the count de vergennes were eager to see britain lose a crucial part of its empire.
through a series of secret bargains facilitated by the creation of a fictional trading firm and the use of secret agents on both sides among them the famed french dramatist caron de beaumarchais france began supplying the americans large quantities of much needed supplies.
but the french government remained reluctant to provide the united states with what it most wanted diplomatic recognition.
finally benjamin franklin himself went to france to represent the united states.
a natural diplomat franklin became a popular hero among the french aristocrats and common people alike.
his popularity there greatly helped the american cause.
of even greater help was the news of the american victory at saratoga which arrived in london on december 2 1777 and in paris two days later.
on february 6 1778 in part to forestall a british peace offensive that vergennes feared might persuade the americans to abandon the war france formally recognized the united states as a sovereign nation and laid the groundwork for greatly expanded assistance to the american war effort.
frances intervention made the war an international conflict.
in the course of the next two years france spain and the pivotal netherlands all drifted into another general french aid war with great britain in europe and all contributed both directly and indirectly to the ultimate american victory.
but france was americas truly indispensable ally.
not only did it furnish the new nation with most of its money and munitions it also provided a navy and an expeditionary force that proved invaluable in the decisive phase of the revolutionary conflict.
the final phase the sooth the last phase of the military struggle in america was very different from either of the first two.
the british government had never been fully united behind the war after the defeat at saratoga and the intervention of the french it imposed new limits on its commitment to the conflict.
instead of a full scale military struggle against the american army therefore the british decided to try to enlist the support of those elements of the american population a majority they continued to believe who were still loyal to the crown in other words they would work to undermine the revolution from within.
since the british believed loyalist sentiment was strongest in the southern colonies despite their earlier failure to enlist loyalist support in north carolina the main focus of their effort shifted there and so it was in the south for the most part that the final stages of the war occurred.
the new british strategy was a dismal failure.
british forces spent three years from 1778 to 1781 moving through the south fighting small battles and large and attempting to neutralize the territory through which they traveled.
all such efforts ended in frustration.
the british badly overestimated the extent of loyalist sentiment.
there were many tories in georgia and the carolinas some of them disgruntled members of the regulator movement.
but there were also many more patriots than the british had believed.
in virginia support for independence was as fervent as in massachusetts.
and even in the lower south loyalists often refused to aid the british because they feared reprisals from the patriots around them.
the british also harmed their own cause by encouraging southern slaves to desert their owners in return for promises of emancipation.
many slaves perhaps 5 percent of the total took advantage of this offer despite the great difficulty of doing so.
but white southerners were aghast and even many who might otherwise have been inclined to support the crown now joined the patriot side which posed no such threat to slavery.
the british also faced severe logistical problems in the south.
patriot forces could move at will throughout the region living off the resources of the countryside blending in with the civilian population and leaving the british unable to distinguish friend from foe.
the british by contrast suffered all the disadvantages of an army in hostile territory.
it was this phase of the conflict that made the war truly revolutionary not only because it introduced a new kind of combat but also because it had the effect of mobilizing and politicizing large groups of the population who had previously remained aloof from the struggle.
with the war expanding into previously isolated communities with many civilians forced to involve themselves whether they liked it or not the political climate of the united states grew more heated than ever.
and support for independence far from being crushed as the british had hoped greatly increased.
that was the context in which the important military encounters of the last years of the war occurred.
in the north where significant numbers of british troops remained the fighting settled into a relatively quiet stalemate.
sir henry clinton replaced the hapless william howe in 1778 and moved what had been howes army from philadelphia back to new york city.
there the british troops stayed for more than a year with washington using his army to keep watch around them.
the american forces in new york did so little fighting in this period that washington sent some troops west to fight hostile indians who had been attacking white settlers.
in that same winter george rogers clark under orders from the state of virginia not from either washington or congress led a daring expedition over the mountains and captured settlements in the illinois country from the british and their indian allies.
during this period of relative calm general benedict arnold shocked the american forces and washington in particular by becoming a traitor.
arnold had been one of the early heroes of the war but now convinced that the american cause was ope ess he conspired with british agents to betray the patriot revolutionary consequences of the southern campaign the american revolution 141 british forces american forces french fleet british victory american victory d estaing sept oct 1779 the revolution in the south 1778 1781 the final phase of the american revolution occurred largely in the south which the british thought would be a more receptive region for their troops.
this map reveals the many scattered military efforts of the british and the americans in those years none of them conclusive.
it also shows the final chapter of the revolution around the chesapeake bay and the james river.
what errors led the british to their surrender at yorktown.
stronghold at west point on the hudson river.
the scheme unraveled before arnold could complete it and he fled to the safety of the british camp where he spent the rest of the war.
in the meantime decisive fighting was in progress in the south.
the british did have some significant military successes during this period.
on december 29 1778 they captured savannah on the coast of georgia and on may 12 1780 they took the port of charles town south carolina.
they also inspired some loyalists to take up arms and advance with them into the interior.
but although the british were able to win conventional battles they were constantly harassed as they moved through the countryside by patriot guerrillas led by such resourceful fighters as thomas sumter andrew pickens and francis marion the swamp fox moving inland to camden south carolina lord cornwallis clintons choice as british commander in the south met nathanael anc crus e a patriot force under horatio greene gates on august 16 1780.
congress recalled gates and washington gave the southern command to nathanael greene a quaker and a former blacksmith from rhode island and probably the ablest of all the american generals of the time next to washington.
142 chapter 5 the british on the hudson 1776 in one of the largest troop movements of the revolution english commanders sent 13 000 british and hessian troops up the hudson river to drive george washington and his patriot army from strongholds in the palisades above the river.
the british took nearly 3 000 prisoners when the patriots surrendered on november 16 1776.
thomas davies painted this watercolor of the british landing at the time.
fotosearch getty images even before greene joined the southern army the tide of battle began to turn against cornwallis.
at kings mountain near the north carolina south carolina border on october 7 1780 a band of patriot riflemen from the backwoods killed wounded or captured an entire force of 1 100 new york and south carolina tories that cornwallis was using as auxiliaries.
once greene arrived he confused and exasperated cornwallis further by dividing the american forces into small fast moving contingents and refraining from a showdown in open battle.
one of the contingents inflicted what cornwallis admitted was a very unexpected and severe blow at cowpens on january 17 1781.
finally after receiving reinforcements greene combined all his forces and maneuvered to meet the british on ground of his own choosing at guilford court house north carolina.
after a hard fought battle there on march 15 1781 greene withdrew from the field but cornwallis had lost so many men that he decided at last to abandon the carolina campaign.
cornwallis withdrew to the port town of wilmington north carolina to receive supplies being sent to him by sea later he moved north to launch raids in the interior of virginia.
but clinton concerned for the armys safety ordered him to take up a position on the peninsula between the york and james rivers and wait for ships to carry his troops to new york city or charles town.
so cornwallis retreated to yorktown and began to build fortifications there.
george washington along with count jean baptiste de rochambeau commander of the french expeditionary force in america and admiral francois joseph paul de grasse commander of the french fleet in american waters set out to trap yorktown cornwallis at yorktown.
washington and rochambeau marched a french american army from new york city to join other french forces under lafayette in virginia while de grasse sailed with additional troops for chesapeake bay and the york river.
these joint operations perfectly timed and executed caught cornwallis between land and sea.
after a few shows of resistance he capitulated on october 17 1781 four years to the day after the surrender of burgoyne at saratoga.
two days later as a military band played the old tune the world turnd upside down cornwallis claiming to be ill sent a deputy who formally sur rendered the british army of more than 7 000 men.
the american revolution 143 except for a few skirmishes the fighting was now over but the united states had not yet won the war.
british forces continued to hold the seaports of savannah charles town wilmington and new york city.
before long a british fleet met and defeated admiral de grasses fleet in the west indies ending washingtons hopes for further french naval assistance.
for more than a year although there was no significant further combat between british and american forces it remained possible that the war might resume and the struggle for independence might still be lost.
winning the peace cornwalliss defeat provoked outcries in england against continuing the war.
lord north resigned as prime minister lord shelburne emerged from the political wreckage to succeed him and british emissaries appeared in france to talk informally with the american diplomats in paris.
the three american principals were benjamin franklin john adams and john jay.
the americans were under instructions to cooperate fully with france in their negotiations with england.
but vergennes insisted that france could not agree to any settlement of the war with england until its ally spain had achieved its principal war aim winning back gibraltar from the british.
there was no real prospect of that happening soon and the americans began to fear that the alliance with france might keep them at war indefinitely.
as a result franklin jay and adams began proceeding on their own without informing vergennes and signed a preliminary treaty with great britain on november 30 1782.
franklin in the meantime skillfully pacified vergennes and avoided an immediate rift in the french american alliance.
the british and americans reached a final settlement the treaty of paris on september 3 1783 when both spain and france agreed to end hostilities.
it was on the whole remark treaty of ably favorable to the united states in grant paris ing a clear cut recognition of its independence and a generous though ambiguous cession of territory from the southern boundary of canada to the northern boundary of florida and from the atlantic to the mississippi.
with good reason americans celebrated in the fall of 1783 as the last of the british occupation forces embarked from new york and general washington at the head of his troops rode triumphantly into the city.
war and society historians have long debated whether the american revolution was a social as well as a political revolution.
some have argued that the colonists were struggling not only over the question of home rule but also over who should rule at home others claim that domestic social and economic concerns had little to do with the conflict.
see debating the past pp.
whatever the motivations of americans however there can be little doubt that the war for independence had important effects on the nature of american society.
loyalists and minorities the losers in the american revolution included not only the british but also american loyalists.
there is no way to be sure how many americans remained loyal to england during the revolution but it is clear that there were many at least a fifth and some historians estimate as much as a third of the white population.
their motivations were varied.
some were officeholders in the imperial government who stood to lose their positions as a result of the revolution.
others were merchants engaged in trade closely tied to the imperial system.
most merchants however supported the revolution.
still others were people who lived in relative isolation and had not been exposed to the wave of discontent that had turned so many americans against britain.
there were cultural and ethnic minorities who feared that an independent america would not offer them sufficient protection.
there were settled cautious people who feared social instability.
and there were those who expecting the british to win the war were simply currying favor with the anticipated victors.
what happened to these men and women during the war was a turbulent and at times tragic story.
hounded by patriots in their communities harassed by legislative and the loyalists judicial actions the position of many plight loyalists became intolerable.
up to 100 000 fled the country.
those who could afford to moved to england where many lived in difficult and lonely exile.
thomas hutchinson who was a wealthy businessman historian and loyalist of the king served in the massachusetts government for many years as lieutenant governor and from 1758 to 1774 as governor.
he was a polarizing figure and as the revolution began his boston mansion was ransacked during protests against the stamp acts.
after being replaced as governor in may 1774 by general thomas gage hutchinson left boston and moved first to canada and then to england.
loyalists of modest means moved to canada establishing the first english speaking community in the province of quebec.
some returned to america after the war and as the earlier passions and resentments faded managed to reenter the life of the nation.
others remained abroad for the rest of their lives.
most loyalists were people of average means but a substantial minority consisted of men and women of wealth.
they left behind large estates and vacated important positions of social and economic leadership.
even some who remained in the country saw their property confiscated and their positions forfeited.
the result was new opportunities for patriots to acquire land and influence a situation that produced significant social changes in many communities.
it would be an exaggeration however to claim that the departure of the loyalists was responsible for anything approaching a social revolution or that the revolution created a general assault on the wealthy and powerful in america.
when the war the age of revolutions pp y y y j american revolution was a result of specific tensions and conflicts between britain h e and its north american colonies.
but it was also a part and a cause of what historians have come to call an age of revolutions that spread through much of the western world in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
the modern idea of revolution the overturning of old systems and regimes and the creation of new ones was largely a product of the ideas of the enlightenment.
among those ideas was the storming the bastille this painting portrays the storming of the great parisian fortress and prison the bastille on july 14 1789.
the bastille was a despised symbol of royal tyranny to many of the french because of the arbitrarily arrested and imprisoned people who were sent there.
the july assault was designed to release the prisoners but in fact the revolutionaries found only seven people in the vast fortress.
even so the capture of the bastille which marked one of the first moments in which ordinary frenchmen joined the revolution became one of the great moments in modern french history.
the anniversary of the event bastille day remains the french national holiday.
musee de la ville de paris musee carnavalet paris france the bridgeman art library notion of popular sovereignty articulated by the english philosopher john locke and others.
locke argued that political authority did not derive from the divine right of kings or the inherited authority of aristocracies but rather from the consent of the governed.
a related enlightenment idea was the concept of individual freedom which challenged the traditional belief that governments had the right to prescribe the way people act speak and even think.
champions of individual freedom in the eighteenth century among them the french philosopher voltaire advocated religious toleration and freedom of thought and expression.
the swiss french enlightenment theorist jean jacques rousseau helped spread the idea of political and legal equality for all people the end of special privileges for aristocrats and elites the right of all citizens to participate in the formation of policies and laws.
the american revolution was the first and in many ways the most influential of the enlightenment derived uprisings against established orders.
it served as an inspiration to people in other lands who were trying to find a way to oppose unpopular regimes.
in 1789 a little over a decade after the beginning of the american revolution revolution began in france.
the monarchy was abolished and the king and queen publicly executed in 1793 the authority of the catholic church was challenged and greatly weakened and at the peak of revolutionary chaos during the jacobin period 1793 1794 more than 40 000 suspected enemies of the revolution were executed and hundreds of thousands of others imprisoned.
the most radical phase of the revolution came to an end in 1799 when napoleon bonaparte a young general seized power and began to build a new french empire.
but france s ancien regime of king and aristocracy never wholly revived.
the american and french revolutions helped inspire uprisings in many other parts of the atlantic world weakening of the anglican church ended those who had been wealthy at its beginning were for the most part still wealthy at the end.
most of those who had wielded social and political influence continued to wield it.
the war had a significant effect on other minorities as well and on certain religious groups in particular.
no sect suffered more than the anglicans many of whom were loyalists.
in virginia and maryland where the colonial governments had recognized anglicanism as the official religion and had imposed a tax for its maintenance the new revolutionary regimes disestablished the anglican church and eliminated the subsidy.
by the time the fighting ended many anglican parishes no longer had clergymen for there were few ministers to take the place of those who had died or who had left the country as loyalist refugees.
anglicanism survived in america but the losses during the revolution permanently weakened it.
the revolution also weakened the quakers in pennsylvania and elsewhere.
they incurred widespread unpopularity because of their pacifism which destroyed much of the social and political prestige they had once enjoyed.
while the war was weakening the anglicans and the quakers it was strengthening the position of the roman 144 the american revolution 145 in 1791 a major slave uprising began in haiti and soon attracted more than 100 000 rebels.
the slave army defeated both the white settlers of the island and the french colonial armies sent to quell their rebellion.
linder the leadership of general toussaint l ouverture they began to agitate for independence which they obtained on january 1 1804 a few months after toussaint s death.
revolution spread next into the spanish and portuguese colonies in the americas particularly among the so called creoles people of european ancestry born in the americas.
in the late eighteenth century they began to resist the authority of colonial officials sent from spain and portugal and to demand a greater say in governing their own lands.
napoleon s invasion of spain and portugal in 1807 weakened the ability of the european regimes to sustain authority over their american colonies.
in the years that followed revolutions swept through much of latin america.
mexico became an independent nation in 1821 and provinces of central america that had once been part of mexico guatemala el salvador honduras nicaragua and costa rica established their independence three years later.
simon bolivar modeling his efforts on those of george washington led a great revolutionary movement that won independence for brazil in 1822 and also helped lead revolutionary campaigns in venezuela ecuador and peru all of which won their independence in the 1820s.
across the atlantic greek patriots drawing from the examples of other revolutionary nations launched a movement to win their independence from the ottoman empire which finally succeeded in 1830.
the age of revolutions left many new independent nations in its wake.
it did not however succeed in establishing the ideals of popular sovereignty individual freedom and political equality in all the nations it affected.
slavery survived in the united states and in many areas of latin america.
new forms of aristocracy and even monarchy emerged in france mexico brazil and elsewhere.
women many of whom had hoped the revolutionary age would win new rights for them made few legal or political gains in this era.
but the ideals that the revolutionary era introduced to the western world continued to shape the histories of nations throughout the nineteenth century and beyond.
understand analyze and evaluate 1.
how did the american revolution influence the french revolution.
what other nations were affected by the example of the american revolution.
what was the significance of the revolution in haiti and how much attention did it get in other nations.
catholic church.
on the advice of charles carroll of carrollton a maryland statesman and catholic lay leader most american c catholics supported the patriot cause strengthening of the catholic church during the war.
the french alliance brought catholic troops and chaplains to the country and the gratitude with vhich most americans greeted them did much to erode old tnd bitter hostilities toward catholics.
the catholic church lid not greatly increase its numbers as a result of the devolution but it did gain considerable strength as an institu ion.
not long after the end of the war the vatican provided the united states with its own catholic hierarchy.
until then catholic bishops in europe had controlled the american church.
father john carroll also of maryland was named head of catholic missions in america in 1784 and in 1789 the first american bishop.
in 1808 he became archbishop of baltimore.
the war and slavery african american desire for freedom for the largest of america s minorities the african american population the war had limited but nevertheless profound significance.
for some it meant freedom because many slaves took advantage of the british presence in the south in the final years of the war to escape.
the british enabled many of them to leave the country not so much as any principled commitment to emancipation but more as a way of disrupting the american war effort.
in south carolina for example nearly a third of all slaves defected during the war.
africans had constituted over 60 percent of the population in 1770 by 1790 that figure had declined to about 44 percent.
for other african americans the revolution meant an increased exposure to the concept although seldom to the reality of liberty.
most black americans could not read but few could avoid the new and exciting ideas circulating through the towns and cities and even at times on the plantations.
the results included incidents in several communities in which african americans engaged in open resistance to white control.
in charles town south carolina for example thomas jeremiah a free black was executed in 1775 after patriot leaders accused him of conspiring to smuggle british guns to south carolina slaves.
the revolution also produced some eloquent efforts by black writers mostly in the north to articulate its lessons for their people.
liberty is a jewel which was handed down to man from the cabinet of heaven the black new englander lemuel hayes wrote in 1776.
even an african has equally good a right to his liberty in common with englishmen shall a mans couler be the decisive criterion wherby to judg of his natural right that was one reason why in south carolina and georgia where slaves constituted half or more of the population there was great ambivalence about the revolution.
slaveowners opposed british efforts to emancipate their slaves but they also feared that the revolution itself would foment slave rebellions.
the same fears helped prevent english colonists in the caribbean islands who were far more greatly outnumbered by african slaves from joining with the continental americans in the revolt against britain.
in much of the north the combination of revolutionary sentiment and evangelical christian fervor helped spread antislavery sentiments widely through society.
but in the south white support for slavery survived.
southern churches rejected the antislavery ideas of the north and worked instead to develop a rationale for slavery in part by reinforcing ideas about white superiority in part by encouraging slaveowners to make slavery more humane.
146 chapter 5 as in so many other periods of american history the revolution exposed the continuing tension between the nations commitment to liberty and its commitment to slavery.
to people in our time and even to some people in revolutionary times it seems obvious that liberty and slavery are incompatible.
but to many white americans in the eighteenth century especially in the south that did not seem obvious.
many white southerners believed in fact that enslaving africans whom they considered inferior and unfit for citizenship was the best way to ensure liberty for white people.
they feared the impact tension between of free black people livin alonsslde liberty and whites.
they also feared that without slavery slaves it would be necessary to recruit a servile white workforce in the south and that the resulting inequalities would jeopardize the survival of liberty.
one of the ironies of the american revolution therefore was that white americans were fighting both to secure freedom for themselves and to preserve slavery for others.
native americans and the revolution most indians viewed the american revolution with considerable uncertainty.
the american patriots tried to persuade them to remain neutral in the conflict which they described as a family quarrel between the colonists and britain that had nothing to do with the tribes.
but in fact a great deal was at stake for native americans in the american revolution.
during the colonial period the british government struggled for many years to restrain the growth of white migration into the indian lands west of the appalachian mountains.
such efforts were mostly unsuccessful.
the white colonists the royal governor of virginia wrote do not conceive that the government has any right to forbid taking possession of a vast tract of country but the british believed that the government did have a right to protect the lands of the indians not because of benevolence but because of their desire to avoid further battles with the tribes especially on land that had been promised to the indians.
once the revolutionary war began the role of the indians became of critical significance to both sides of the conflict.
for the american patriots among the goals of battle for independence was their right to expand into the western lands at the expense of the indians.
some of the most eminent figures in the new nation were themselves land speculators in the west among them george washington and many such men had long complained about the proclamation of 1763 which had forbidden white movement into tribal lands.
other colonial grievances against the british included the recruitment of indians to join the royal army.
in fact both sides tried to recruit indians to help them.
in the western carolinas and virginia a cherokee faction led by dragging canoe attacked outlying white settlements in the summer of 1776.
patriot militias responded with overwhelming force ravaging cherokee lands and forcing dragging canoe and many of his followers to flee west across the tennessee river.
those cherokees who remained behind agreed to a new treaty by which they gave up still more land.
not all native american military efforts were so unsuccessful.
some iroquois despite the setbacks at oriskany continued to wage war against white americans in the west and caused widespread destruction in large agricultural areas of new york and pennsylvania areas whose crops were of crucial importance to the patriot cause.
and although the retaliating united states armies inflicted heavy losses on the indians the attacks continued throughout the war.
in the end however the revolution generally weakened the position of native americans in several ways.
the patriot victory increased the white demand for western lands many american whites associated restrictions on settlement with british oppression and expected the new nation to remove the obstacles.
at the same time white attitudes toward the tribes seldom friendly in the best of times took a turn for taking sides the worse many whites deeply resented the assistance the mohawk and other indian nations had given the british and insisted on treating them as conquered people.
others adopted a paternalistic ueorge komney painted this portr joseph brant chtef of the mohawks 1742 1807 to depict the mohawk leader who led lour the six iroquois nations against the american forces in support of the british.
he achieved a viim pkeputa ii after partlclpatin9 in the batt e f oriskany and a raid against the fortific vdlage of cherry valley new york.
national gallery of canada.
ottawa ontano.
canada the ridgeman art library the american revolution 147 view of the tribes that was only slightly less dangerous to them.
thomas jefferson for example came to view the native americans as noble savages uncivilized in their present state but redeemable if they were willing to adapt to the norms of white society.
among the tribes themselves the revolution both revealed and increased the deep divisions that made it difficult for them to form a common front to resist the growing power of whites.
in 1774 for example the shawnee indians in west growing ern virginia had attempted to lead an up divisions rising against white settlers moving into among the the lands that would later become indians kentucky.
they attracted virtually no al lies and in a conflict known as lord dunmores war were defeated by the colonial militia and forced to cede more land to white settlers.
and the iroquois whose power had been eroding since the end of the french and indian war were similarly unable to act in unison in the revolution.
bands of native americans continued to launch raids against white settlers on the frontier.
white militias often using such raids as pretexts continued to attack indian tribes who stood in the way of expansion.
perhaps the most vicious massacre of the era occurred in 1782 after the british surrender when white militias slaughtered a peaceful band of delaware indians at gnadenhuetten in ohio.
they claimed to be retaliating for the killing of a white family several days before but few white settlers believed this band of delaware who were both christian converts and pacifists had played any role in the earlier attack.
the white soldiers killed ninety six people including many women and children.
such massacres did not become the norm of indian white relations.
but they did reveal how little the revolution had done to settle the basic conflict between the two peoples.
the triumph of the american patriots in the revolution contributed to the ultimate defeat of the indian tribes.
to white americans independence meant among other things their right to move aggressively into the western lands despite the opposition of the indians.
to the indians american independence was the greatest blow that could have been dealt us one tribal leader warned.
women s rights and womens roles the long revolutionary war which touched the lives of people in almost every region naturally had a significant effect on american women.
the departure of so many men to fight in the patriot armies left wives mothers sisters and daughters in charge of farms and businesses.
other women whose husbands or fathers went off to war did not have even a farm or shop to fall back on.
many cities and towns developed significant populations of impoverished women who on occasion led popular protests against price increases.
on a few occasions hungry women rioted and looted for food.
elsewhere in new jersey and on staten island women launched attacks on occupying british troops whom they were required to house and feed at considerable expense.
not all women however stayed behind when the men went off to war.
sometimes by choice but more often out of economic necessity or because they had been driven from women of their homes by the enemy and by the the army smallpox and dysentery the british army carried with it women flocked in increasing numbers to the camps of the patriot armies to join their male relatives.
george washington looked askance at these female camp followers convinced that they were disruptive and distracting even though his own wife martha spent the winter of 1778 1779 with him at valley forge.
other officers were even more hostile voicing complaints that reflected a high level of anxiety over this seeming violation of traditional gender roles and also perhaps over the generally lower class backgrounds of the camp women.
one described them in decidedly hostile terms their hair falling their brows beady with the heat their belongings slung over one shoulder chattering and yelling in sluttish shrills as they went in fact however the women were of significant value to the new army.
it had not yet developed an adequate system of supply and auxiliary services and it profited greatly from the presence of women who increased army morale and performed such necessary tasks as cooking laundry and nursing.
but female activity did not always remain restricted to womens tasks.
in the rough environment of the camps traditional gender distinctions proved difficult to maintain.
considerable numbers of women became involved at least intermittently in combat including the legendary molly pitcher so named because she carried pitchers of water to soldiers on the battlefield.
she watched her husband fall during one encounter and immediately took his place at a field gun.
a few women even disguised themselves as men so as to be able to fight.
after the war of course the soldiers and the female camp followers returned home.
the experience of combat had little visible impact on how society or on how women themselves defined female roles in peacetime.
the revolution did however call certain assumptions about women into question in other ways.
the emphasis on liberty and the rights of man led some women to begin to question their position in society as well.
by the way abigail adams wrote to her husband john adams in 1776 in the new code of laws which i suppose it will be necessary for you to make i desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors adams was calling for a very modest expansion of womens rights.
she wanted new protections against abusive and tyrannical men.
a few women however went further.
judith sargent murray one of the leading essayists of the late eighteenth century wrote in 1779 that womens minds were as good as mens and that girls as well as boys therefore deserved access to education.
some political leaders among them benjamin franklin and benjamin rush also voiced support for the education 148 chapter 5 calls for womens rights of women and for other feminist reforms.
yale students in the 1780s debated the question whether women ought to be admitted into the magistracy and government of empires and republics and there was for a time wide discussion of the future role of women in a new re public that had broken with so many other traditions already.
but few concrete reforms became either law or common social practice.
in colonial society under the doctrines of english common law an unmarried woman had some legal rights to own property to enter contracts and others but a married woman had virtually no rights.
she could own no property and earn no independent wages everything she owned and everything she earned belonged to her husband.
she had no legal authority over her children the father was in the eyes of the law the autocrat of the family.
because a married woman had no property rights she could not engage in any legal transactions buying or selling suing or being sued writing wills.
she could not vote.
nor could she obtain a divorce in most states that too was a right reserved mostly for men although in much of the south men could not obtain divorces either.
these restrictions were what abigail adams who herself enjoyed a successful marriage was describing when she appealed to her husband not to put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands the revolution did little to change any of these legal customs.
in some states it did become easier for women to obtain divorces.
and in new jersey women obtained the right to vote although that right was repealed in 1807.
otherwise there were few advances and some setbacks including widows loss of the right to regain their dowries from their husbands estates.
that change left many widows without any means of support and was one of the reasons for the increased agitation for female education such women needed a way to support themselves.
the revolution in other words far from challenging the patriarchal structure of american society actually confirmed and strengthened it.
few american women challenged the belief that they occupied a special sphere distinct from that of men.
most accepted that their place remained in the family.
nevertheless the revolutionary experience did contribute to a subtle but important alteration of womens roles.
in the past they had often been little better than servants in their husbands homes.
but the revolution encouraged people of both genders to reevaluate the contribution of women to the family and the society.
one reason for this was a reevaluation of american life during and after the revolutionary struggle.
as the republic the british infantry the worlds greatest military power raised its armies in almost haphazard fashion command of a british.
received a cash reward for every man they enlisted.
with that incentive they were hardly picky and the foot soldiers of the british army were mo t e psitined gen emen who enlisting through a combination of liquor and cash.
even so the rough and ready quality of the british infantrv made them need u v men wh d be persuaded r tricked in during the american revolution.
as with the colonial armies the brihsh troops attrected women seen f s drawi 9 w a british encampment themselves wore highly ornamental uniforms that were in many ways very impractical to keed himself nmnerlv j.
p ollowers doing chores to help the soldiers.
the soldiers military collection brown university library p p msel 9rmed and a lrad could take a soldier up to three hours a day.
brown the american revolution 149 searched for a cultural identity for itself it began to place additional value on the role of women as mothers.
the new nation a strengthened was many americans liked to believe patriarchal producing a new kind of citizen steeped structure in the principles of liberty.
mothers had a particularly important task therefore in instructing their children in the virtues the republican citizenry was expected now to possess.
wives were still far from equal partners in marriage but their ideas interests and do mestic roles received increased respect from many men.
the war economy inevitably the revolution produced important changes in the structure of the american economy.
after more than a century of dependence on the british imperial system american trade suddenly found itself on its own.
no longer did it have the protection of the great british navy on the contrary english ships now attempted to drive american vessels from the seas.
no longer did american merchants have access to the markets of the empire those markets were now hostile ports lnclud ing of course the most important source of american trade england itself.
yet while the revolution disrupted traditional economic patterns in the long run it strengthened the american economy.
well before the war was over american ships had learned to evade the british navy with light fast easily maneuverable vessels.
indeed the yankees began to prey on british commerce with hundreds of privateers.
for many shipowners privateering proved to be more profitable than ordinary peacetime trade.
more important in the long run the end of imperial restrictions on american shipping opened up enormous new areas of trade to the nation.
enterprising merchants in new england and elsewhere began to develop new commerce in the caribbean and in south america.
by the mid 1780s american merchants were developing an important new pattern of trade with asia and by the end of that decade yankee ships were regularly sailing from the eastern seaboard around cape horn to the pacific coast of north america there exchanging manufactured goods for hides and furs and then proceeding across the pacific to barter for goods in china.
there was also a substantial increase in trade among the american states.
when english imports to america were cut off first by the prewar boycott then by the war itself there were desperate new patterns efforts throughout the states to stimulate of trade domestic manufacturing of certain necessities.
no great industrial expansion resulted but there were several signs of the economic growth that was to come in the next century.
americans began to make their own cloth homespun which became both patriotic and fashionable to replace now unobtainable british fabrics.
it would be some time before a large domestic textile industry would emerge but the nation was never again to rely exclusively on foreign sources for its cloth.
there was of course pressure to build factories for the manufacture of guns and ammunition.
and there was a growing general awareness that america need not forever be dependent on other nations for manufactured goods.
the war stopped well short of revolutionizing the american economy not until the nineteenth century would that begin to occur.
but it did serve to release a wide range of entrepreneurial energies that despite the temporary dislocations encouraged growth and diversification.
banner of the society of pewterers members of the american society of pewterers carried this patriotic banner when they marched in a new york city parade in july 1788.
its inscription celebrates the adoption of the new federal constitution and predicts a future of prosperity and freedom in columbias land.
the banner also suggests the growing importance of american manufacturing which had received an important boost during the revolution when british imports became unavailable.
collection of the new york historical society usa the bridgeman art library international 150 chapter 5 the creation of state governments at the same time that americans were struggling to win their independence on the battlefield they were also struggling to create new institutions of government to replace the british system they had repudiated.
that struggle continued for more than fifteen years but its most important phase occurred during the war itself at the state level.
the assumptions of republicanism if americans agreed on nothing else when they began to build new governments for themselves they agreed that those governments would be republican.
to them that meant a political system in which all power came from the people rather than from some supreme authority such as a king.
the success of such a government depended on the nature of its citizenry j if the population consisted of sturdy inde civic virtue pendent property owners imbued with civic virtue then the republic could survive.
if it consisted of a few powerful aristocrats and a great mass of dependent workers then it would be in danger.
from the beginning therefore the ideal of the small freeholder the independent landowner was basic to american political ideology.
another crucial part of that ideology was the concept of equality.
the declaration of independence had given voice to that idea in its most ringing phrase all men are created equal it was a belief that stood in direct contrast to the old european assumption of an inherited aristocracy.
the innate talents and energies of individuals not their positions at birth would determine their roles in society.
some people would inevitably be wealthier and more powerful than others.
but all people would have to earn their success.
there would be no equality of condition but there would be equality of opportunity.
in reality of course the united states was never a nation in which all citizens were independent property holders.
from the beginning there was a sizable dependent labor force.
white laborers enjoyed some of the privileges of citizenship.
persistent black workers were allowed virtually none.
inequality american women remained both politically and economically subordinate.
native americans were systematically exploited and displaced.
nor was there ever full equality of opportunity.
american society was more open and more fluid than the societies of most european nations but the condition of a persons birth was almost always a crucial determinant of success.
nevertheless in embracing the assumptions of republicanism americans were adopting a powerful even revolutionary ideology and their experiment in statecraft became a model for many other countries.
it made the united states for a time the most admired and studied nation on earth.
the first state constitutions the first and perhaps most basic decision about the character of government was that the constitutions were to be written down because americans believed the written vagueness of englands unwritten constitu candtstrongs tion had produced corruption.
the second legislatures decision was that the power of the executive which americans believed had grown too great in england must be limited.
pennsylvania eliminated the executive altogether.
most other states inserted provisions that limited the power of governors to make appointments and veto legislation.
most states also prevented governors from dismissing the legislature.
most important every state forbade the governor or any other executive officer from holding a seat in the legislature thus ensuring that unlike in england the executive and legislative branches of government would remain wholly separate.
but the new constitutions did not embrace direct popular rule.
in georgia and pennsylvania the legislature consisted of one popularly elected house.
but in every other state there was an upper and a lower chamber and in most cases the upper chamber was designed to represent the higher orders of society.
there were property requirements for voters some modest some substantial in all states.
revising state governments by the late 1770s many americans were growing concerned about the apparent divisiveness and instability of their new state governments.
most states were having trouble accomplishing anything.
many believed the problem was one of too much democracy.
as a result most of the states began to revise their constitutions to limit popular power.
massachusetts which waited until 1780 to ratify its first constitution was the first to act on the new concerns.
two changes in particular differentiated the massachusetts and later constitutions from the earlier ones.
the first was a change in the process of constitution writing itself.
most of the first documents had been written by state legislatures and thus could easily be amended or violated by them.
massachusetts and later other states sought a way to protect the constitutions from ordinary politics and created the constitutional convention a special assembly of the people that would meet only for the purpose of writing the constitution and that would never except under extraordinary circumstances meet again.
the second change was a significant strengthening of the executive a reaction to what many americans believed was the instability of the original state governments that had weak governors.
the 1780 massachusetts constitution made the governor one of the strongest in any strom state.
he was to be elected directly by the executives people he was to have a fixed salary in ther words he would not be dependent the american revolution.
151 on the goodwill of the legislature each year for his wages he would have significant appointment powers and a veto over legislation.
other states followed.
those with weak or nonexistent upper houses strengthened or created them.
most increased the powers of the governor.
pennsylvania which had no executive at first now produced a strong one.
by the late 1780s almost every state had either revised its constitution or drawn up a new one in an effort to produce stability in government.
toleration and slavery the states moved far in the direction of complete religious freedom.
most americans continued to believe that religion statute of should play some role in government but religious rhey did not wish to give special powers to liberty any particular denomination.
the privileges that churches had once enjoyed were now largely stripped away.
in 1786 virginia enacted the statute a free black man john singleton copley the great american portraitist of the revolutionary age painted this picture of a young african american in 1777 1978.
he was probably a worker on new england fishing boats who appeared in another copley painting watson and the shark.
it is one of a small number of portrayals of the free blacks in the north in this era and one of even a smaller number that portrays them realistically and seriously.
head of a negro.
by john singleton copley.
oil on canvas 53 3 x 41 3 cm.
founders society purchase gibbs williams fund.
photograph detroit institute of arts usa the bridgeman art lib y of religious liberty written by thomas jefferson which called for the complete separation of church and state.
more difficult to resolve was the question of slavery.
in areas where slavery was already weak in new england where there had never been many slaves and in pennsylvania where the quakers opposed slavery it was abolished relatively early.
even in the south there were some pressures to amend or even eliminate the institution every state but south carolina and georgia prohibited further importation of slaves from abroad and south carolina banned the slave trade during the war.
virginia passed a law encouraging manumission the freeing of slaves.
nevertheless slavery survived in all the southern and border states.
there were several reasons racist assumptions among whites about the inferiority of blacks the enormous economic investments many white southerners had in their slaves and the inability of even such men as washington and jefferson who had moral misgivings about slavery to envision any alternative to it.
if slavery were abolished what would happen to the black people in america.
few whites believed blacks could be integrated into american society as equals.
in maintaining slavery jefferson once remarked americans were holding a wolf by the ears however unappealing it was to hold on to it letting go would be even worse.
the search for a national government americans were much quicker to agree on state institutions than they were on the structure of their national government.
at first most believed that the central government should remain a relatively weak and unimportant force and that each state would be virtually a sovereign nation.
it was in response to such ideas that the articles of confederation emerged.
the confederation the articles of confederation which the continental congress had adopted in 1777 provided for a national government much like the one already in place.
congress wrote for ratification of the articles permit us then earnestly to recommend these articles to the immediate and dispassionate attention of the legislatures of the respective states.
let them be candidly reviewed under a sense of the difficulty of combining in one system the various sentiments and interests of a continent divided into so many sovereign and independent communities under a conviction of the absolute necessity of uniting all our councils and all our strengths to maintain and defend our common liberties under the articles congress remained the central indeed the only institution of national authority.
its powers expanded to give it authority to conduct wars and foreign relations 152.
chapter 5 limited power of the national government and to appropriate borrow and issue money.
but it did not have power to regulate trade draft troops or levy taxes directly on the people.
for troops and taxes it had to make formal requests to the state legislatures which could and often did refuse them.
there was no separate executive the president of the united states was merely the presiding officer at the sessions of congress.
each state had a single vote in congress and at least nine of the states had to approve the admission of a new state.
all thirteen state legislatures had to approve any amendment of the articles.
during the process of ratifying the articles of confederation which required approval by all thirteen states broad disagreements over the plan became evident.
the small states had insisted on equal state representation but the larger states wanted representation to be based on population.
the smaller states prevailed on that issue.
more important the states claiming western lands wished to keep them but the rest of the states demanded that all such territory be turned over to the national government.
new york and virginia had to give up their western claims before the articles were finally approved.
they went into effect in 1781.
the confederation which existed from 1781 until 1789 was not a complete failure but it was far from a success.
it lacked adequate powers to deal with interstate issues or to enforce its will on the states and it had little stature in the eyes of the world.
diplomatic failures evidence of the low esteem in which the rest of the world held the confederation was its difficulty in persuading great britain and to a lesser extent spain to live up to the terms of the peace treaty of 1783.
the british had promised to evacuate american territory but british forces continued to occupy postwar disputes with britain and spain maine 7 mass.
lmew hampshirl connecticut atlantic ocean ceded by spain 1795 ceded by georgia 1802 f 1 v massachusetts w rhode island the conflict over western lands the american victory in the revolution transformed the colonies into states within a new nation whose central government claimed at least some sovereignty over the individual units.
an early conflict between national and state power took place over the state claims to western lands claims established during the colonial period.
this map shows the extensive western lands claimed by most of the original thirteen colonies to land in the west and it illustrates the shifting nature of those claims over time as colonies and then states transferred land to one another.
the new national government gradually persuaded the states to give it control of the western lands and in 1784 and 1785 it issued ordinances governing the process of settling those lands.
why did the national government consider it important for the states to give up their claim to these territories.
ceded by spain to france 1800 sold by france to united states 1803 gulf o f mexico states after land cessions ceded territory territory ceded by new york 1782 the american revolution 153 a string of frontier posts along the great lakes within the united states.
nor did the british honor their agreement to make restitution to slaveowners whose slaves the british army had confiscated.
there were also disputes over the boundaries of the new nation.
americans wanted full access to british markets england however placed sharp restrictions on that access.
in 1784 congress sent john adams as minister to london to resolve these differences but adams made no headway with the english who were never sure whether he represented a single nation or thirteen different ones.
throughout the 1780s the british government refused even to send a diplomatic minister to the american capital.
the confederation and the northwest the confederations most important accomplishment was its resolution of controversies over the western lands.
when the revolution began only a few thousand whites lived west of the appalachian mountains but by 1790 their numbers had increased to 120 000.
the confederation had to find a way to include these new settlements in the political structure of the nation.
the landed states began to yield their western claims to the national government in 1781 and by 1784 the confederation controlled enough land to permit congress to begin making policy for the western lands.
the treaty of greenville on august 3 1795 this painting from the american school of painting depicts the treaty of greenville ending the northeast indian war in the ohio r l.
o kunuatq i itpnqils and domesticated animals the united states acquired large parts of ohio tracts of what would soon become country.
in exchange for 20 000 worth of various goods such as blankets utensils ana aomesmua e chicago and the fort detroit area.
chicago history museum usa the bridgeman art library 154 chapter 5 the ordinances of 1784 and 1785 the ordinance of 1784 based on a proposal by thomas jefferson divided the western territory into ten self governing districts each of which could petition congress for statehood when its population equaled the number of free inhabitants of the smallest existing state.
the provision reflected the desire of the revolutionary generation to avoid creating second class citizens in subordinate territories.
then in the ordinance of 1785 congress created a system for surveying and selling the western lands.
the territory north of the ohio river was to be surveyed and marked off into neat rectangular townships each divided into thirty six identical sections.
in every township four sections were to be set aside for the united states the revenue from the sale of one of the other sections was to support creation of a public school.
sections were to be sold at auction for no less than one dollar an acre.
among the many important results of the ordinance of 1785 was the establishment of an enduring pattern of divid the grid in8 up an fr human use.
many such systems have emerged throughout history.
some have relied on natural boundaries rivers mountains and other topographical features.
some have reflected informal claims of landlords over vast but vaguely defined territories.
some have rested on random allocations of acres to be determined by individual landholders.
but many enlightenment thinkers began in the eighteenth century to imagine more precise even mathematical forms of land distribution which required both careful surveying and a clear method for defining boundaries.
the result was the method applied in 1785 in the northwest territory which came to be known as the grid the division of land into carefully measured and evenly divided squares or rectangles.
this pattern of land distribution eventually became the norm for much of the land west of the appalachians.
it also became a model for the organization of many towns and cities which distributed land in geometrical patterns within rectangular grids defined by streets.
although older land distribution systems survive within the united states the grid has become the most common form by which americans impose human ownership and use on the landscape.
the original ordinances were highly favorable to land northwest speculators and less so to ordinary settlers ordinance many of whom could not afford the price of the land.
congress compounded the problem by selling much of the best land to the ohio and scioto land companies before making it available to anyone else.
criticism of these policies led to the passage in 1787 of another law governing western settlement legislation that became known as the northwest ordinance the 1787 ordinance abandoned the ten districts established in 1784 and created a single northwest territory out of the lands the seven ranges first area survey geographer s line base line u oc c u to oc c.
to c 1 e is ln 3 ro liibi a d it f 4 a b c d ie four sections reserved for subsequent sales section 16 reserved for school funds one section 640 acres 1 mile square a half section 320 acres b quarter section 160 acres c half quarter section 80 acres 4 northwest territory one township six miles square 1 36 30 24 18 12 6 35 29 23 17 11 5 s 34 28 22 16 10 4 33 27 21 15 9 3 32 26 20 14 8 2 31 25 19 13 7 1 land survey ordinance of 1785 in the ordinance of 1785 the congress established a new system for surveying and selling western lands.
these maps illustrate the way in which the lands were divided in an area of ohio.
note the highly geometrical grid pattern that the ordinance imposed on these lands.
each of the squares in the map on the left was subdivided into 36 sections as illustrated in the map at the lower right.
why was this grid pattern so appealing to the planners of the western lands.
1 mile the american revolution 155 north of the ohio the territory could eventually be divided into between three and five territories.
it also specified a population of 60 000 as a minimum for statehood guaranteed freedom of religion and the right to trial by jury to residents of the northwest and prohibited slavery throughout the territory.
the western lands south of the ohio river received less attention from congress and development was more chaotic there.
the region that became kentucky and tennessee developed rapidly in the late 1770s and in the 1780s speculators and settlers began setting up governments and asking for recognition as states.
the confederation was never able to successfully resolve the conflicting claims in that region.
indians and the western lands on paper at least the western land policies of the confederation created a system that brought order and stability to the process of white settlement in the northwest.
but in reality order and stability came slowly and at great cost because much of the land the confederation was neatly subdividing and offering for sale consisted of territory claimed by the indians of the region.
congress tried to resolve that problem in 1784 1785 and 1786 by persuading iroquois choctaw chickasaw and cherokee leaders to sign treaties ceding substantial western lands in the north and south to the united states.
but those agreements proved ineffective.
in 1786 the leadership of the iroquois confederacy repudiated the treaty it had signed two years earlier and threatened to attack white settlements in the disputed lands.
other tribes had never accepted the treaties affecting them and continued to resist white movement into their lands.
violence between whites and indians on the northwest frontier reached a crescendo in the early 1790s.
in 1790 and again in 1791 a group of tribes led by the famed miami war d rior little turtle defeated united states fallen forces in two major battles near what is timbers now the western border of ohio in the second of those battles on november 4 1791 630 white americans died in fighting at the wabash river the greatest military victory indians had ever or would ever again achieve in their battles with whites.
efforts to negotiate a settlement failed because of the miamis insistence that no treaty was possible unless it forbade white settlement west of the ohio river.
negotiations did not resume until after general anthony wayne led 4 000 soldiers into the ohio valley in 1794 and defeated the indians in the battle of fallen timbers.
a year later the miami signed the treaty of greenville ceding substantial new lands to the united states which was now operating under the constitution of 1789 in exchange for a formal acknowledgment of their claim to the territory they had managed to retain.
in doing so the united states was affirming that indian lands could be ceded only by the tribes themselves.
that hard won assurance however proved a frail protection against the pressure of white expansion westward in later years.
debts taxes and daniel shays the postwar depression which lasted from 1784 to 1787 in postwar creased the perennial american problem of depression an inadequate money supply a problem that weighed particularly heavily on debtors.
in dealing with this problem congress most clearly demonstrated its weakness.
the confederation itself had an enormous outstanding debt that it had accumulated at home and abroad during the revolutionary war.
it had few means with which to pay it having no power to tax.
it could only make requisitions of the states and it received only about one sixth of the money it requisitioned.
the fragile new nation was faced with the grim prospect of defaulting on its obligations.
this alarming possibility brought to the fore a group of leaders who would play a crucial role in the shaping of the little turtle little turtle led the miami confederacy in its wars with the united states in what is now ohio and indiana in the early 1790s.
for a time he seemed almost invincible but in 1794 little turtle was defeated in the battle of fallen timbers.
in this sketch a rough copy of a painting attributed to gilbert stuart little turtle wears a medal bearing the likeness of george washington awarded him by the united states after the signing of the treaty of greenville.
the granger collection new york 156 chapter 5 daniel shays and job shattuck shays and shattuck were the principal leaders of the 1786 uprising by poor farmers in massachusetts demanding relief from their indebtedness.
shattuck led an insurrection in the east which collapsed when he was captured on november 30.
shays organized the rebellion in the west which continued until the state militia dispersed the rebels in late february 1787.
the following year state authorities pardoned shays even before that the legislature responded to the rebellion by providing some relief to the impoverished farmers.
these drawings are part of a hostile account of the rebellion published in 1787 in a boston almanac.
the granger collection new york republic for several decades.
committed nationalists they sought ways to increase the powers of the central government and to meet its financial obligations.
robert morris the head of the confederations treasury alexander hamilton his young protege james madison of virginia and others called for a continental impost a 5 percent duty on imported goods to be levied by congress and used to fund the debt.
many americans however feared that the impost plan would concentrate too much financial power in the hands of morris and his allies in philadelphia.
congress failed to approve the impost in 1781 and again in 1783.
angry and discouraged the nationalists largely withdrew from any active involvement in the confederation.
political disputes over economic issues the states had war debts too and they generally relied on increased taxation to pay them.
but poor farmers already burdened by debt and now burdened again by new taxes considered such policies unfair even tyrannical.
they demanded that the state governments issue paper currency to increase the money supply and make it easier for them to meet their obligations.
resentment was especially high among farmers in new england who felt that the states were squeezing them to enrich already wealthy bondholders in boston and other towns.
throughout the late 1780s therefore mobs of distressed farmers rioted periodically in various parts of new england.
dissidents in the connecticut valley and the berkshire hills of massachusetts many of them revolutionary veterans ral shayss hed behind daniel shays a former captain rebellion in the continental army.
shays issued a set of demands that included paper money tax relief a moratorium on debts the relocation of the state capital from boston to the interior and the abolition of imprisonment for debt.
during the summer of 1786 the shaysites concentrated on preventing the collection of debts private or public and used force to keep courts from sitting and sheriffs from selling confiscated property.
in boston members of the legislature including samuel adams denounced shays and his men as rebels and traitors.
when winter came the rebels advanced on springfield hoping to seize weapons from the arsenal there.
an army of state militiamen financed by a loan from wealthy merchants set out from boston to confront them.
in january 1787 this army met shayss band and dispersed his ragged troops.
as a military enterprise shayss rebellion was a failure although it produced some concessions to the aggrieved farmers.
shays and his lieutenants at first sentenced to death were later pardoned and massachusetts offered the protesters some tax relief and a postponement of debt payments.
the rebellion had more important consequences for the future of the united states however for it added urgency to a movement already gathering support throughout the new nation the movement to produce a new national constitution.
looking back between a small inconclusive battle on a village green in new england in 1775 and a momentous surrender at yorktown in 1781 the american people fought a great and terrible war against the mightiest military nation in the world.
no one outside america and few within it would have predicted in 1775 that the makeshift armies of the colonies could withstand the armies and navies of the british empire.
but a combination of luck brilliance determination and timely aid from abroad allowed the patriots as they began to call themselves to make full use of the advantages of fighting on their home soil and to frustrate british designs time and again.
the war was not just a historic military event.
it was also a great political one for it propelled the colonies to unite to organize and in july 1776 to declare their independence.
having done so they fought with even greater determination defending now not just a set of principles but an actual fledgling nation.
by the end of the war they had created new governments at both the state and national level and had begun experimenting with new political forms that would distinguish the united states from any previous nation in history.
the war was also important for its effects on american society for the way it shook although never overturned the the american revolution 157 existing social order for the way it caused women to question although seldom openly to challenge their place in society and for the way it spread notions of liberty and freedom throughout a society that in the past had often been rigidly hierarchical and highly deferential.
even african american slaves absorbed some of the ideas of the revolution although it would be many years before they would be in any position to make much use of them.
victory in the american revolution solved many of the problems of the new nation but it also produced others.
what should the united states do about its relations with the indians and with its neighbors to the north and south.
what should it do about the distribution of western lands.
what should it do about slavery.
how should it balance its commitment to liberty with its need for order.
these questions bedeviled the new national government in its first years of existence and ultimately led americans to create a new political order.
people places events american patriots 131 articles of confederation 131 benedict arnold 134 common sense 130 daniel shays 156 george washington 132 hessians 136 john burgoyne 136 john locke 131 joseph and mary brant 138 lord cornwallis 141 loyalists tories 143 nathanael greene 141 olive branch petition 129 prohibitory act 130 saratoga 137 second continental congress 129 thomas jefferson 130 thomas paine 130 valley forge 132 william howe 135 yorktown 142 recall and reflect 1.
what questions did the second continental congress debate and how did it answer them.
what was the impact of thomas paine s common sense on americans view of the war with britain.
how and why were the americans able to prevail in their war for independence.
what were the ideological ideals of the new state and national governments and how did those ideals compare with the realities of american society.
what was the purpose of the articles of confederation.
how did the revolution affect the role of religion and the position of churches in american society.
158 chapter 5 significant events.
1775 second continental congress meets george washington appointed to command american forces battle of bunker hi 1781 cornwallis surrenders at yorktown articles of confederation ratified thomas paine s common j778 sense published batt e of trenton declaration of independence first state constitutions written debated and signed july 2 4 1781 1784 states cede western lands to confederation 1777 articles of confederation adopted washington camps at valley forge for winter burgoyne surrenders to gates at saratoga 1784 1785 first ordinances establishing procedures for settling western lands enacted 1783 treaty of paris with great britain recognizes american independence slavery abolished in massachusetts 1778 french american alliance established war shifts to the south 1787 northwest ordinance enacted 1786 1787 shays s rebellion in massachusetts 1780 cornwallis defeats gates at camden south carolina massachusetts state constitution ratified slavery abolished in pennsylvania patriots defeat tories at king s mountain south carolina 1794 anthony wayne defeats indians in ohio the constitution and the new republic the american star frederick kemmelmeyer painted this tribute to george washington sometime in the 1790s.
it was one of many efforts by artists and others to create an iconography for the new republic.
private collection photo boltin picture library the bridgeman art library looking ahead 1.
what were the most important questions debated at the constitutional convention of 1787 and how were they resolved.
what were the main tenets of the federalist and antifederalist arguments on ratification of the constitution.
3 what were the origins of america s first party system.
setting the stage by the late 1780s most americans had grown deeply dissatisfied with the confederation government with its inability to deal with factions and instability its powerlessness as shown in dealing with shays s rebellion and its failure to handle economic problems effectively.
a decade earlier americans had deliberately avoided creating a strong national government fearing that it would encroach on the sovereignty of the individual states.
now they reconsidered.
in 1787 they produced a new constitution that created a new powerful national government the new government created in 1787 has survived for more than two centuries as one of the stablest and most successful in the world.
many americans have described the constitution s provisions as unassailable fundamental law from which all public policies all political principles all solutions of controversies must spring.
yet the adoption of the constitution did not complete the creation of the republic it only defined the terms in which debate over the future of government would continue.
americans may have agreed that the constitution was a nearly perfect document but they disagreed at times fundamentally on what that document meant.
they still do.
out of such disagreements emerged the first great political battles of the new nation.
framing a new government so unpopular and ineffectual had the confederation congress become by the mid 1780s that it began to lead an almost waiflike existence.
in 1783 its members timidly withdrew from philadelphia to escape from the clamor of army veterans demanding back pay.
they took refuge for a while in princeton a weak new jersey then moved to annapolis and in 1785 settled in new york.
through central delegates were often conspicuous largely by their absence.
only government with great difficulty did congress secure a quorum to ratify the treaty with great britain ending the revolutionary war.
eighteen members representing only eight states voted on the confederation s most important piece of legislation the northwest ordinance.
in the meantime a major public debate was beginning over the future of the confederation.
advocates of centralization weak and unpopular though the confederation was it had for a time satisfied a great many probably a majority of the people.
they believed they had fought the revolutionary war to avert the danger of what they considered remote and tyrannical authority now they wanted to keep political power centered in the states where they could carefully and closely control it.
but during the 1780s some of the wealthiest and most powerful groups in the country began to clamor for a more genuinely national government capable of dealing with the nations problems supporters of particularlv rhe economic problems that most directly afflicted them.
some a strong military men many of them members of the exclusive and hereditary society of national tlle cincinnati formed by revolutionary army officers in 1783 were disgrun government tied at the refusal of congress to fund their pensions.
they began aspiring to in fluence and invigorate the national government some even envisioned a form of military dictatorship and flirted briefly in 1783 in the so called newburgh conspiracy with a direct challenge to congress until george washington intervened and blocked the potential rebellion.
american manufacturers the artisans and mechanics of the nations cities and towns wanted to replace the various state tariffs with a uniformly high national duty merchants and shippers wanted to replace the thirteen different and largely ineffective state commercial policies with a single national one.
land speculators wanted the indian menace finally removed from their western tracts.
people who were owed money wanted to stop the states from issuing paper money which would lower the value of what they received in payment.
investors in confederation securities wanted the government to fund the debt and thus enhance the value of their securities.
large property owners looked for protection from the threat of mobs a threat 160.
the constitution and the new republic 161 george washington at mount vernon washington was in his first term as president in 1790 when an anonymous folk artist painted this view of his home at mount vernon virginia.
washington appears in uniform along with members of his family on the lawn.
after he retired from office in 1797 washington returned happily to his plantation and spent the two years before his death in 1799 amusing myself in agricultural and rural pursuits he also played host to an endless stream of visitors from throughout the country and europe.
courtesy national gallery of art washington that seemed particularly menacing in light of such episodes as shayss rebellion.
this fear of disorder and violence expressed a tension between the resolute defense of individual rights which was a core principle of the revolution and found reflection in the bill of rights p 168 and the public concern for safety and security which the occasional chaos of the confederation period had reinforced.
frequent conflicts between liberty and order became and remain a central feature of american democracy.
by 1786 these diverse demands had grown so powerful that the issue was no longer whether the confederation should be changed but how drastic the changes should be.
even the defenders of the existing system reluctantly came to agree that the government needed strengthening at its weakest point its lack of power to tax.
the most resourceful of the reformers was alexander hamilton political genius new york lawyer onetime military aide to general washington and illegitimate son of a scottish alexander merchant in the west indies.
from the be hamilton ginning hamilton had been unhappy with the articles of confederation and the weak central government they had created.
he now called for a national convention to overhaul the entire document.
he found an important ally in james madison of virginia who persuaded the virginia legislature to convene an interstate conference on commercial questions.
only five states sent delegates to the meeting held in annapolis maryland in 1786 but the delegates approved a proposal drafted by hamilton who was representing new york recommending that congress call a convention of special delegates from all the states to gather in philadelphia the next year and consider ways to render the constitution of the federal government adequate to the exigencies of the union at that moment in 1786 there seemed little possibility that the philadelphia convention would attract any more interest than the meeting at annapolis had attracted.
only by winning the support of george washington the centralizers believed could they hope to prevail.
but washington at first showed little interest in joining the cause.
then early in 1787 the news of shayss rebellion spread throughout the nation.
thomas jefferson then the american minister in paris was not alarmed.
t hold he confided in a letter to james madison that a little rebellion now and then is a good thing and as necessary in the political world as storms in the physical but washington took the news less calmly.
in may he left his home at mount vernon in virginia for the constitutional convention in philadelphia.
his support gave the meeting immediate credibility.
136 chapter 6 compromise the delegates bickered for weeks.
by the end of june with both temperature and tempers rising the convention seemed in danger of collapsing.
finally on july 2 the convention created a grand committee comprised of one delegate from each state which produced the great compromise a proposal that became the basis of the great compromise it called for a two house legislature.
in the lower house the states would be represented on the basis of population each slave would be counted as three fifths of a free person in determining the basis for both representation and direct taxation.
in the upper house the states would be represented equally with two members apiece.
on july 16 1787 the convention voted to accept the compromise.
in the next few weeks the convention agreed to another important compromise.
to placate southern delegates who feared the new government would interfere with slavery the convention agreed to bar the new government from stopping the slave trade for twenty years.
some significant issues remained unaddressed.
the constitution provided no definition of citizenship.
nor did it resolve the status of native american tribes.
most important to unresolved issues many americans was the absence of a list of individual rights which would restrain the powers of the national government.
madison opposed the idea arguing that specifying rights that were reserved to the people would in effect limit those rights.
others however feared that without such protections the national government might abuse its new authority.
the constitution of 1787 many people contributed to the creation of the american constitution but the most important person in the process was james madison.
madison had devised the virginia plan and he did most of the drafting of the constitution itself.
madisons most important achievement however was in helping resolve two important philosophical questions the the question of sovereignty question of sovereignty and the question of limiting power.
for historians evolving views on the constitutions purpose see debating the past the meaning of the constitution how could a national government exercise sovereignty concurrently with state governments.
where did ultimate sovereignty lie.
the answer madison and his contemporaries decided was that all power at all levels of government flowed ultimately from the people.
thus neither the federal government nor the state governments were truly sovereign.
all of them derived their authority from below.
the resolution of the problem of sovereignty made possible one of the distinctive features of the constitution its federalism or division of powers between the national and state governments.
the constitution and the government it created were to be the supreme law of the land.
at the same time however the constitution left important powers in the hands of the states.
in addition to solving the question of sovereignty the constitution produced a distinctive solution to the problem of concentrated authority.
drawing from the ideas of the french philosopher baron de montesquieu most americans had long believed that the best way to avoid tyranny was to keep government close to the people.
a large nation would breed corruption and despotism because distant rulers could not be controlled by the people.
madison however helped break the grip of these assumptions by arguing that a large republic would be less likely to produce tyranny because no single group would ever be able to dominate it.
the idea of many centers of power checking one another and preventing any single despotic authority from emerging also helped shape the the constitution and the new republic 137 internal structure of the federal government.
the constitutions most distinctive feature was its separation of powers within the government managed by a system of checks and balances among the legislative executive and judicial branches.
the forces within the government would constantly compete with one another.
congress would have two chambers each checking the other since both would have to agree before any law could be passed.
the president would have the power to veto acts of congress.
the federal courts would be protected from both the executive and the legislature because judges would serve for life.
the federal structure of the government was designed to protect the united states from the kind of despotism that americans believed had emerged in england.
but it was also designed to protect the nation from another kind of despotism the tyranny of the people.
shayss rebellion most of the founders believed had been only one example of what could happen if a nation did not defend itself against the unchecked exercise of popular will.
thus in the new government only the members checks on exercise of popular will of the house of representatives would be elected directly by the people.
senators would be chosen by state legislators.
the president would be chosen by an electoral college.
federal judges would be appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate.
on september 17 1787 thirty nine delegates signed the constitution.
the constitution of 1787 was a document that established a democratic republic for white people mostly white men.
native americans and african americans the two largest population groups sharing the lands of the united states with anglo americans enjoyed virtually none of the rights and privileges offered to the white population.
limited democracy native americans had at least the semblance of a legal status within the nation through treaties that assured them lands that would be theirs forever.
but most of these treaties did not survive for long and native groups found themselves driven farther and farther west without very much of the protection that the government had promised them.
among the white leaders of the united states there were eminent figures who believed native americans could in fact join the republic as citizens.
thomas jefferson was among them believing that they could be taught the ways of civilization jefferson sought to teach the native americans to live as white americans did.
efforts to teach them anglo farming methods were based on sedentary farms that relied on men doing the farming and women caring for the home.
native americans had no interest in such ways and preferred to retain their own traditional cultures.
their repudiation of white civilization contributed to the erosion of support among white americans.
they were not granted citizenship of the united states until the 1920s.
far more removed from the guarantees of the constitution were enslaved african americans who were given virtually none of the rights and protections that the new government provided to white people.
they were not one southern official noted constituent members of our society the french canadian writer hector st john de crvecoeur who after the revolution settled in the united states wrote a famous book in 1782 titled letters from an american farmer.
in it he posed what became a famous question what then is the american this new man.
crvecoeur answered his own question by noting that individuals of all nations would become melted into a common citizenry.
but he saw no room for african americans in the new community.
indeed among the first laws passed by the new united states under the constitution was the naturalization act of 1790 which helped legalize the stream of immigrants coming into the country and allowed them to become citizens.
but it defined citizenry as a status available only to white people.
even free black people were barred from inclusion.
debating the past the meaning of the constitution the constitution of the united states inspired debate from the moment it was drafted.
some argue that the constitution is a flexible document intended to evolve in response to societys evolution.
others counter that it has a fixed meaning rooted in the original intent of the framers and that to move beyond that is to deny its value.
historians too disagree about why the constitution was written and what it meant.
to some scholars the creation of the federal system was an effort to preserve the ideals of the revolution and to create a strong national government capable of exercising real authority.
to others the constitution was an effort to protect the economic interests of existing elites even at the cost of betraying the principles of the revolution.
and to still others the constitution was designed to protect individual freedom and to limit the power of the federal government.
the first influential exponent of the heroic view of the constitution as the culmination of the revolution was john fiske whose book the critical period of american history 1888 painted a grim picture of political life under the articles of confederation.
many problems including economic difficulties the weakness and ineptitude of the national government threats from abroad interstate jealousies and widespread lawlessness beset the new nation.
fiske argued that only the timely adoption of the constitution saved the young republic from disaster.
in an economic interpretation of the constitution of the united states 1913 charles a.
beard presented a powerful challenge to fiskes view.
according to beard the 1780s had been a critical period primarily for conservative business interests who feared 138 that the decentralized political structure of the republic imperiled their financial position.
such men he claimed wanted a government able to promote industry and trade protect private property and perhaps most of all make good the public debt much of which was owed to them.
the constitution was beard claimed an economic document drawn with superb skill by men whose property interests were immediately at stake and who won its ratification over the opposition of a majority of the people.
a series of powerful challenges to beards thesis emerged in the 1950s.
the constitution many scholars now began to argue was not an effort to preserve property but an enlightened effort to ensure stability and order.
robert e brown for example argued in 1956 that absolutely no correlation could be shown between the wealth of the delegates to the constitutional convention and their position on the constitution.
examining the debate between the federalists and the antifederalists forrest mcdonald in we the people 1958 also concluded that there was no consistent relationship between wealth and property and support for the constitution.
instead opinion on the new system was far more likely to reflect local and regional interests.
these challenges greatly weakened beards argument few historians any longer accept his thesis without reservation.
in the 1960s scholars began again to revive an economic interpretation of the constitution but one that differed from beards and nevertheless emphasized social and economic factors as motives for supporting the federal system.
jackson turner main argued in the anti federalists 1961 that supporters of the constitution were national archives and records administration cosmopolitan commercialists eager to advance the economic development of the nation the antifederalists by contrast were agrarian localists fearful of centralization.
gordon wood in the creation of the american republic 1969 suggested that the debate over the state constitutions in the 1770s and 1780s reflected profound social divisions and that those same divisions helped shape the argument over the federal constitution.
the federalists wood suggested were largely traditional aristocrats who had become deeply concerned by the instability of life under the articles of confederation and were particularly alarmed by the decline in popular deference toward social elites.
the creation of the constitution was part of a larger search to create a legitimate political leadership based on the existing social hierarchy it reflected the efforts of elites to contain what they considered the excesses of democracy.
more recently historians have continued to examine the question of intent did the framers intend a strong centralized political system or did they intend to create a decentralized system with a heavy emphasis on individual rights.
the answer according to jack rakove in original meanings 1996 and revolutionaries 2010 is both and many other things as well.
the constitution he argues was the result of a long and vigorous debate through which the views of many different groups found their way into the document.
james madison generally known as the father of the constitution was a strong nationalist as was alexander hamilton.
they believed that only a powerful central government could preserve stability in a large nation and they saw the constitution as a way to protect order and property and defend the nation against the dangers of too much liberty.
but if madison and hamilton feared too much liberty they also feared too little.
and that made them receptive to the demands of the antifederalists for protections of individual rights which culminated in the bill of rights.
the framers differed as well in their views of the proper relationship between the federal government and the state governments.
madison favored unquestioned federal supremacy while many others who wanted to preserve the rights of the states saw in the federal system and in its division of sovereignty among different levels and branches of government a guarantee against too much national power.
the constitution is not rakove argues infinitely malleable but neither does it have a fixed meaning that can be an inflexible guide to how we interpret it today.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
is the constitution a conservative liberal or radical document.
did the framers consider the constitution something finished with the exception of constitutional amendments or did they consider it a document that would evolve in response to changes in society over time.
which parts of the constitution suggest that the framers intent was to create a strong centralized political system.
which parts suggest that the framers intent was to create a decentralized system with heavy emphasis on individual rights.
139 140 chapter 6 jefferson who had briefly tried without result to give indians a legal status within the new nation had no such aspirations for african americans.
he was an uneasy defender of slavery worrying about excluding a whole race of men from the natural rights that jefferson himself had done much to promote.
but he could never accept the idea that black men and women could attain the level of knowledge and intelligence of white people.
jeffersons long romantic relationship with a black woman sally hemmings did nothing to change his mind.
hemmings was a light skinned woman who was a slave on jeffersons plantation in virginia.
he lived with her after the death of his wife and fathered several of the hemmings family her children.
but his intimate relationship with the hemmings family did not ultimately change his position on slavery.
unlike george washington who freed his slaves after his death jefferson deeply in debt required his heirs to sell his slaves after he died after liberating the hemmings family.
not until the end of the civil war were black men and women eligible to live as citizens in the united states and even then with only partial rights until a century later.
for almost a hundred years the united states constitution was a document that protected white people only.
adoption and adaptation the delegates at philadelphia had greatly exceeded their instructions from congress and the states.
instead of making simple revisions in the articles of confederation they had produced a plan for a completely different form of government.
they feared that the constitution would not be ratified under the rules of the articles of confederation which required unanimous approval by the state legislatures.
so the convention changed the rules proposing that the new government would come into being when nine of the thirteen states ratified the constitution and recommending that state conventions not state legislatures be called to ratify it.
federalists and antifederalists the congress in new york accepted the conventions work and submitted it to the states for approval.
all the state legislatures except rhode island elected delegates to ratifying conventions most of which began meeting in early 1788.
even before the ratifying conventions convened however a great national debate on the new constitution had begun.
supporters of the constitution had a number of advantages.
better organized than their opponents they seized an appealing label for themselves federalists a term that opponents of centralization had once used to describe themselves thus implying that they were less committed to a nationalist government than in fact they were.
in addition the federalists had the support of not only the two most eminent men in america franklin and washington but also the ablest political philosophers of their time alexander hamilton james madison and john jay.
under the joint pseudonym publius these three men wrote a series of essays widely published in newspapers throughout the nation explaining the meaning and virtues of the constitution.
the essays were later gathered together and the federalist papers published as a book known today as the federalist papers.
the federalists called their critics antifederalists suggesting that their rivals had the antifederalists nothing to offer except opposition.
but the antifederalists too led by such distinguished revolutionary leaders as patrick henry and samuel adams had serious and intelligent arguments.
they were they believed the defenders of the true principles the constitution and the new republic 141 of the revolution.
they believed that the constitution would increase taxes weaken the states wield dictatorial powers favor the well born over the common people and abolish individual liberty.
but their biggest complaint was that the constitution lacked a bill of rights.
only by enumerating the natural rights of the people they argued could there be any certainty that those rights would be protected.
despite the efforts of the antifederalists ratification proceeded quickly during the winter of 1787 1788.
the delaware convention the first to act ratified the constitution unanimously as did the new jersey and georgia conventions.
and in june 1788 ratification of the constitution new hampshire the critical ninth state ratified the document.
it was now theoretically p ossible for the constitution to go into effect.
but a new government could not hope to succeed without virginia and new york the largest states whose conventions remained closely divided.
by the end of june first virginia and then new york consented to the constitution by narrow margins on the assumption that a bill of rights would be added in the form of amendments to the constitution.
north carolinas convention adjourned without taking action waiting to see what happened to the amendments.
rhode island controlled by staunch opponents of centralized government did not even consider ratification.
completing the structure the first elections under the constitution were held in the early months of 1789.
there was never any doubt about who would be the first president.
george washington had presided at the constitutional convention and many who had favored ratification did so only because they expected him to preside over the new government as well.
washington received the votes of all the presidential electors.
john adams a leading federalist became vice president.
after a journey from his estate at mount vernon virginia marked by elaborate celebrations along the way washington was inaugurated in new york on april 30 1789.
washington was in his first term as president in 1790 when an anonymous folk artist painted this view of his home at mount vernon virginia.
washington appears in uniform along with members of his family on the lawn.
after he retired from office in 1797 washington returned happily to his plantation and spent the two years before his death in 1799 amusing myself in agricultural and rural pursuits he also played host to an endless stream of visitors from throughout the country and europe.
courtesy national gallery of art washington d c george washington at mount vernon 142 chapter 6 the first congress served in many ways as a continuation of the constitutional convention.
its most important task was drafting a bill of rights.
by early 1789 even madison had come to agree that some sort of bill of rights would be essential to legitimize the new government.
on september 25 1789 congress approved twelve amendments ten of which were ratified by the states by the end of 1791.
these first ten amendments to the the bill of rights constitution comprise what we know as the bill of rights.
nine of them placed limitations on the new government by forbidding it to infringe on certain fundamental rights freedom of religion speech and the press immunity from arbitrary arrest trial by jury and others.
the bill of rights had very specific terms provisions for the judiciary branch were more vague.
the constitution said only the judicial power of the united states shall be vested in one supreme court and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish it was left to congress to determine the number of supreme court judges to be appointed and the kinds of lower courts to be organized.
in the judiciary act of 1789 congress provided for a supreme court of six members and a system of lower district courts and courts of appeal.
it also gave the supreme court the power to make the final decision in cases involving the constitutionality of state laws.
the constitution also said little about the organization of the executive branch.
it referred indirectly to executive departments but did not specify which ones or how many there should be.
the first congress created three such departments state treasury and war and also established the offices of the attorney general and postmaster general.
to organizing the executive branch the office of secretary of the treasury washington appointed alexander hamilton of new york.
for secretary of war he chose a massachusetts federalist general henry knox.
he named edmund randolph of virginia as attorney general and chose another virginian thomas jefferson for secretary of state.
federalists and republicans the framers of the constitution had dealt with many controversies by papering them over with a series of vague compromises as a result the disagreements survived to plague the new government.
at the heart of the controversies of the 1790s was the same basic difference in philosophy that had fueled the debate over the constitution.
on one side stood a powerful group who envisioned america as a genuine nation state with centralized authority and a complex commercial economy.
on the other side stood another group whose members envisioned a more modest national government.
rather than aspire to be a highly commercial or urban nation it should remain predominantly rural and agrarian.
the centralizers became known as the federalists and gravitated to the leadership of alexander hamilton.
their opponents acquired the name republicans and admired the views of thomas jefferson as well as james madison who grew skeptical of federalist rule.
hamilton and the federalists for twelve years the federalists retained firm control of the new government.
that was in part because george washington had always envisioned a strong national government.
but the president washington believed should stand above political controversies and so he avoided personal involvement in the deliberations of congress.
as a result the the constitution and the new republic 143 dominant figure in his administration became alexander hamilton.
of all the national leaders of his time hamilton was one of the most aristocratic in his political philosophy he believed that a stable and effective government required an elite ruling class.
thus the new government needed the support of the wealthy and powerful and to get that it needed to give elites a stake in its success.
hamilton proposed hamiltons funded debt proposal therefore that the existing public debt be funded that the various certificates of indebtedness that the old congress had issued during and after the revolution many of them now in the possession of wealthy speculators be called in and exchanged for interestbearing bonds.
he also recommended that the states revolutionary debts be assumed taken over to cause state bondholders also to look to the central government for eventual payment.
hamilton wanted to create a permanent national debt with new bonds being issued as old ones were paid off.
he hoped to motivate the wealthy classes who were the most likely to lend money to the government to support perpetually the survival of that centralized state.
hamilton also wanted to create a national bank.
it would provide loans and currency to businesses give the government a safe place for the deposit of federal funds facilitate the collection of taxes and the disbursement of the governments expenditures and provide a stable center to the nations small and feeble banking system.
the bank would be chartered by the federal government but much of its capital would come from private investors.
the funding and assumption of debts would require new sources of revenue.
hamilton recommended two kinds of taxes to complement the receipts anticipated from the sales of public land.
one was an excise tax on alcoholic beverages a tax that would be most burdensome to the whiskey distillers of the backcountry small farmers who converted part of their corn and rye crops into whiskey.
the other was a tariff on imports which hamilton saw not only as a way to raise money but as a way to protect domestic industries from foreign competition.
in his famous report on manufactures of report on manufactures 1791 he outlined a plan for stimulating the growth of industry and spoke glowingly of the advantages to society of a healthy manufacturing sector.
the federalists in short offered more than a vision of a stable new government.
they offered a vision of the sort of nation america should become a nation with a wealthy enlightened ruling class a vigorous independent commercial economy and a thriving manufacturing sector.
enacting the federalist program few members of congress objected to hamiltons plan for funding the national debt but many did oppose his proposal to exchange new bonds for old certificates of indebtedness on a dollar for dollar basis.
many of the original holders had been forced to sell during the hard times of the 1780s to speculators who had bought them at a fraction of their face value.
james madison now a representative from virginia argued for a plan by which the new bonds would be divided between the original purchasers and the speculators.
but hamiltons allies insisted that the honor of the government required a literal fulfillment of its earlier promises to pay whoever held the bonds.
congress finally passed the funding bill hamilton wanted.
hamiltons proposal that the federal government assume the state debts encountered greater difficulty.
its opponents argued that if the federal government took over the state debts the states with small debts would have to pay taxes to service the states with large ones.
144 chapter 6 massachusetts for example owed much more money than did virginia.
only by striking a bargain with the virginians were hamilton and his supporters able to win passage of the assumption bill.
the deal involved the location of the national capital which the virginians wanted near them in the south.
hamilton and jefferson met and agreed to exchange northern bargaining and the national capital support for placing the capital in the south for virginias votes for the assumption bill.
the bargain called for the construction of a new capital city on the banks of the potomac river which divided maryland and virginia on land to be selected by george washington.
hamiltons bank bill produced the most heated debates.
madison jefferson randolph and others argued that because the constitution made no provision for a national bank congress had no authority to create one.
but congress agreed to hamiltons bill despite these objections and washington signed it.
the bank of the united states began operations in 1791.
hamilton also had his way with the excise tax although protests from farmers later forced revisions to reduce the burden on the smaller distillers.
he failed to win passage of a tariff as highly protective as he had hoped for but the tariff law of 1792 did raise the rates somewhat.
once enacted hamiltons program won the support of manufacturers creditors and other influential segments of the population.
but others found it less appealing.
small farmers complained that they were being taxed excessively.
they and others began to argue that the federalist program served the interests of a small number of wealthy elites rather than the people at large.
from these sentiments an organized political opposition arose.
the republican opposition the constitution made no reference to political parties.
most of the framers believed that organized parties were dangerous factions to be avoided.
disagreement was inevitable on particular issues but they believed that such disagreements need not and should not lead to the formation of permanent factions.
yet not many years had passed after the ratification of the constitution before madison and others became convinced that hamilton and his followers had become dangerous and self interested.
the federalists had used the powers of their offices to reward their supporters and win additional allies.
they were doing many of the same things their opponents believed that the corrupt british governments of the early eighteenth century had done.
because the federalists appeared to their critics to be creating such a menacing and tyrannical structure of power there was no alternative but to organize a vigorous opposition.
the result was the emergence of an alternative political organization whose members called themselves republicans these first republicans are not institutionally related to the modern republican party which was created in the 1850s.
by the late 1790s the formation of the first party system republicans were going to even greater lengths than the federalists to create vehicles of partisan influence.
in every state they formed committees societies and caucuses republican groups banded together to influence state and local elections.
neither side was willing to admit that it was acting as a party nor would either concede the right of the other to exist.
this institutionalized factionalism is known to historians as the first party system from the beginning the preeminent figures among the republicans were thomas jefferson and james madison.
the most prominent spokesman for the cause jefferson the constitution and the new republic 145 the jeffersonian idyll american artists in the early nineteenth century were drawn to tranquil rural scenes symbolic of the jeffersonian vision of a nation of small independent farmers.
by 1822 when francis alexander painted this depiction of ralph wheelocks farm the simple agrarian republic was already being transformed by rapid economic growth.
courtesy national gallery of art washington d c promoted a vision of an agrarian republic in which most citizens would farm their own land.
jefferson did not scorn commercial or industrial activity.
but he believed that the nation should be wary of too much urbanization and industrialization.
although both parties had supporters across the country and among all classes there were regional and economic differences.
the federalists regional and economic differences were most numerous in the commercial centers of the northeast and in such southern seaports as charleston the republicans were stronger in the rural areas of the south and the west.
the difference in their philosophies was visible in among other things their reactions to the progress of the french revolution.
as that revolution grew increasingly radical in the 1790s the federalists expressed horror.
but the republicans applauded the democratic antiaristocratic spirit they believed the french revolution embodied.
when the time came for the nations second presidential election in 1792 both jefferson and hamilton urged washington to run for a second term.
the president reluctantly agreed.
but while washington had the respect of both factions he was in reality more in sympathy with the federalists than with the republicans.
establishing national sovereignty the federalists consolidated their position by acting effectively in managing the western territories and diplomacy.
securing the west despite the northwest ordinance the old congress had largely failed to tie the outlying western areas of the country firmly to the national government.
farmers in western massachusetts had rebelled settlers in vermont kentucky and tennessee had flirted with seceding from the union.
and at first the new government under the constitution faced similar problems.
co ns ider t he s o urc e washingtons farewell address american daily advertiser september 19 1796 in this open letter to the american people president washington defended the young constitution and warned against disunity among the nations various states and politi cal factions.
here he cautions citizens about another threat to the republic entangling engagements abroad.
observe good faith and justice toward all nations.
cultivate peace and harmony with all.
religion and morality enjoin this conduct.
and can it be that good policy does not equally enjoin it.
it will be worthy of a free enlightened and at no distant period a great nation to give to mankind the magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an exalted justice and benevolence.
in the execution of such a plan nothing is more essential than that permanent inveterate antipathies against particular nations and passionate attachments for others should be excluded and that in place of them just and amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated.
the nation which indulges toward another an habitual hatred or an habitual fondness is in some degree a slave.
it is a slave to its animosity or to its affection either of which is sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and its interest.
the nation prompted by ill will and resentment sometimes impels to war the government contrary to the best calculations of policy.
the government sometimes participates in the national propensity and adopts through passion what reason would reject.
so likewise a passionate attachment of one nation for another produces a variety of evils.
sympathy for the favorite nation facilitating the illusion of an imaginary common interest in cases where no real common interest exists and infusing into one the enmities of the other betrays the former 146 into a participation in the quarrels and wars of the latter without adequate inducement or justification.
as avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways such attachments are particularly alarming to the truly enlightened and independent patriot.
how many opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic factions to practice the arts of seduction to mislead public opinion to influence or awe the public councils.
such an attachment of a small or weak toward a great and powerful nation dooms the former to be the satellite of the latter.
against the insidious wiles of foreign influence i conjure you to believe me fellow citizens the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake since history and experience prove that foreign influence is one of the most baneful foes of republican government.
the great rule of conduct for us in r egard to foreign nations is in extending our commercial relation to have with them as little political connection as possible.
so far as we have already formed engagements let them be fulfilled with perfect good faith.
here let us stop.
europe has a set of primary interests which to us have no or a very remote relation.
hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies the causes of which are essentially foreign to our concerns.
hence therefore it must be unwise in us to implicate ourselves by artificial ties in the ordinary vicissitudes of her politics or the ordinary combinations and collisions of her friendships or enmities.
our detached and distant situation invites and enables us to pursue a different course.
if we remain one people under an efficient government the period is not far off when we may defy material injury from external annoyance when we may take such an attitude as will cause the neutrality we may at any time resolve upon to be scrupulously respected when belligerent nations under the impossibility of making acquisitions upon us will not lightly hazard giving us provocation when we may choose peace or war as our interest guided by justice shall counsel.
why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation.
why quit our own to stand upon foreign ground.
why by interweaving our destiny with that of any part of europe entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of european ambition rivalship interest humor or caprice.
it is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world so far i mean as we are now at liberty to do it.
for let me not be understood as capable of patronizing infidelity to existing engagements.
i hold the maxim of less applicable to public than to private affairs that honesty is always the best policy.
i repeat therefore let those engagements be observed in their genuine sense.
but in my opinion it is unnecessary and would be unwise to extend them.
taking care always to keep ourselves by suitable establishments on a respectable defensive posture we may safely trust to temporary alliances for extraordinary emergencies.
harmony liberal intercourse with all nations are recommended by policy humanity and interest.
but even our commercial policy should hold an equal and impartial hand neither seeking nor granting exclusive favors or preferences.
constantly keeping in view that it is folly in one n ation to look for disinterested favors from another that it must pay with a portion of its independence for whatever it may accept under that character that by such acceptance it may place itself in the c ondition of having given equivalents for nominal favors and yet of being reproached with ingratitude for not giving more.
there can be no greater error than to expect or calculate upon real favors from nation to nation.
it is an illusion which experience must cure which a just pride ought to discard.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
what advice did george washington offer on foreign policy.
did washington advocate the complete isolation of the united states from europe.
how did washington characterize europe.
what circumstances of the 1790s may have inspired this assessment.
in 1794 farmers in western pennsylvania raised a major challenge to federal authority when they refused to pay the new whiskey excise tax and began terrorizing tax collectors in the region.
but the federal government did not leave settlement of the so called whiskey rebellion to the authorities of pennsylvania.
at hamiltons urging whiskey rebellion washington called out the militias of three states and assembled an army of nearly 15 000 and he personally led the troops into pennsylvania.
at the approach of the militiamen the rebellion quickly collapsed.
the federal government won the allegiance of the whiskey rebels through intimidation.
it secured the loyalties of other western people by accepting new states as members of the union.
the last two of the original thirteen colonies joined the union once the bill of rights had been appended to the constitution north carolina in 1789 and rhode 147 148 chapter 6 island in 1790.
vermont became the fourteenth state in 1791 after new york and new hampshire agreed to give up their rights to it.
next came kentucky in 1792 when virginia relinquished its claim to that region.
after north carolina ceded its western lands to the union tennessee became a state in 1796.
the new government faced a greater challenge in more distant areas of the northwest and the southwest.
the ordinances of 1784 1787 establishing the terms of white settlement in the west had produced a series of border conflicts with native tribes.
the new government inherited these tensions which continued with few interruptions for nearly a decade.
such clashes revealed another issue the constitution had done little to resolve the place of native americans within the new federal structure.
the constitution gave congress power to regulate commerce.
with the indian tribes and it bound the new government to respect treaties negotiated by the confederation most of which had been with the tribes.
but none of this did very much to clarify the precise legal standing of indians within the united states.
the tribes received no direct representation in the native americans ambiguous status new government.
above all the constitution did not address the major issue of land.
native americans lived within the boundaries of the united states yet they claimed and the white government at times agreed that they had some measure of sovereignty over their own land.
but neither the constitution nor common law offered any clear guide to the rights of a nation within a nation or to the precise nature of tribal sovereignty.
maintaining neutrality a crisis in anglo american relations emerged in 1793 when the revolutionary french government went to war with great britain.
both the president and congress took steps to establish american neutrality in the conflict but that neutrality was severely tested.
early in 1794 the royal navy began seizing hundreds of american ships engaged in trade in the french west indies.
hamilton was deeply concerned.
war would mean an end to imports from england and most of the revenue for maintaining his financial system came from duties on those imports.
hamilton and the federalists did not trust the state department now in the hands of the ardently pro french edmund randolph to find a solution to the crisis.
so they persuaded washington to name a special commissioner the chief justice of the supreme court john jay to go to england and negotiate a solution.
jay was instructed to secure compensation for the recent british assaults on american shipping to demand withdrawal of british forces from their posts on the frontier of the united states and to negotiate a commercial treaty with britain.
the long and complex treaty jay negotiated in 1794 failed to achieve all these goals.
but it settled the conflict with britain avoiding a likely war.
it provided for undisputed american sovereignty over the entire northwest and produced a reasonably satisfactory jays treaty commercial relationship.
nevertheless when the terms became known in america criticism was intense.
opponents of the treaty went to great lengths to defeat it but in the end the senate ratified what was by then known as jays treaty.
jays treaty paved the way for a settlement of important american disputes with spain.
pinckneys treaty under pinckneys treaty negotiated by thomas pinckney and signed in 1795 spain recognized the right of americans to navigate the mississippi to its mouth and to deposit goods at new orleans for reloading on oceangoing ships agreed to fix the northern boundary of florida along the 31st parallel and commanded its authorities to the constitution and the new republic 149 prevent native americans in florida from launching raids north across that border.
for president washingtons views on such matters of foreign policy see consider the source washingtons farewell address the downfall of the federalists since almost everyone in the 1790s agreed that there was no place in a stable republic for organized parties the emergence of the republicans as a powerful and apparently permanent opposition seemed to the federalists a grave threat to national stability.
and so when international perils confronted the government in the 1790s hamilton and his followers moved forcefully against what they considered illegitimate dissent.
the election of 1796 george washington refused to run for a third term as president in 1796.
jefferson was the obvious presidential candidate of the republicans that year but the federalists faced a more difficult choice.
hamilton had created too many enemies to be a credible candidate.
vice president john adams who was not directly associated with any of the controversial federalist achievements received the partys nomination for president at a caucus of the federalists in congress.
the federalists were still clearly the dominant party.
but without washington to mediate they fell victim to fierce factional rivalries.
adams defeated jefferson by john adams elected only three electoral votes and assumed the presidency as head of a divided party facing a powerful opposition.
jefferson became vice president by finishing second.
not until the adoption of the twelfth amendment in 1804 did electors vote separately for president and vice president.
the quasi war with france american relations with great britain and spain improved as a result of jays and pinckneys treaties.
but the nations relations with revolutionary france quickly deteriorated.
french vessels captured american ships on the high seas.
the french government refused to receive charles cotesworth pinckney when he arrived in paris as the new american minister.
in an effort to stabilize relations adams appointed a bipartisan commission to negotiate with france.
when the americans arrived in paris in 1797 three agents of the french foreign minister prince talleyrand demanded a loan for france and a bribe for french officials before any negotiations could begin.
pinckney a member of the commission responded no.
not a sixpence when adams heard of the incident he sent a message to congress urging preparations for war.
before giving the commissioners report to congress he deleted the names of the three french agents and designated them only as messrs x y and z.
when the report was published the xyz affair as it quickly became known provoked the xyz affair widespread popular outrage at frances actions and strong popular support for the federalists response.
for nearly two years 1798 and 1799 the united states found itself engaged in an undeclared quasi war.
adams persuaded congress to cut off all trade with france to abrogate the treaties of 1778 and to authorize american vessels to capture french armed ships on the high seas.
150 chapter 6 in 1798 congress created the department of the navy.
the navy soon won a number of battles and captured a total of eighty five french ships.
the united states also began cooperating closely with the british.
at last the french began trying to conciliate the united states.
adams sent another commission to paris in 1800 and the new french government headed now by first consul napoleon bonaparte agreed to a treaty with the united states that canceled the old agreements of 1778 and established new commercial arrangements.
as a result the war came to a reasonably peaceful end.
repression and protest the conflict with france helped the federalists increase their majorities in congress in 1798.
they now began to consider ways to silence the republican opposition.
the result was some of the most controversial legislation in american history the alien and sedition acts.
the alien act placed new obstacles in the way of foreigners who wished to become the alien and sedition acts american citizens.
the sedition act allowed the government to prosecute those who engaged in sedition against the government.
in theory only libelous or treasonous activities were subject to prosecution but since such activities had no clear definition the law in effect gave the government authority to stifle virtually any opposition.
the republicans interpreted the new laws as part of a federalist campaign to destroy them.
president adams signed the new laws but was cautious in implementing them.
he did not deport any aliens and he prevented the government from launching a broad crusade against the republicans.
but the alien act discouraged immigration and encouraged some foreigners already in the country to leave.
and the administration used the sedition act to arrest and convict ten men most of them republican newspaper editors whose only crime had been criticism of the federalists in government.
republican leaders began to look for ways to reverse the alien and sedition acts.
some looked to the state legislatures for help.
they developed a theory to justify action by the states against the federal government in two sets of resolutions of 1798 1799 one written anonymously by jefferson and adopted by the kentucky legislavirginia and kentucky resolutions ture and the other drafted by madison and approved by the virginia legislature.
the virginia and kentucky resolutions as they were known used the ideas of john locke and the tenth amendment to the constitution to argue that the federal government had been formed by a compact or contract among the states and possessed only certain delegated powers.
whenever a state decided that the central government had exceeded those powers it had the right to nullify the appropriate laws.
the republicans did not win wide support for the nullification idea they did however succeed in elevating their dispute with the federalists to the level of a national crisis.
by the late 1790s the entire nation was deeply and bitterly politicized.
state legislatures at times resembled battlegrounds.
even the united states congress was plagued with violent disagreements.
in one celebrated incident in the chamber of the house of representatives matthew lyon a republican from vermont responded to an insult from roger griswold a federalist from connecticut by spitting in griswolds eye.
griswold attacked lyon with his cane lyon fought back with a pair of fire tongs and soon the two men were wrestling on the floor.
the constitution and the new republic 151 congressional brawlers 1798 this cartoon was inspired by the celebrated fight on the floor of the house of representatives between matthew lyon a republican representative from vermont and roger griswold a federalist from connecticut.
griswold at right attacks lyon with his cane and lyon retaliates with fire tongs.
other members of congress are portrayed enjoying the battle.
the library of congress the revolution of 1800 these bitter controversies shaped the presidential election of 1800.
the presidential candidates were the same as four years earlier adams for the federalists election of 1800 jefferson for the republicans.
but the campaign of 1800 was very different from the one preceding it.
adams and jefferson themselves displayed reasonable dignity but their supporters showed no such restraint.
the federalists accused jefferson of being a dangerous radical whose followers were wild men who if they should come to power would bring on a reign of terror comparable to that of the french revolution.
the republicans portrayed adams as a tyrant conspiring to become king and they accused the federalists of plotting to impose slavery on the people.
the election was close and the crucial c ontest was in new york.
there aaron burr mobilized an organization of revolutionary war veterans the tammany society to serve as a republican political machine.
through tammanys efforts the party carried the city by a large majority and with it the state.
jefferson was apparently elected.
but an unexpected complication soon jeopardized the republican victory.
the constitution called for each elector to vote by ballot for two persons the expectation was that an elector would cast one vote for his partys presidential candidate and the other for his partys vice presidential candidate.
to avoid a tie the republicans had intended that one elector would refrain from voting for the partys vice presidential candidate aaron burr.
but when the votes were counted jefferson and burr each had 73.
no candidate had a majority and the house of representatives had to choose between the two top candidates jefferson and burr.
each state delegation would cast a single vote.
the new congress elected in 1800 with a republican majority was not to convene until after the inauguration of the president so it was the federalist congress that had to decide the question.
after a long deadlock several leading federalists concluded following 152 chapter 6 hamiltons advice that burr was too unreliable to trust with the presidency.
on the thirtysixth ballot jefferson was elected.
after the election of 1800 the only branch of the federal government left in federalist hands was the judiciary.
the adams administration spent its last months in office taking the judiciary act of 1801 steps to make the partys hold on the courts secure.
with the judiciary act of 1801 the federalists reduced the number of supreme court justiceships by one but greatly increased the number of federal judgeships as a whole.
adams quickly appointed federalists to the newly created positions.
he also appointed a leading federalist john marshall to be chief justice of the supreme court a position marshall held for 34 years.
indeed there were charges that he stayed up until midnight on his last day in office to finish signing the new judges commissions.
these officeholders became known as the midnight appointments even so the republicans viewed their victory as almost complete.
the nation had they believed been saved from tyranny.
the exuberance with which the victors viewed the future and the importance they ascribed to the defeat of the federalists was evident in the phrase jefferson himself later used to describe his election.
he called it the revolution of 1800 conclusion the constitution of 1787 created a federal system of dispersed authority authority divided among national and state governments and among an executive a legislature and a judiciary.
the young nation thus sought to balance its need for an effective central government against its fear of concentrated and despotic power.
the ability of the delegates to the constitutional convention to compromise revealed their yearning for a stable political system.
the same willingness to compromise allowed the greatest challenge to the ideals of the new democracy slavery to survive intact.
the writing and ratifying of the constitution settled some questions about the shape of the new nation.
the first twelve years under the government created by the constitution solved others.
and yet by the year 1800 a basic disagreement about the future of the nation remained unresolved and was creating bitter divisions and conflicts within the political world.
the election of thomas jefferson to the presidency that year opened a new chapter in the nations public history.
it also brought to a close at least temporarily savage political conflicts that had seemed to threaten the nations future.
key terms people places events alexander hamilton 142 alien and sedition acts 150 antifederalists 140 bill of rights 142 checks and balances 137 constitution 140 federalism 136 federalists 140 great compromise 136 james madison 136 jays treaty 148 john adams 141 new jersey plan 135 pinckneys treaty 148 quasi war 149 republicans 144 revolution of 1800 152 separation of powers 137 the federalist papers 140 virginia and kentucky resolutions 150 virginia plan 135 whiskey rebellion 147 xyz affair 149 the constitution and the new republic 153 recall and reflect 1.
how did the constitution of 1787 attempt to resolve the weaknesses of the articles of confederation.
what role did the federalist papers play in the battle over ratification of the constitution.
what were the main tenets of alexander hamiltons financial program.
what diplomatic crises did the united states face in the first decade of its existence and how did the new government respond to these crises.
what was the revolution of 1800 and in what way was it a revolution.
the jeffersonian era the rise of cultural nationalism stirrings of industrialism jefferson the president doubling the national domain expansion and war the war of 1812 looking ahead 1.
how successful was jeffersons effort to create a republican society dominated by sturdy independent farmers.
how did the napoleonic wars affect the united states.
what events and issues led to the war of 1812.
thomas jefferson and his followers assumed control of the national government in 1801 as the champions of a distinctive vision of america.
they favored a society of sturdy independent farmers happily free from the workshops the industrial towns and the urban mobs of europe.
they celebrated localism and republican simplicity.
above all they proposed a federal government of sharply limited power.
almost nothing worked out as they had planned for during their years in power the young republic was developing in ways that made much of their vision obsolete.
the american economy became steadily more diversified and complex making the ideal of a simple agrarian society impossible to maintain.
american cultural life was dominated by a vigorous and ambitious nationalism.
jefferson himself contributed to the changes by exercising strong national authority at times and by arranging the greatest single increase in the size of the united states in its history.
154 the rise of cultural nationalism in many respects american cultural life in the early nineteenth century reflected the republican vision of the nations future.
opportunities for education increased the nations literary and artistic life began to free itself from european influences and american religion began to adjust to the spread of enlightenment rationalism.
in other ways however the new culture was posing a serious challenge to republican ideals.
educational and literary nationalism central to the republican vision of america was the concept of a virtuous and enlightened citizenry.
republicans believed therefore in the creation of a nationwide system of public schools in which all male citizens would receive free education.
such hopes were not fulfilled.
schooling remained primarily the responsibility of private institutions most of which were open only to those who could afford to pay for them.
in the south and in the mid atlantic states most schools were run by religious groups.
in new england private academies were often more secular many of them modeled on those founded by the phillips family at andover massachusetts in 1778 and at exeter new hampshire three years later.
many were frankly aristocratic in outlook.
some educational institutions were open to the poor but not nearly enough to accommodate everyone and the education they offered was usually clearly inferior to that provided for more prosperous students.
private secondary schools such as those in new england generally accepted only male students even many public schools excluded females from the classroom.
yet the late eighteenth and early nineteenth c enturies did see some important advances in education for time line eli whitney invents cotton gin u s capital moves to washington second great awakening begins louisiana purchase marbury v madison marshall named chief justice of supreme court 1804 1806 lewis and clark expedition jefferson reelected embargo madison elected president non intercourse act tecumseh confederacy formed macons bill no.
2 battle of tippecanoe u s declares war on great britain madison reelected hartford convention treaty of ghent battle of new orleans 155 86 chapter 4 the iroquois maintained their autonomy by trading successfully with both the french and the english and astutely played them against each other.
anglo french conflicts as long as peace and stability in the north american interior lasted english and french colonists coexisted without serious difficulty.
but after the glorious revolution in england a complicated series of anglo french wars erupted in europe and continued intermittently for nearly eighty years creating important repercussions in america.
king williams war 1689 1697 produced only a few indecisive clashes between the english and the french in northern new england.
queen annes war which began in 1701 and continued for nearly twelve years generated more substantial conflicts.
the treaty of utrecht which brought the conflict to a close in 1713 transferred substantial territory from the french to the english in north america including acadia nova scotia and newfoundland.
two decades later disputes over british trading rights in the spanish colonies produced a conflict between england and spain that soon grew into a much larger european war.
the english colonists in america were drawn into the struggle which they called king georges war 1744 1748.
new englanders captured the french bastion at louisbourg on cape breton island in nova scotia but the peace treaty that finally ended the conflict forced them to abandon it.
in the aftermath of king georges war relations among the english french and iroquois in north america quickly deteriorated.
the iroquois in what appears to have been a major blunder granted trading concessions in the interior to english merchants for the first time.
the french feared probably correctly that the english were using the concessions as a first step toward expansion into french lands.
they began in 1749 to construct new fortresses in the ohio valley.
the english responded by increasing their military forces and building fortresses of their own.
the balance of power that the iroquois had carefully maintained for so long rapidly disintegrated.
for the next five years tensions between the english and the french increased.
in the summer of 1754 the governor of virginia sent a militia force under the command of an inexperienced young colonel george washington into the ohio valley to challenge fort necessity french expansion.
washington built a crude stockade fort necessity not far from frances fort duquesne on the site of what is now pittsburgh.
after the virginians staged an unsuccessful attack on a french detachment the french countered with an assault on fort necessity trapping washington and his soldiers inside.
after one third of them died in the fighting washington surrendered.
the clash marked the beginning of the french and indian war.
the great war for the empire the french and indian war lasted nearly nine years and it moved through three distinct phases.
the first phase from the fort necessity debacle in 1754 until the expansion of the war to europe in 1756 was primarily a local north american conflict.
the iroquois remained largely passive in the conflict.
but virtually all the other tribes were allied with the french.
they launched a series of raids on western english settlements.
the english colonists fought to defend themselves against those raids.
by late 1755 many english settlers along the frontier had withdrawn to the east of the allegheny mountains to escape the hostilities.
french and indian war the empire in transition 87 the second phase of the struggle began in 1756 when the seven years war began in europe and beyond.
see america in the world the first global war seven years war the fighting now spread to the west indies india and europe itself.
but the principal struggle remained the war in north america where so far england had suffered nothing but frustration and defeat.
beginning in 1757 william pitt the english secretary william pitt of state and future prime minister brought the war fully under british control.
he planned military strategy appointed commanders and issued orders to the colonists.
british commanders began forcibly enlisting colonists into the army a practice known as impressment.
officers also seized supplies from local farmers and tradesmen and compelled colonists to offer shelter to british troops all generally without compensation.
the americans resented these new impositions and firmly resisted them.
by early 1758 the friction between the british authorities and the colonists was threatening to bring the war effort to a halt.
beginning in 1758 pitt initiated the third and final phase of the war by relaxing many of the policies that americans had found obnoxious.
he agreed to reimburse the colonists for all supplies requisitioned by the army.
he returned control over recruitment to the colonial assemblies.
and he dispatched large numbers of additional british troops to america.
these moves turned the tide of battle in englands favor.
the french had always been outnumbered by the british colonists.
after 1756 moreover the french suffered from a series of poor harvests and were unable to sustain their early military successes.
by mid 1758 british regulars and colonial militias were seizing one french stronghold after another.
two brilliant english generals jeffrey amherst and james wolfe captured the fortress at louisbourg in july 1758 a few months later fort duquesne fpo the fortress of louisbourg on cape breton island in nova scotia was one of the principal french outposts in eastern canada during the french and indian war.
it took a british fleet of 157 ships nearly two months to force the french garrison to surrender.
private collection peter newark american pictures bridgeman images the siege of louisbourg 1758 america in the world the first global war the french and indian war in north america was only a small part of a much larger conflict.
known in europe as the seven years war it was one of the longest most widespread and most important wars in modern history.
the war thrust great britain into conflicts across europe and north america.
winston churchill once wrote of it as the first world war in north america the war was a result of tensions along the frontiers of the british empire.
but it arose more broadly from larger conflicts among the great powers in europe.
it began in the 1750s with what historians have called a diplomatic revolution well established alliances between britain and the austro hungarian empire and between france and prussia collapsed replaced by a new set of alliances setting britain and prussia against france and austria.
the instability that these changing alliances produced helped speed the european nations toward war.
the austrian british alliance collapsed because austria suffered a series of significant defeats at the hands of the prussians.
to the british government these failures suggested that the austro hungarian empire was now too weak to help britain balance french power.
as a result england launched a search for new partnerships with the rising powers of northern germany austrias enemies.
in response the austrians sought an alliance with france to help protect them from the power of their former british allies.
one later result of this new alliance was the 1770 marriage of the future french king louis xvi to the austrian princess marie antoinette.
in the aftermath of these realignments austria sought again to defeat the prussian hanover forces in germany.
in the process russia became concerned about the austro hungarian 88 empires possible dominance in central europe and allied itself with the british and the prussians.
these complicated realignments eventually led to the seven years war which soon spread across much of the world.
the war engaged not only most of the great powers in europe from england to russia but also the emerging colonial worlds india west africa the caribbean and the philippines as the powerful british navy worked to strip france and eventually spain of its valuable colonial holdings.
like most modern conflicts the seven years war was at heart a struggle for economic power.
colonial possessions many european nations believed were critical to their future wealth and well worth fighting for.
the wars outcome affected not only the future of america but also the distribution of power throughout much of the world.
it destroyed the french navy and much of the french empire and it elevated great britain to undisputed preeminence among the colonizing powers especially when at the conclusion of the war india and all of eastern north america fell firmly under english control.
the war also reorganized the balance of power in europe with britain now preeminent among the great powers and prussia later to become the core of modern germany rapidly rising in wealth and military power.
the seven years war was not only one of the first great colonial wars but also one of the last great wars of religion and it extended the dominance of protestantism in europe.
in what is now canada the war replaced french with british rule and thus replaced catholic with protestant dominance.
the vatican no longer a military power itself had relied on the great catholic empires spain france and austriahungary as bulwarks of its power and influence.
the shift of power t oward protestant this etching shows a fireworks display in paris on february 10 1763 to mark the end of the seven years war.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
celebrating the peace of paris governments in europe and north america weakened the catholic church and reduced its geopolitical influence.
the conclusion of the seven years war strengthened britain and germany and weakened france.
but it did not provide any lasting solution to the rivalries among the great colonial powers.
in north america a dozen years after the end of the conflict the american revolution the origins of which were in many ways a direct result of the seven years war stripped the british empire of one of its most important and valuable colonial appendages.
by the time the american revolution came to an end the french revolution had sparked another lengthy period of war culminating in the napoleonic wars of the early nineteenth century which once again redrew the map of europe and for a while the world.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
how did the seven years war change the balance of power among the nations of europe.
who gained and who lost in the war.
why is the seven years war described as one of the most important wars in modern history.
fell without a fight.
the next year at the end of a siege of quebec the army of general wolfe struggled up a hidden ravine under cover of darkness surprised the larger forces of the marquis de montcalm and defeated them in a battle in which both commanders were killed.
the dramatic fall of quebec on september 13 1759 marked the beginning of the end of the american phase of the war.
a year later in september 1760 the french army formally surrendered to amherst in montreal.
peace finally came in 1763 with the 89 90 chapter 4 peace of paris by which the french ceded to great britain some of their west indian islands most of their colonies in india and canada and all other french territory in north america east of the mississippi.
the french then ceded new orleans and their claims west of the mississippi to spain surrendering all title to the mainland of north america.
the french and indian war greatly expanded englands territorial claims in the new world.
at the same time the cost of the war greatly enlarged britains debt and substantially increased effects of the conflict british resentment of the americans.
english leaders were contemptuous of the colonists for what they considered american military ineptitude during the war they were angry that the colonists had made so few financial contributions to a struggle waged they believed largely for american benefit they were particularly bitter that colonial merchants had been selling food and other goods to the french in the west indies throughout the conflict.
all these factors combined to persuade many english leaders that a major reorganization of the empire would be necessary.
london wanted increased authority over the colonies.
the war had an equally profound effect on the american colonists.
it was an experience that forced them for the first time to act in concert against a common foe.
the 1758 return of authority to the colonial assemblies seemed to many americans to confirm the illegitimacy of english interference in local affairs.
for the indians of the ohio valley the british victory was disastrous.
those tribes that had allied themselves with the french had earned the enmity of the victorious english.
the iroquois confederacy which had not allied with the french fared only slightly better.
consequences for native americans english officials saw the passivity of the iroquois during the war as evidence of duplicity.
in the aftermath of the peace settlement the fragile iroquois alliance with the british quickly unraveled.
the tribes would continue to contest the english for control of the ohio valley for another fifty years but were increasingly divided and increasingly outnumbered.
they would seldom again be in a position to deal with their european rivals on terms of military or political equality.
the new imperialism with the treaty of 1763 england found itself truly at peace for the first time in more than fifty years.
as a result the british government could now turn its attention to the organization of its empire.
saddled with enormous debts from the many years of war england was desperately in need of new revenues.
responsible for vast holdings in the new world the imperial government believed it must increase its administrative capacities in america.
the result was a dramatic and for england disastrous redefinition of the colonial relationship.
burdens of empire the experience of the french and indian war should have suggested that increasing imperial control over the colonies would not be easy.
not only had the resistance of the colonists forced pitt to relax his policies in 1758 but the colonial assemblies continued to defy imperial trade regulations and other british demands.
but the most immediate britains staggering war debt problem for london was its staggering war debt.
landlords and merchants in england were objecting strenuously to any further tax increases and the colonial assemblies had repeatedly demonstrated their unwillingness to pay for the war effort.
many officials in england believed that only by taxing the americans directly could the empire effectively meet its financial needs.
the empire in transition 91 at this crucial moment in anglo american relations the government of england was thrown into turmoil by the 1760 accession to the throne of george iii.
he george the third brought two particularly unfortunate qualities to the position.
first he was determined to reassert the authority of the monarchy.
he removed from power the relatively stable coalition of whigs that had governed for much of the century and replaced it with a new and very unstable coalition of his own.
the weak new ministries that emerged as a result each lasted in office an average of only about two years.
second the king had serious intellectual and psychological limitations.
he suffered apparently from a rare mental disease that produced intermittent bouts of insanity.
indeed in the last years of his long reign he was according to most accounts unable to perform any official hudsons bay company quebec quebec.
er nc re maine mass.
st la w superio lake r montreal y r ny e eri kingston poughkeepsie.
pennsylvania a r ta r n ia h c a l c a p p a cu m plymouth providence newport r i new jersey atlantic ocean es jam r richmond williamsburg mis fayetteville norfolk north carolina.
ten n pi r.
conn delaware petersburg roa no ke r.
rr spanish louisiana mass.
hartford burlington new castle po baltimore tom dover.
annapolis ea ef ap siss ip bennington virginia and r r see es falmouth portsmouth gloucester boston n shena n do m o ah u r ohio r vincennes l ber n h new haven southampton new york perth amboy trenton r st louis philadelphia.
ac wabash r ill in ois fort duquesne n reading i st joseph susq n s ueh an e lak r albany fort niagara he s h t i i fort detroit b r lake champlain fort frontenac io fort m ontar ohawk r lake stanwix all eg lake mic h igan ro n hu e t i o connecticut e ak la baye r r t hudson r l r delaware r fort michimilimackinac edenton non indian settlement greenville new bern portsmouth before 1700 wilmington south carolina disputed territory claimed by spain and britain camden columbia sant ee r.
r ah nn augusta sa ashley va r georgia frontier line proclamation line of 1763 fort cooper r charles town.
al 1700 1763 kingston tam ah a savannah r 250 mi 500 km provincial capital this map shows the thirteen colonies at the end of the seven years war.
it shows the line of settlement established by the proclamation of 1763 the red line as well as the extent of actual settlement in that year the blue line.
note that in the middle colonies north carolina virginia maryland and southern pennsylvania settlement had already reached the red line and in one small area of western pennsylvania moved beyond it by the time of the proclamation of 1763.
note also the string of forts established beyond the proclamation line.
how do the forts help explain the efforts of the british to restrict settlement.
and how does the extent of actual settlement help explain why it was so difficult for the british to enforce their restrictions.
the thirteen colonies in 1763 92 chapter 4 functions.
yet even when george iii was lucid which was most of the time in the 1760s and 1770s he was painfully immature and insecure.
the kings personality therefore contributed both to the instability and to the rigidity of the british government during these critical years.
more directly responsible for the problems that soon emerged with the colonies george grenville however was george grenville whom the king made prime minister in 1763.
grenville shared the prevailing opinion within britain that the colonists should be compelled to pay a part of the cost of defending and administering the empire.
the british and the tribes with the defeat of the french frontiersmen from the english colonies began immediately to move over the mountains and into tribal lands in the upper ohio valley.
an alliance of indian tribes under the ottawa chieftain pontiac struck back.
fearing that an escalation of the fighting proclamation of 1763 might threaten western trade the british government in the proclamation of 1763 forbade settlers to advance beyond the appalachian mountains.
many indian groups supported the proclamation as the best bargain available to them.
the cherokee in particular worked actively to hasten the drawing of the boundary hoping finally to put an end to white movements into their lands.
relations between the western tribes and the british improved for a time partly as a result of the work of the sympathetic indian superintendents the british appointed.
in the end however the proclamation of 1763 was ineffective.
white settlers continued to swarm across the boundary and to claim lands farther and farther into the ohio valley.
the british authorities failed to enforce limits to the expansion.
in 1768 new agreements with the western tribes pushed the permanent boundary farther west.
but these treaties and subsequent ones also failed to stop the white advance.
battles over trade and taxes the grenville ministry tried to increase its authority in the colonies in other ways as well.
regular british troops were stationed permanently in america and under the mutiny act of 1765 the colonists were required to help provision and maintain the army.
ships of the british navy patrolled american waters to search for smugglers.
the customs service was reorganized and enlarged.
royal officials were required to take up their colonial posts in person instead of sending substitutes.
colonial manufacturing was restricted so that it would not compete with rapidly expanding industries in great britain.
the sugar act of 1764 raised the duty on sugar while lowering the duty on molasses.
sugar and currency acts it also established new vice admiralty courts in america to try accused smugglers thus cutting them off from sympathetic local juries.
the currency act of 1764 required that the colonial assemblies stop issuing paper money.
at first it was difficult for the colonists to resist these unpopular new laws.
that was partly because americans continued to harbor as many grievances against one another as they did against the authorities in london.
in 1763 for example a band of pennsylvania frontiersmen known as the paxton boys descended on philadelphia to demand tax relief and financial support for their defense against indians.
bloodshed was averted only by concessions from the colonial assembly.
in 1771 a small scale civil war broke out in north carolina when the paxton boys and regulators regulators farmers of the interior organized and armed themselves to resist high taxes.
the colonial governor appointed sheriffs to enforce the levies.
an army of militiamen most of them from the eastern counties crushed the regulator revolt.
mutiny act the empire in transition 93 the unpopularity of the grenville program helped the colonists overcome their internal conflicts and see that the policies from london were a threat to all americans.
northern merchants would suffer from restraints on their commerce.
the closing of the west to land speculation and fur trading enraged many colonists.
others were angered by the restriction of opportunities for manufacturing.
southern planters in debt to english merchants would be unable to ease their debts by speculating in western land.
small farmers would suffer from the abolition of paper money which had been the source of most of their loans.
workers in towns faced the prospect of narrowing opportunities particularly because of the restraints on manufacturing and currency.
everyone stood to suffer from increased taxes.
most americans soon found ways to live with the new british laws without terrible economic hardship.
but their political grievances remained.
americans were accustomed to wide latitude in self government.
they believed that colonial assemblies had the sole right to control appropriations for the costs of government within the colonies.
by attempting to raise extensive revenues directly from the public the british government was challenging the basis of colonial political power.
stirrings of revolt by the mid 1760s a hardening of positions had begun in both england and america.
the result was a progression of events that more rapidly than imagined destroyed the british empire in america.
the stamp act crisis grenville could not have devised a better method for antagonizing and unifying the colonies than the stamp act of 1765.
unlike the sugar act of a year earlier the stamp act which affected only a few new england merchants the new tax fell on everyone.
it levied taxes on every printed document in the colonies newspapers almanacs pamphlets deeds wills licenses.
british officials were soon collecting more than ten times as much revenue in america as they had been before 1763.
more alarming than these taxes however was the precedent they seemed to create.
in the past taxes and duties on colonial trade had always been designed to regulate commerce.
the stamp act however was clearly an attempt by england to raise revenue from the colonies without the consent of the colonial assemblies.
few colonists believed that they could do anything more than grumble until the virginia house of burgesses aroused americans to action.
patrick henry made a dramatic speech to the house in may 1765 concluding with a vague prediction that if present policies were not revised george iii like earlier tyrants might lose his head.
amid shocked cries of treason henry introduced a set of resolutions only some of which the assembly passed declaring that americans possessed the same rights as the english especially the right to be taxed only by their virginia resolves own representatives that virginians should pay no taxes except those voted by the virginia assembly and that anyone advocating the right of parliament to tax virginians should be deemed an enemy of the colony.
henrys resolutions were printed and circulated as the virginia resolves co ns ider t he s o urc e benjamin franklin testimony against the stamp act 1766 in 1765 parliament passed the first internal tax on the colonists known as the stamp act.
benjamin franklin was a colonial agent in london at the time and as colonial opposition to the act grew he found himself representing these views to the british government.
in his testimony from parliament he describes the role of taxes in pennsylvania and the economic r elationship between the colonies and the mother country.
what is your name and place of abode.
a franklin of philadelphia.
do the americans pay any considerable taxes among themselves.
certainly many and very heavy taxes.
what are the present taxes in pennsylvania laid by the laws of the colony.
there are taxes on all estates real and personal a poll tax a tax on all offices professions trades and businesses according to their profits an excise on all wine rum and other spirit and a duty of ten pounds per head on all negroes imported with some other duties.
for what purposes are those taxes laid.
for the support of the civil and military establishments of the country and to discharge the heavy debt contracted in the last seven years war.
are not all the people very able to pay those taxes.
the frontier counties all along the continent have been frequently ravaged by the enemy and greatly impoverished are able to pay very little tax.
are not the colonies from their circumstances very able to pay the stamp duty.
in my opinion there is not gold and silver enough in the colonies to pay the stamp duty for one year.
94 q dont you know that the money arising from the stamps was all to be laid out in america.
a i know it is appropriated by the act to the american service but it will be spent in the conquered colonies where the soldiers are not in the colonies that pay it.
do you think it right that america should be protected by this country and pay no part of the expense.
that is not the case.
the colonies raised clothed and paid during the last war near 25 000 men and spent many millions.
were you not reimbursed by parliament.
we were only reimbursed what in your opinion we had advanced beyond our proportion or beyond what might reasonably be expected from us and it was a very small part of what we spent.
pennsylvania in particular disbursed about 500 000 pounds and the reimbursements in the whole did not exceed 60 000 pounds.
do you think the people of america would submit to pay the stamp duty if it was moderated.
no never unless compelled by force of arms.
what was the temper of america towards great britain before the year 1763.
the best in the world.
they submitted willingly to the government of the crown and paid in all their courts obedience to acts of parliament.
what is your opinion of a future tax imposed on the same principle with that of the stamp act.
how would the americans receive it.
just as they do this.
they would not pay it.
have not you heard of the resolutions of this house and of the house of lords asserting the right of parliament relating to america including a power to tax the people there.
yes i have heard of such resolutions.
what will be the opinion of the americans on those resolutions.
they will think them unconstitutional and unjust.
was it an opinion in america before 1763 that the parliament had no right to lay taxes and duties there.
a i never heard any objection to the right of laying duties to regulate commerce but a right to lay internal taxes was never supposed to be in parliament as we are not represented there.
did the americans ever dispute the controlling power of parliament to regulate the commerce.
can anything less than a military force carry the stamp act into execution.
a i do not see how a military force can be applied to that purpose.
why may it not.
suppose a military force sent into america they will find nobody in arms what are they then to do.
they cannot force a man to take stamps who chooses to do without them.
they will not find a rebellion they may indeed make one.
if the act is not repealed what do you think will be the consequences.
a total loss of the respect and affection the people of america bear to this country and of all the commerce that depends on that respect and affection.
how can the commerce be affected.
you will find that if the act is not repealed they will take very little of your manufactures in a short time.
is it in their power to do without them.
a i think they may very well do without them.
is it their interest not to take them.
the goods they take from britain are either necessaries mere conveniences or superfluities.
the first as cloth etc with a little industry they can make at home the second they can do without till they are able to provide them among themselves and the last which are mere articles of fashion purchased and consumed because of the fashion in a respected country but will now be detested and rejected.
the people have already struck off by general agreement the use of all goods fashionable in mourning.
if the stamp act should be repealed would it induce the assemblies of america to acknowledge the right of parliament to tax them and would they erase their resolutions against the stamp act.
is there no means of obliging them to erase those resolutions.
none that i know of they will never do it unless compelled by force of arms.
is there a power on earth that can force them to erase them.
no power how great so ever can force men to change their opinions.
what used to be the pride of the americans.
to indulge in the fashions and manufactures of great britain.
what is now their pride.
to wear their old clothes over again till they can make new ones.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
what kind of taxes did colonists pay a ccording to franklin.
what did the interviewer seem to think of the colonists tax burden.
what disagreements existed between franklin and his interviewer on the purpose legality and feasibility of the stamp tax.
how did franklin characterize the britishcolonial relationship prior to 1763.
what colonial response to the stamp act and other internal taxes did franklin predict.
what if anything could parliament do to enforce the colonists compliance.
source the parliamentary history of england london 1813 vol.
138 159 in charles morris the great republic by the master historians vol.
belcher co 1902.
95 96 chapter 4 in massachusetts at about the same time james otis persuaded his fellow members of the colonial assembly to call an intercolonial congress to take action against the new tax.
and in october 1765 the stamp act congress as it was called met in new york with delegates from nine colonies.
in a petition to the british government the congress denied that the colonies could rightfully be taxed except through their own provincial assemblies.
across the ocean colonial agent benjamin franklin articulated such grievances before parliament.
see consider the source testimony against the stamp act meanwhile in the summer of 1765 mobs were rising up in several colonial cities against the stamp act.
the largest was in boston where men belonging to the newly organized sons of liberty terrorized stamp agents and burned stamps.
the mob also attacked such supposedly pro british aristocrats as the lieutenant governor thomas hutchinson who had privately opposed passage of the stamp act but who felt obliged to support it once it became law.
hutchinsons elegant house was pillaged and virtually destroyed.
the crisis finally subsided largely because england backed down.
the authorities in london were less affected by the political protests than by economic pressure.
many new stamp act repealed englanders had stopped buying english goods to protest the sugar act of 1764 and the stamp act caused the boycott to spread.
with pressure from english merchants parliament under a new prime minister the marquis of rockingham repealed the unpopular law on march 18 1766.
to satisfy his strong and vociferous opponents rockingham also pushed through the declaratory act which confirmed parliamentary authority over the colonies in all cases whatsoever but in their rejoicing over the stamp act repeal most americans paid little attention to this sweeping declaration of power.
internal rebellions the conflicts with britain were not the only uprisings emerging in the turbulent years of the 1760s.
in addition to the stamp act crisis and other challenges to london there were internal rebellions that had their roots in the class system in new york and new england.
in the hudson valley in new york great estates had grown up in which owners had rented out their land to small farmers.
the revolutionary fervor of the time led many of these tenants to demand ownership of the land they worked.
to emphasize their determination they stopped paying rents.
the rebellion soon failed but other challenges continued.
in vermont which still was governed by new york insurgent farmers challenged landowners many of them the same owners whom tenants had challenged on the hudson by taking up arms and demanding ownership of the land they worked.
ethan allen later a hero of the revolutionary war and himself a land speculator took up the cause of the green mountain farmers and accused the landowners of trying to enslave a free people allen eventually succeeded in making vermont into a separate state which broke up some of the large estates.
the townshend program when the rockingham governments policy of appeasement met substantial opposition in england the king dismissed the ministry and replaced it with a new government led by the aging but still powerful william pitt who was now lord chatham.
chatham had in the past been sympathetic toward american interests.
once in office however he was at times so incapacitated by mental illness that leadership of his administration fell to the chancellor of the exchequer charles townshend.
the empire in transition 97 with the stamp act repealed the greatest remaining american grievance involved the mutiny or quartering act of 1765 which required colonists to shelter and supply british troops.
the colonists objected not so much to the actual burden as to being required by london to do so.
the massachusetts and new york assemblies went so far as to refuse to grant the mandated supplies to the troops.
townshend responded in 1767 by disbanding the new york assembly until the colonists agreed to obey the mutiny act.
by singling out new york he believed he would avoid antagonizing all the colonies at once.
he also imposed new taxes known as the townshend duties on various goods imported to the colonies from england lead paint townshend duties paper and tea.
townshend assumed that since these were taxes purely on external transactions imports from overseas as opposed to the internal transactions the stamp act had taxed the colonists would not object.
but all the colonies resented the suspension of the new york assembly believing it to be a threat to every colonial government.
and all the colonies rejected townshends careful distinction between external and internal taxation.
townshend also established a board of customs commissioners in america.
the new commissioners established their headquarters in boston.
they virtually ended smuggling in boston although smugglers continued to carry on a busy trade in other colonial seaports.
the boston merchants angry that the new commission was diverting the lucrative smuggling trade elsewhere helped organize a boycott of british goods that were subject to the townshend duties.
merchants in philadelphia and new york joined them in a nonimportation agreement in 1768 and later some southern nonimportation agreement merchants and planters also agreed to cooperate.
throughout the colonies american homespun and other domestic products became suddenly fashionable.
late in 1767 charles townshend died.
in march 1770 the new prime minister lord north hoping to end the american boycott repealed all the townshend duties except the tea tax.
the boston massacre before news of the repeal reached america an event in massachusetts inflamed colonial opinion.
the harassment of the new customs commissioners in boston had grown so intense that the british government had placed four regiments of regular troops in the city.
many of the poorly paid british soldiers looked for jobs in their off duty hours and thus competed with local workers.
clashes between the two groups were frequent.
on the night of march 5 1770 a mob of dockworkers liberty boys and others began pelting the sentries at the customs house with rocks and snowballs.
hastily captain thomas preston of the british regiment lined up several of his men in front of the building to protect it.
there was some scuffling one of the soldiers was knocked down and in the midst of it all apparently several british soldiers fired into the crowd killing five people.
this murky incident almost certainly the result of panic and confusion was quickly transformed by local resistance leaders into the boston the boston massacre in popular culture massacre it became the subject of such lurid and inaccurate accounts as the widely circulated pamphlet innocent blood crying to god from the streets of boston.
a famous engraving by paul revere portrayed the massacre as a calculated assault on a peaceful crowd.
the british soldiers tried before a jury of bostonians were found guilty only of manslaughter and given token punishment.
but colonial pamphlets and newspapers convinced many americans that the soldiers were guilty of official murder.
the leading figure in fomenting public outrage over the boston massacre was samuel adams.
england he argued had become a morass of sin and corruption only 98 chapter 4 the boston massacre 1770 by paul revere this sensationalized engraving of the conflict between british troops and boston laborers is one of many important propaganda documents by revere and others for the patriot cause in the 1770s.
among the victims of the massacre listed by revere was crispus attucks probably the first black man to die in the struggle for american independence.
the library of congress in america did public virtue survive.
in 1772 he proposed the creation of a committee of correspondence in boston to publicize the grievances against england.
other colonies followed massachusettss lead and a loose intercolonial network of political organizations was soon established that kept the spirit of dissent alive through the 1770s.
committee of correspondence the philosophy of revolt although a superficial calm settled on the colonies after the boston massacre the crises of the 1760s had helped arouse enduring ideological challenges to english authority and had produced powerful instruments for publicizing colonial grievances.
gradually a political outlook gained a following in america that would ultimately serve to justify revolt.
the ideas that would support the revolution emerged from many sources.
some were drawn from religious particularly puritan sources or from the political experiences of the colonies.
others came from abroad.
most important perhaps were the radical ideas the empire in transition 99 of the political opposition in great britain.
some were scots who considered the english state tyrannical.
others were embittered country whigs who felt excluded from power and considered the existing system corrupt and oppressive.
drawing from some of the great philosophical minds of earlier generations most notably john locke these english dissidents framed a powerful argument against their government.
central to this emerging ideology was a new concept of what government should be.
because humans were inherently corrupt and selfish government was necessary to protect individuals from the evil in one another.
but because any government was run by corruptible leaders the people needed safeguards against its possible abuses of power.
most people in both england and america considered the english constitution the best system ever devised to meet these necessities.
by distributing power among the three elements of society the monarchy the aristocracy and the common people the english political system had ensured that no individual or group could exercise unchecked authority.
yet by the mid seventeenth century dissidents in both england and america had become convinced that the constitution was in danger.
a single center of power the king and his ministers was becoming so powerful that it could not be effectively checked.
such arguments found little sympathy in most of england.
the english constitution was not a written document or a fixed set of unchangeable rules.
it was a general sense of the way things are done and most people in england were willing to accept changes in it.
americans by contrast drew from their experience with colonial charters in which the shape and powers of government were permanently inscribed on paper.
they resisted the idea of a flexible changing set of basic principles.
one basic principle americans believed was the right of people to be taxed only with their own consent a belief that gradually took shape in no taxation without representation the popular slogan no taxation without representation whatever the nature of a tax it could not be levied without the consent of the colonists themselves.
this clamor about representation made little sense to the english.
according to english constitutional theory members of parliament did not represent individuals or particular geographical areas.
instead each member represented the interests of the whole nation and indeed the whole empire.
the many boroughs of england that had no representative in parliament the whole of ireland and the colonies thousands of miles away all were thus represented in the parliament at london even though they elected no representatives of their own.
this was the theory of virtual representation.
but americans drawing from their experiences with their town meetings and their colonial assemblies believed in actual representation.
every community was entitled to its own representative elected by the people of that community.
since the colonists had none of their own representatives in parliament it followed that they were not represented there.
americans believed that the colonial assemblies played the same role within the colonies as parliament did within england.
the empire the americans argued was a sort of federation of commonwealths each with its own legislative body all tied together by loyalty to the king.
such ideas illustrated a fundamental difference of opinion between england and america over the question of where ultimate power lay.
by arguing that parliament had the right to legislate for the empire as a whole but that only the provincial assemblies could legislate for the individual colonies americans were in effect arguing for a division of sovereignty debated sovereignty.
parliament would be sovereign in some matters the assemblies in others.
to the british such an argument was absurd.
in any system of government there must be a single ultimate authority.
and since the empire was in their view a single undivided unit there could be only one authority within it the english government of king and parliament.
patterns of popular culture taverns in revolutionary massachusetts in colonial massachusetts as in many other american colonies in the 1760s and 1770s taverns or public houses as they were often known were crucial to the development of popular resistance to british rule.
the puritan culture of new england created some resistance to taverns and reformers tried to regulate or close them to reduce the problems caused by public drunkenness lewd behavior and anarchy but as the commercial life of the colonies expanded and more people began living in towns and cities taverns became a central institution in american social life and eventually in its political life as well.
taverns were appealing of course because they provided alcoholic drinks in a culture where the craving for alcohol and the extent of drunkenness was very high.
but taverns had other attractions as well.
they were one of the few places where people could meet and talk openly in public indeed many colonists considered the life of the tavern as the only vaguely democratic experience available to them.
the tavern was a mostly male institution just as politics was considered a mostly male concern.
and so the fusion of male camaraderie and political discourse emerged naturally out of the tavern culture.
as the revolutionary crisis deepened taverns and pubs became the central meeting places for airing the ideas that fueled resistance to british policies.
educated and uneducated men alike joined in 100 a nimated discussions of events.
those who could not read and there were many could learn about the contents of revolutionary pamphlets from listening to tavern conversations.
they could join in the discussion of the new republican ideas emerging in america by participating in tavern celebrations of for example the anniversaries of resistance to the stamp act.
those anniversaries inspired elaborate toasts in public houses throughout the colonies.
in an age before wide distribution of newspapers taverns and tavernkeepers were important sources of information about the political and social turmoil of the time.
taverns were also the settings for political events.
in 1770 for example a report circulated through the taverns of danvers massachusetts about a local man who was continuing to sell tea despite the colonial boycott.
the sons of liberty brought the seller to the bell tavern and persuaded him to sign a confession and apology before a crowd of defiant men in the public room.
almost all politicians who wanted any real contact with the public found it necessary to visit taverns in colonial massachusetts.
samuel adams spent considerable time in the public houses of boston where he sought to encourage resistance to british rule while taking care to drink moderately so as not to erode his stature as a leader.
his cousin john adams although somewhat more skeptical of taverns and more sensitive to the vices they encouraged also r ecognized their political value.
in taverns he once said bastards and legislatores are frequently begotten understand analyze evaluate 1.
why were taverns so important in edu cating colonists about the relationship with britain.
what gathering places today serve the same purposes as taverns did in colonial america.
taverns and politics the green dragon tavern is where protesters planned the boston tea party.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
sites of resistance colonists kept the growing spirit of resistance alive in many ways but most of all through writing and talking.
dissenting leaflets pamphlets and books circulated widely through the colonies.
in towns and cities men gathered in churches schools town squares and above all taverns to discuss politics.
taverns were also places where resistance pamphlets and leaflets could be distributed and where meetings for the planning of protests and demonstrations could be held.
massachusetts had the most elaborately developed tavern culture which was perhaps one reason why the spirit of resistance grew more quickly there than anywhere else.
see patterns of popular culture taverns in revolutionary massachusetts the apparent calm in america in the 1770s hid a growing sense of resentment about the continued enforcement of the navigation acts.
popular anger was visible in occasional acts of rebellion.
at one point colonists seized a british revenue ship on gaspe incident the lower delaware river.
in 1772 angry residents of rhode island boarded the british schooner gaspe set it afire and sank it.
the tea excitement the revolutionary fervor of the 1760s intensified as a result of a new act of parliament one that involved the business of selling tea.
in 1773 britains east india company on the verge of bankruptcy was sitting on large stocks of tea that it could not sell in england.
in an effort to save it the government passed the tea act of 1773 which gave the tea act the company the right to export its merchandise directly to the colonies without paying any of the regular taxes that were imposed on colonial merchants who had traditionally served as the intermediaries in such transactions.
with these privileges the company could undersell american merchants and monopolize the colonial tea trade.
the act angered influential colonial merchants and more important revived american passions about the issue of taxation without representation.
the law provided no new tax on tea.
but the original townshend duty on the commodity survived and the east india company was now exempt from paying it.
lord north had assumed that most colonists would welcome the new law because it would reduce the price of tea to consumers by removing the intermediaries.
but resistance leaders in america argued that the law in effect represented an unconstitutional tax on american merchants.
the colonists responded by boycotting tea.
101 102 chapter 4 unlike earlier protests most of which had involved relatively small numbers of people the tea boycott mobilized large segments of the population.
it also helped link the colonies together in a common experience of mass popular protest.
particularly important to the movement were the activities of colonial women who led the boycott.
the daughters of daughters of liberty liberty a recently formed womens patriotic organization proclaimed rather than freedom well part with our tea in the last weeks of 1773 with strong popular support some colonial leaders made plans to prevent the east india company from landing its cargoes.
in philadelphia and new york determined colonists kept the tea from leaving the companys ships and in charles town south carolina they stored it away in a public warehouse.
in boston local patriots staged a spectacular drama.
on the evening of december 16 1773 three companies of fifty men each masquerading as mohawk indians went aboard three the boston tea party ships broke open the tea chests and heaved them into the harbor.
as the electrifying news of the boston tea party spread colonists in other seaports staged similar acts of resistance.
parliament retaliated in four acts of 1774 closing the port of boston drastically reducing the powers of self government in massachusetts permitting royal officers in america to be tried for crimes in other colonies or in england and providing for the quartering of troops by the colonists.
these coercive acts were more widely known in america as the intolerable acts the coercive acts backfired.
far from isolating massachusetts they made it a m artyr in the eyes of residents of other colonies and sparked new resistance up and down the coast.
colonial legislatures passed a series of resolves supporting massachusetts.
consequences of the coercive acts womens groups mobilized to extend the boycotts of british goods and to create substitutes for the tea textiles and other commodities they were shunning.
in edenton north carolina fifty one women signed an agreement in october 1774 declaring their sincere adherence to the anti british resolutions of their provincial assembly and proclaiming their duty to do every thing as far as lies in our power to support the publick good cooperation and war beginning in 1765 colonial leaders developed a variety of organizations for converting popular discontent into action organizations that in time formed the basis for an independent government.
new sources of authority the passage of authority from the royal government to the colonists themselves began on the local level.
in colony after colony local institutions responded to the resistance movement by simply seizing authority.
at times entirely new institutions emerged.
the most effective of these new groups were the committees of correspondence.
virginia established the first intercolonial committees of correspondence which helped make possible continuous cooperation among the colonies.
after the royal governor dissolved the assembly in 1774 colonists met in the raleigh tavern at williamsburg declared that the intolerable acts menaced the liberties of every colony and issued a call for a continental congress.
the empire in transition 103 delegates from all the colonies except georgia were present when in september 1774 the first continental congress convened in philadelphia.
they made the first continental congress five major decisions.
first they rejected a plan for a colonial union under british authority.
second they endorsed a relatively moderate statement of grievances which addressed the king as most gracious sovereign but which also included a demand for the repeal of all oppressive legislation passed since 1763.
third they approved a series of resolutions recommending that military preparations be made for defense against possible attack by the british troops in boston.
fourth they agreed to a series of boycotts that they hoped would stop all trade with great britain and they formed a continental association to see that these agreements were enforced.
fifth the delegates agreed to meet again the following spring.
during the winter the parliament in london debated proposals for conciliating the colonists and early in 1775 lord north finally won approval for a series of measures known as the conciliatory propositions.
parliament proposed that the colonies would tax themselves at parliaments demand.
with this offer lord north hoped to separate the american moderates whom he believed represented the views of the majority from the extremist minority.
but his offer was too little and too late.
it did not reach america until after the first shots of war had been fired.
lexington and concord for months the farmers and townspeople of massachusetts had been gathering arms and ammunition and preparing minutemen to fight on a moments notice.
the minutemen continental congress had approved preparations for a defensive war and the citizensoldiers waited only for an aggressive move by the british regulars in boston.
there general thomas gage commanding the british garrison considered his army too small to do anything without reinforcements.
he resisted the advice general thomas gage of less cautious officers who assured him that the americans would back down quickly before any show of british force.
when general gage received orders to arrest the rebel leaders sam adams and john hancock known to be in the vicinity of lexington he still hesitated.
but when he heard that the minutemen had stored a large supply of gunpowder in concord eighteen miles from boston he decided to act.
on the night of april 18 1775 he sent a detachment of about 1 000 men out toward lexington hoping to surprise the colonials and seize the illegal supplies without bloodshed.
but patriots in boston were watching the british movements closely and during the night two horsemen william dawes and paul revere rode out to warn the villages and farms.
when the redcoats arrived in lexington the next day several dozen minutemen awaited them on the town common.
shots were fired and minutemen fell eight were killed and ten wounded.
advancing to concord the british discovered that the americans had hastily removed most of the powder supply.
all along the road back to boston the british were harassed by the gunfire of farmers hiding behind trees rocks and stone walls.
by the end of the day the british had lost almost three times as many men as the americans.
the first shots the shots heard round the world as americans later called them had been fired.
but who had fired them first.
according to one of the minutemen at lexington the british commander major thomas pitcairn had shouted to the colonists on his arrival disperse ye rebels when they ignored him he ordered his troops to fire.
british officers and soldiers claimed that the minutemen had fired first.
whatever the truth the rebels succeeded in circulating their account well ahead of the british version adorning it with tales of british atrocities.
the effect was to rally thousands of colonists to the rebel cause.
104 chapter 4 paul reveres ride night of april 18 1775 north bridge british return to boston april 19 same day concord su april 19 1775 db u william dawess ride april 18 1775 revere captured troop movements american forces british forces battles and entrenchments american victory british victory american entrenchment road r ry lexington april 19 1775 dawes returns to boston medford arlington.
cr sti my ch charlestown es r arl bunker hill and breeds hill june 17 1775 north church boston boston harbor 3 mi 6 km brookline roxbury the battles of lexington and concord 1775 this map shows the fabled series of events that led to the first battle of the american revolution.
on the night of april 18 1775 paul revere and william dawes rode out from boston to warn the outlying towns of the approach of british troops.
revere was captured just west of lexington but dawes escaped and returned to boston.
the next morning british forces moved out of boston toward lexington where they met armed american minutemen on the lexington common and exchanged fire.
the british dispersed the americans in lexington.
but they next moved on to concord where they encountered more armed minutemen clashed again and were driven back toward boston.
all along their line of march they were harassed by riflemen.
what impact did the battles of lexington and concord and the later battle of bunker hill also shown on this map have on colonial sentiment toward the british.
it was not immediately clear at the time that the skirmishes at lexington and concord were the first battles of a war.
but whether people recognized it at the time or not the war for independence had begun.
the war begins conclusion when the french and indian war ended in 1763 it might have seemed reasonable to expect that relations between the english colonists in america and great britain itself would have been cemented more firmly than ever.
but in fact the resolution of that conflict altered the imperial relationship forever in ways that ultimately drove americans to rebel against english rule and begin a war for independence.
to the british the lesson of the french and indian war was that the colonies in america needed firmer control from london.
the empire was now much bigger and it needed better administration.
the war had produced great debts and the americans among the principal beneficiaries of the war should help pay them.
and so for more than a decade after the end of the fighting the british tried one strategy after another to tighten control over and extract money from the colonies.
the empire in transition 105 to the colonists this effort to tighten imperial rule seemed both a betrayal of the sacrifices they had made in the war and a challenge to their long developing assumptions about the rights of english people to rule themselves.
gradually white americans came to see in the british policies evidence of a conspiracy to establish tyranny in the new world.
and so throughout the 1760s and 1770s the colonists developed an ideology of resistance and defiance.
by the time the first shots were fired in the american revolution in 1775 britain and america had come to view each other as two very different societies.
their differences which soon appeared irreconcilable propelled them into a war that would change the course of history for both sides.
key terms people places events albany plan 85 benjamin franklin 94 boston massacre 97 boston tea party 102 coercive acts 102 committees of correspondence 102 creole 85 currency act 92 daughters of liberty 102 first continental congress 103 fort necessity 86 french and indian war 86 george grenville 92 george iii 91 impressment 87 iroquois confederacy 85 mutiny act 92 patrick henry 93 paxton boys 92 proclamation of 1763 92 seven years war 87 sons of liberty 96 sovereignty 99 stamp act 93 sugar act 92 tea act 101 townshend duties 97 virginia resolves 93 virtual representation 99 william pitt 87 recall and reflect 1.
what native americans fought in the french and indian war and how did the wars outcome affect them.
what about native americans who did not participate in the war.
how and why did the colonists attitude toward britain change from the time of the seven years war to the beginning of the american revolution.
what were the philosophical underpinnings of the colonists revolt against britain.
what did the slogan no taxation without representation mean and why was it a rallying cry for the colonists.
the american revolution the states united the war for independence war and society the creation of state governments the search for a national government looking ahead 1.
what were the military strategies both british and american of each of the three phases of the american revolution.
how successful were these strategies during each phase.
how did the american revolution become an international conflict not just a colonial war against the british.
how did the new national government of the united states reflect the assumptions of republicanism.
two struggles occurred simultaneously during the seven years of war that began in april 1775.
the first was the military conflict with great britain.
the second was a political conflict within america.
the military conflict was by the standards of later wars a relatively modest one.
by the standards of its own day however it was an unusually savage conflict pitting not only army against army but the civilian population against a powerful external force.
the shift of the war from a traditional conventional struggle to a new kind of conflict a revolutionary war for liberation is what made it possible for the united states to defeat the more powerful british.
at the same time americans were wrestling with the great political questions that the conflict necessarily produced first whether to demand independence from britain second how to structure the new nation they had proclaimed and third how to deal with questions that the revolution had raised about slavery the rights of indians the role of women and the limits of religious tolerance in the new american society.
106 the states united time line although some americans had long expected a military conflict with britain the actual beginning of hostilities in 1775 found the colonies generally unprepared for war against the worlds greatest armed power.
defining american war aims three weeks after the battles of lexington and concord when the second continental congress met in philadelphia delegates from every colony except georgia which had not yet sent a representative agreed to support the war.
but they disagreed about its purpose.
at one extreme was a group led by the adams cousins john and samuel richard henry lee of virginia and others who already favored independence at the other extreme was a group led by such moderates as john dickinson of pennsylvania who hoped for a quick reconciliation with great britain.
most americans believed at first that they were fighting not for independence but for a resolution of grievances against the british empire.
during the first year of fighting however many colonists began to change their minds.
the costs of the war were so high that the original war aims began to seem too modest to justify them.
many colonists were enraged when the british began trying to recruit indians african slaves and german mercenaries the hated hessians against them.
when the british government blockaded colonial ports and rejected all efforts at conciliation many colonists concluded that independence was the only remaining option.
thomas paines impassioned pamphlet common sense crystallized these feelings in january 1776.
paine who had emigrated from england less than two years before wanted to turn the anger of americans away from particular parliamentary measures and toward what he considered the root of the problem the english constitution itself.
second continental congress washington commands american forces paines common sense declaration of independence battle of trenton french american alliance articles of confederation adopted british defeat at saratoga treaty of paris articles of confederation ratified cornwallis surrenders at yorktown postwar depression begins shayss rebellion northwest ordinance 107 debating the past the american revolution the long standing debate over the origins of the american revolution has tended to reflect two broad schools of interpretation.
one sees the revolution largely as a political and intellectual event the other as a social and economic phenomenon.
the revolutionary generation itself portrayed the conflict as a struggle over ideals and this interpretation prevailed through most of the nineteenth century.
but in the early twentieth century historians influenced by the reform currents of the progressive era began to identify social and economic forces that they believed had contributed to the rebellion.
carl becker for example wrote in a 1909 study of new york that two questions had shaped the revolution the first was the question of home rule the second was the question.
of who should rule at home the colonists were not only fighting the british but also were engaged in a kind of civil war a contest between radicals and conservatives.
other historians elaborated on beckers thesis.
j franklin jameson writing in 1926 argued many economic desires many social aspirations were set free by the political struggle many aspects of society profoundly altered by the forces thus let loose arthur m schlesinger maintained in a 1917 book that colonial merchants motivated by their own interest in escaping the restrictive policies of british mercantilism aroused american resistance in the 1760s and 1770s.
beginning in the 1950s a new generation of scholars began to reemphasize the role of ideology and de emphasize the role of economic interests.
robert e brown in 1955 and edmund s morgan in 1956 108 both argued that most eighteenth century americans shared common political principles and that the social and economic conflicts other historians had identified were not severe.
the rhetoric of the revolution they suggested was not propaganda but a real reflection of the ideas of the colonists.
bernard bailyn in the ideological origins of the american revolution 1967 demonstrated the complex roots of the ideas behind the revolution and argued that this carefully constructed political stance was not a disguise for economic interests but a genuine ideology rooted in deeply held convictions about rights and power.
the revolution he exclaimed was above all an ideological constitutional political struggle and not primarily a controversy between social groups undertaken to force changes in the organization of the society or the economy by the late 1960s a new generation of historians many influenced by the new left were reviving economic interpretations of the revolution by exploring the social and economic tensions that they claimed shaped the revolutionary struggle.
historians cited economic distress and the actions of mobs in colonial cities the economic pressures on colonial merchants and other changes in the character of american culture and society as critical prerequisites for the growth of the revolutionary movement.
gary nash attempting to reconcile the emphasis on economic interests with the role of ideology argued that the two things were not incompatible.
everyone has economic interests he claimed and everyone.
has an ideology exploring the relationship between the two he a rgued is critical to historians this contemporary drawing depicts the formal surrender of british troops at yorktown on october 19 1781.
columns of american troops and a large french fleet flank the surrender ceremony suggesting part of the reason for the british defeat.
general cornwallis the commander of british forces in virginia did not himself attend the surrender.
he sent a deputy in his place.
mpi hulton archive getty images the british surrender ability to understand either.
also as linda kerber and others have argued the newer social interpretations have raised increasing interest in the experience of workers slaves women native americans and other groups previously considered marginal to public life as part of the explanation of the revolutionary struggle.
finally gordon wood in the radicalism of the american revolution 1992 revived an idea once popular and recently unfashionable that the revolution was a genuinely radical event that led to the breakdown of such long standing characteristics of society as deference patriarchy and traditional gender relations.
class conflict may not have caused the revolution he argued but the revolution had a profound even radical effect on society nevertheless.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
in what way was the american revolution an ideological struggle.
in what way was the american revolution a social and economic conflict.
109 110 chapter 5 it was simple common sense paine wrote for americans to break completely with a political system that could inflict such brutality on its own people.
common sense sold more than 100 000 copies in only a few months and helped build support for the idea of independence in the early months of 1776.
for more on the origins of the rebellion see debating the past the american revolution the declaration of independence in the meantime the continental congress in philadelphia was moving toward a complete break with england.
at the beginning of the summer it appointed a committee to draft a formal declaration of independence and on july 2 1776 it adopted a resolution that these independence declared united colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states that they are absolved from all allegiance to the british crown and that all political connexion between them and the state of great britain is and ought to be totally dissolved two days later on july 4 congress approved the declaration of independence itself which provided formal justifications for this resolution.
the declaration launched a period of energetic political innovation as one colony after another reconstituted itself as a state by 1781 most states had produced written constitutions for themselves.
at the national level however the process was more uncertain.
in articles of confederation november 1777 finally congress adopted a plan for union the articles of confederation.
the document confirmed the existing weak decentralized system.
thomas jefferson a thirty three year old virginian wrote most of the declaration with thomas jefferson help from benjamin franklin and john adams.
the declaration expressed concepts that had been circulating throughout the colonies over the previous few months in the form of at least ninety other local declarations of independence declarations drafted up and down the coast by town meetings artisan and militia organizations county officials grand juries sons of liberty and colonial assemblies.
jefferson borrowed heavily from these texts.
the final document had two parts.
in the first the declaration restated the familiar contract theory of john locke that governments were formed to protect what jefferson called life liberty and the pursuit of happiness in the second part it listed the alleged crimes of the king who with the backing of parliament had violated his contract with the colonists and thus had forfeited all claim to their loyalty.
mobilizing for war financing the war was difficult.
congress had no authority to levy taxes on its own and when it requisitioned money from the state governments none contributed more than a small part of its expected share.
congress had little success borrowing from the public since few americans could afford to buy bonds.
instead congress issued paper money.
printing presses turned out enormous amounts of continental currency and the states printed currencies of their own.
the result predictably was soaring inflation and congress soon found that the continental currency was virtually worthless.
ultimately congress financed the war mostly by borrowing from other nations.
after a first surge of patriotism in 1775 volunteer soldiers became scarce.
states had to pay bounties or use a draft to recruit the needed men.
at first the militiamen remained under the control of their respective states.
but congress recognized the need for a centralized military command and it created a continental army with a single commander in the american revolution 111 jean baptist de verger a french officer serving in america during the revolution kept an illustrated journal of his experiences.
here he portrays four american soldiers carrying different kinds of arms a black infantryman with a light rifle a musketman a rifleman and an artilleryman.
brown university library providence rhode island usa bridgeman images revolutionary soldiers chief george washington.
washington an early advocate of independence with considerable military experience was admired respected and trusted by nearly all patriots.
he took command of the new army in june 1775.
with the aid of foreign military experts such as the marquis de lafayette from france and the baron von steuben from prussia he built a force that prevailed against the mightiest power in the world.
even more important perhaps washingtons steadiness courage and dedication to his cause washington takes command provided the army and the people with a symbol of stability around which they could rally.
the war for independence as the war for independence began the british seemed to have overwhelming advantages the greatest navy and the best equipped army in the world the resources of an empire a coherent structure of command.
yet the united states had advantages too.
americans were fighting on their own ground.
they were more committed to the conflict than were the british.
and beginning in 1777 they received substantial aid from abroad.
but the american victory was also a result of a series of early blunders and miscalculations by the british.
it was finally a result of the transformation of the war through three distinct phases into a new kind of conflict that the british military for all its strength was unable to win.
the first phase new england for the first year of the conflict from the spring of 1775 to the spring of 1776 many english authorities thought that british forces were not fighting a real war but simply quelling pockets of rebellion in the contentious area around boston.
after the redcoats 112 chapter 5 battle of quebec dec 31 1775 mon tgo british canada ld siege of quebec nov 1775 mar.
1776 n ar ar o quebec ld no trois rivires june 7 1776 y er m montreal maine mass.
halifax nova scotia crown point fort ticonderoga lake ontario lake george kennebec r yler ce ren lake w champlain la valcour island oct 11 1776 schu st.
r may 12 1775 atlant i c oc e an may 10 1775 new hampshire howe albany boston massachusetts hudson r new york x 17 alifa to h r i connecticut how ne e to rk w yo british forces american forces 100 mi british victory 200 km the revolution in the north 1775 1776 after initial battles in and around boston the british forces left massachusetts and after a brief stay in halifax canada moved south to new york.
in the meantime american forces moved north in an effort to capture british strongholds in montreal and quebec with little success.
why would the british have considered new york a better base than boston.
withdrew from lexington and concord in april american forces besieged them in boston.
in the battle of bunker hill actually fought on breeds hill on june 17 1775 the patriots suffered severe casualties and withdrew.
but they inflicted even greater losses on the enemy.
the siege continued.
early in 1776 finally the british decided that boston was a poor place from which to fight.
it was in the center of the most anti british part of america and tactically difficult to defend because it was easily isolated and surrounded.
and so on march 17 1776 the redcoats evacuated boston for halifax nova scotia with hundreds of loyalist refugees americans still loyal to england and the king.
in the meantime a band of southern patriots at moores creek bridge in north carolina crushed an uprising of loyalists on february 27 1776.
and to the north the americans invasion of canada began an invasion of canada.
generals benedict arnold and richard montgomery unsuccessfully threatened quebec in late 1775 and early 1776 in a battle in which montgomery was killed and arnold was wounded.
by the spring of 1776 it had become clear to the british that the conflict was not just a local phenomenon.
the american campaigns in canada the agitation in the south and the growing evidence of colonial unity all suggested that england must prepare to fight a much larger conflict.
bunker hill the second phase the mid atlantic region during the next phase of the war which lasted from 1776 until early 1778 the british were in a good position to win.
indeed had it not been for a series of blunders and misfortunes they probably would have crushed the rebellion.
the american revolution 113 the british regrouped quickly after their retreat from boston.
during the summer of 1776 hundreds of british ships and 32 000 british soldiers arrived in new york under the command of general william howe.
he offered congress a choice william howe surrender with royal pardon or face a battle against apparently overwhelming odds.
to oppose howes great force washington could muster only about 19 000 soldiers he had no navy at all.
even so the americans rejected howes offer.
the british then pushed the patriot forces out of manhattan and off long island and drove them in slow retreat over the plains of new jersey across the delaware river and into pennsylvania.
the british settled down for the winter in northern and central new jersey with an outpost of hessians at trenton on the delaware river.
but washington did not sit still.
on christmas night 1776 he daringly recrossed the icy delaware river surprised and scattered the hessians and occupied trenton.
then he advanced to trenton and princeton princeton and drove a force of redcoats from their base in the college there.
but washington was unable to hold either princeton or trenton and finally took refuge in the hills around morristown.
still the campaign of 1776 came to an end with the americans having triumphed in two minor battles and with their main army still intact.
for the campaigns of 1777 the british devised a strategy to divide the united states in two.
howe would move from new york up the hudson to albany while another force burgoyne oriskany aug 6 1777 mo h a massachusetts trenton schenectady arnold r i connecticut schoharie white plains oct 28 1776 harlem heights sept 16 1776 brooklyn heights aug 27 1776 new york city albany washington pennsylvania princeton jan 3 1777 troop movements british forces american forces battles delaware american victory e how wa shin gton brandywine creek sept 11 1777 ton ing.
sh er wa ar washin g 1778 ton germantown oct 4 1777 in cl d el a howe 1 del.
w monmouth courthouse june 28 1778 trenton dec 26 1776 and jan 2 1777 philadelphia maryland british victory washington valley forge winter headquarters 1777 1778 philadelphia new jersey rk bennington aug 16 1777 bennington new jersey howe pennsylvania r ld r west point morristown winter headquarters jan may 1777 valley forge wk ser are r aw l huds on kingston de arn o fr a ga t es albany new york saratoga sta new york new hampshire huds on r.
fort stanwix aug 23 1777 burgoyne surrenders oct 17 1777 saratoga oct 7 1777 to n lake ontario fort edward fort ticonderoga july 5 1777 200 km nw 776 al l is 1 100 mi co r these maps illustrate the major campaigns of the revolution in the middle colonies new york new jersey and pennsylvania between 1776 and 1778.
the large map on the left shows the two prongs of the british strategy first a movement of british forces south from canada into the hudson valley and second a movement of other british forces under general william howe out from new york.
the strategy was designed to trap the american army between the two british movements.
what movements of howe helped thwart that plan.
the two smaller maps on the right show a detailed picture of some of the major battles.
the upper one reveals the surprising american victory at saratoga.
the lower one shows a series of inconclusive battles between new york and philadelphia in 1777 and 1778.
the revolution in the middle colonies 1776 1778 114 chapter 5 would come down from canada to meet him.
john burgoyne commander of the northern force began a two pronged attack to the south along both the mohawk and the upper hudson approaches to albany.
but having set the plan in motion howe strangely abandoned his part of it.
instead of moving north to meet burgoyne he went south and captured philadelphia hoping that his seizure of the rebel capital would bring the war to a speedy conclusion.
philadelphia fell with little resistance and the continental congress moved into exile in york pennsylvania.
after launching an unsuccessful attack against the british on october 4 at germantown just outside philadelphia washington went into winter quarters at valley forge.
howes move to philadelphia left burgoyne to carry out the campaign in the north alone.
he sent colonel barry st leger up the st lawrence river toward lake ontario.
burgoyne himself advanced directly down the upper hudson valley and easily seized fort ticonderoga.
but burgoyne soon experienced two staggering defeats.
in one of them at oriskany new york on august 6 patriots held off st legers force of indians and loyalists.
that allowed benedict arnold to close off the mohawk valley to st legers advance.
in the other battle at bennington vermont on august 16 new england militiamen mauled a detachment that burgoyne had sent to seek supplies.
short of materials with all help cut off burgoyne fought several costly engagements and then withdrew to patriot victory at saratoga saratoga where general horatio gates surrounded him.
on october 17 1777 burgoyne surrendered.
the campaign in upstate new york was not just a british defeat.
it was a setback for the ambitious efforts of several iroquois leaders.
although the iroquois confederacy had declared its neutrality in the revolutionary war in 1776 some of its members allied themselves with the british among them a mohawk brother and sister joseph and mary brant.
this ill fated alliance further divided the already weakened joseph and mary brant iroquois confederacy because only three of the iroquois nations the mohawk the seneca and the cayuga followed the brants in support of the british.
a year after the defeat at oriskany iroquois forces joined british troops in a series of raids on white settlements in upstate new york.
patriot forces under the command of general john sullivan harshly retaliated wreaking such destruction on indian settlements that large groups of iroquois fled north into canada to seek refuge.
many never returned.
john burgoyne securing aid from abroad the leaders of the american effort knew that victory would not be likely without aid from abroad.
their most promising allies they realized were the french who stood to gain from seeing britain lose a crucial part of its empire.
at first france provided the united states with badly needed supplies.
but they remained reluctant to formally acknowledge the new nation despite the efforts of benjamin franklin in paris to lobby for aid and diplomatic recognition.
frances foreign minister the count de vergennes wanted evidence that the americans had a real chance of winning.
the british defeat at saratoga he believed offered that evidence.
when the news from saratoga arrived in london and paris in early december 1777 a shaken lord north made a new peace offer complete home rule within the empire for americans if they would quit the war.
vergennes feared the americans might accept the french diplomatic recognition offer and thus destroy frances opportunity to weaken britain.
encouraged by franklin he agreed on february 6 1778 to give formal recognition to the united states and to provide it with greatly expanded military assistance.
the american revolution 115 frances decision made the war an international conflict which over the years pitted france spain and the netherlands against great britain.
that helped reduce the resources available for the english effort in america.
but france remained americas most important ally.
the final phase the south the american victory at saratoga and the intervention of the french transformed the war.
instead of mounting a full scale military struggle against the american army the british now tried to enlist the support of those elements of the american britains southern strategy population who were still loyal to the crown.
since loyalist sentiment was strongest in the south and since the english also hoped slaves would rally to their cause the main focus of the british effort shifted there.
the new strategy failed dismally.
british forces spent three years from 1778 to 1781 moving through the south.
but they had badly overestimated the extent of loyalist sentiment.
and they had underestimated the logistical problems they would face.
patriot forces could move at will throughout the region blending in with the civilian population and pennsylvania british forces ac r french fleet british victory new jersey maryland m to po american forces.
ochambeau yorktown aug 30 oct 19 richmond chesapeake bay g charlottesville ho od t te lafaye n r gto s h in wa virginia rav es delaware american victory cape charles ll i s ene gr e guilford court house mar.
15 1781 l r georgia eutaw springs sept 8 1781 briar creek mar.
3 1779 charleston may 12 1780 evo st ton clin c nw or all c ar is m atlan t ic oc e an h1 ll 1 pbe cam savannah occ.
by british dec 29 1778 pr r h na augusta occ.
by british jan 29 1779 south carolina e cape lookout wilmington dee v an camden aug 16 1780 e pe sa kettle creek feb 14 1779.
cornwallis m r ta rr et on cape hatteras new bern s as gr en e a fe an morg s te ga cape kings mountain oct 7 1780 gr e de cowpens jan 17 1781 north carolina ay 1781 a cornw n destaing sept oct.
1779 100 mi 200 km the revolution in the south 1778 1781 the final phase of the american revolution occurred largely in the south which the british thought would be a more receptive region for their troops.
why did they believe that.
this map reveals the many scattered military efforts of the british and the americans in those years none of them conclusive.
it also shows the final chapter of the revolution around the chesapeake bay and the james river.
what errors led the british to their surrender at yorktown.
america in the world the age of revolutions the american revolution was a result of tensions and conflicts between imperial britain and its north american colonies.
but it was also both a part and a cause of what historians have come to call an age of revolutions which spread through much of the western world in the last decades of the eighteenth century and the first decades of the nineteenth.
the modern idea of revolution the overturning of old systems and regimes and the creation of new ones was to a large degree a product of the ideas of the enlightenment.
among those ideas was the notion of popular sovereignty articulated by among others the english philosopher john locke.
locke argued that political authority did not derive from the divine right of kings or the inherited authority of aristocracies but from the consent of the governed.
a related enlightenment idea was the concept of individual freedom which challenged the traditional belief that governments had the right to prescribe the way people act speak and even think.
champions of individual freedom in the eighteenth century among them the french philosopher voltaire advocated religious toleration and freedom of thought and expression.
the enlightenment also helped spread the idea of political and legal equality for all people the end of special privileges for aristocrats and elites and the right of all citizens to participate in the formation of policies and laws.
jean jacques rousseau a swissfrench theorist helped define these new ideas of equality.
together enlightenment ideas formed the basis for challenges to existing social orders in many parts of the western world and eventually beyond it.
the american revolution was the first and in many ways most influential of the enlightenment derived uprisings against 116 e stablished orders.
it served as an inspiration to people in other lands who opposed unpopular regimes.
in 1789 a little over a decade after the beginning of the american revolution dissenters rebelled in france at first through a revolt by the national legislature against the king and then through a series of increasingly radical challenges to established authority.
the monarchy was abolished and the king and queen publicly executed in 1793 the authority of the catholic church was challenged and greatly weakened and at the peak of revolutionary chaos during the jacobin period 1793 1794 over 40 000 suspected enemies of the revolution were executed and hundreds of thousands of others imprisoned.
the radical phase of the revolution came to an end in 1799 when napoleon bonaparte a young general seized power and began to build a new french empire.
but frances ancien regime of king and aristocracy never wholly revived.
together the french and american revolutions helped inspire uprisings in many other parts of the atlantic world.
in 1791 a major slave revolt began in haiti and soon attracted over 100 000 rebels.
the army of enslaved people defeated both the white settlers of the island and the french colonial armies sent to quell their rebellion.
under the leadership of toussaint louverture they began to agitate for independence which they obtained on january 1 1804 a few months after toussaints death.
the ideas of these revolutions spread next into spanish and portuguese colonies in the americas particularly among the so called creoles people of european ancestry born in the americas.
in the late eighteenth century they began to resist the continuing authority of colonial officials from spain and portugal and to demand a greater say in governing their own lands.
when napoleons french armies this painting portrays the storming of the great parisian fortress and prison the bastille on july 14 1789.
the bastille was a despised symbol of royal tyranny to many of the french because of the arbitrarily arrested and imprisoned people who were sent there.
the july assault was designed to release the prisoners but in fact the revolutionaries found only seven people in the vast fortress.
even so the capture of the bastille which marked one of the first moments in which ordinary frenchmen joined the revolution became one of the great moments in modern french history.
the anniversary of the event bastille day remains the french national holiday.
musee de la ville de paris musee carnavalet paris france bridgeman images storming the bastille invaded spain and portugal in 1807 they weakened the ability of the european regimes to sustain authority over their american colonies.
in the years that followed revolutions swept through much of latin america.
mexico became an independent nation in 1821 and provinces of central america that had once been part of mexico guatemala el salvador honduras nicaragua and costa rica established their independence three years later.
simn bolvar modeling his efforts on those of george washington movement that helped inspire revolutionary campaigns in venezuela ecuador and peru all of which won their independence in the 1820s.
at about the same time greek patriots drawing from the examples of other revolutionary nations launched a movement to win their independence from the ottoman empire which finally succeeded in 1830.
the age of revolutions left many new independent nations in its wake.
it did not however succeed in establishing the ideals of popular sovereignty individual freedom and political equality in all the nations it affected.
slavery survived in the united states and in many areas of latin america.
new forms of aristocracy and even monarchy emerged in france mexico brazil and elsewhere.
women many of whom had hoped the revolutionary age would win them new rights made few legal or political gains in this era.
but the ideals that the revolutionary era introduced to the western world continued to shape the histories of nations throughout the nineteenth century and beyond.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
how did the american revolution influ ence the french revolution and how were other nations affected by it.
what was the significance of the revolution in haiti and how much attention did it get in other nations.
117 118 chapter 5 leaving the british unable to distinguish friend from foe.
the british by contrast suffered all the disadvantages of an army in hostile territory.
it was this phase of the conflict that made the war revolutionary not only because revolutionary phase it introduced a new kind of warfare but because it had the effect of mobilizing and politicizing large groups of the population.
with the war expanding into previously isolated communities and with many civilians forced to involve themselves whether they liked it or not the political climate of the united states grew more heated than ever.
and support for independence far from being crushed greatly increased.
in the north the fighting settled into a stalemate.
sir henry clinton replaced the unsuccessful william howe in may 1778 and moved what had been howes army from philadelphia back to new york.
the british troops stayed there for more than a year.
in the meantime george rogers clark led a patriot expedition over the appalachian mountains and captured settlements in the illinois country from the british and their indian allies.
on the whole however there was relatively little military activity in the north after 1778.
there was however considerable intrigue.
in the fall of 1780 american forces benedict arnolds betrayal were shocked by the exposure of treason on the part of general benedict arnold.
convinced that the american cause was hopeless arnold conspired with british agents to betray the patriot stronghold at west point on the hudson river.
when the scheme was exposed and foiled arnold fled to the safety of the british camp where he spent the rest of the war.
the british did have some significant military successes during this period.
on december 29 1778 they captured savannah georgia.
after taking the port of charleston south carolina on may 12 1780 they advanced into the interior.
although the british were able to win conventional battles they faced constant harrassment from such patriot guerrillas as thomas sumter andrew pickens and francis marion the swamp fox penetrating to camden south carolina lord cornwallis whom clinton named british commander in the south met and crushed a patriot force under horatio gates on august 16 1780.
congress recalled gates and washington replaced him with nathanael greene one of the ablest american generals of his time.
even before greene arrived in the south the tide of battle had begun to turn against cornwallis.
at kings mountain near the north carolina south carolina border on october 7 1780 a band of patriot riflemen from the backwoods killed wounded or captured every man in a force of 1 100 new york and south carolina loyalists upon whom cornwallis had depended.
once greene arrived he confused and exasperated cornwallis by dividing the american forces into fast moving contingents while avoiding open conventional battles.
one of the contingents inflicted what cornwallis admitted was a very unexpected and severe blow at cowpens on january 17 1781.
finally after receiving reinforcements greene combined all his forces and maneuvered to meet the british at guilford court house north carolina.
after a hard fought battle there on march 15 1781 greene was driven from the field but cornwallis had lost so many men that he decided to abandon the carolina campaign.
instead he moved north hoping to conduct raids in the interior of virginia.
but clinton fearful that the southern army might be destroyed ordered him to take up a defensive position at yorktown.
american and french forces quickly descended on yorktown.
washington and the yorktown count de rochambeau marched a french american army from new york to join the marquis de lafayette in virginia while admiral de grasse took a french fleet with additional troops up chesapeake bay to the york river.
these joint operations caught cornwallis between land and sea.
after a few shows of resistance he surrendered on october 17 1781.
two days later as a military band played the world turned upside down he surrendered his whole army of more than 7 000.
the american revolution 119 winning the peace cornwalliss defeat provoked outcries in england against continuing the war.
lord north resigned as prime minister lord shelburne emerged from the political wreckage to succeed him and british emissaries appeared in france to talk informally with the american diplomats there benjamin franklin john adams and john jay.
the americans were under instructions to cooperate with france in their negotiations with england.
but vergennes insisted that france could not agree to any settlement with england until its ally spain had achieved its principal war aim winning back gibraltar from the british.
there was no real prospect of that happening soon and the americans began to fear that the alliance with france might keep them at war indefinitely.
as a result the americans began proceeding on their own without informing vergennes and soon drew up a preliminary treaty with great britain which was signed on november 30 1782.
benjamin franklin in the meantime skillfully pacified vergennes franklins diplomacy and avoided an immediate rift in the french american alliance.
the final treaty signed september 3 1783 was on the whole remarkably favorable to the united states.
it provided a clear cut recognition of independence and a large though ambiguous cession of territory to the new nation from the southern boundary of canada to the northern boundary of florida and from the atlantic to the mississippi.
the american people had good reason to celebrate as the last of the british occupation forces embarked from new york.
dissenters around the world too found inspiration in news of the revolution.
see america in the world the age of revolutions war and society historians have long debated whether the american revolution was a social as well as a political revolution.
but whatever the intention of those who launched and fought the war the conflict transformed american society.
loyalists and minorities estimates differ as to how many americans remained loyal to england during the revolution but it is clear that there were many at least one fifth and some estimate as much as one third of the white population.
some were officeholders in the imperial government.
others were merchants whose trade was closely tied to the imperial system.
still others were people who lived in relative isolation and had simply retained their traditional loyalties.
and there were those who expecting the british to win the war were currying favor with the anticipated victors.
many of these loyalists were hounded by patriots in their communities and harassed by legislative and judicial actions.
up to 100 000 fled the country.
those who could afford it moved to england.
others moved to canada establishing the first the loyalists plight english speaking community in the french speaking province of quebec.
some returned to america after the war and gradually reentered the life of the nation.
the war weakened other groups as well.
the anglican church many of whose members were loyalists lost its status as the official religion of virginia and maryland.
by the time the fighting ended many anglican parishes could no longer even afford clergymen.
also weakened were the quakers whose pacifism gave them widespread unpopularity.
120 chapter 5 other protestant denominations however grew stronger.
presbyterian congregational and baptist churches successfully tied themselves to the patriot cause.
most american catholics also supported the patriots and won increased popularity as a result.
shortly after the peace treaty was signed the vatican provided the united states with its own hierarchy and in 1789 its first bishop.
the war and slavery for some african americans the war meant freedom because the british enabled many escaped slaves to leave the country as a way of disrupting the american war effort.
in south carolina for example nearly one third of all slaves defected during the war.
for other african americans the revolution meant an increased exposure to the exposure to revolutionary ideas concept although seldom to the reality of liberty.
most african americans could not read but few could avoid the new and exciting ideas circulating through the towns and cities and even the plantations where they lived.
in several communities slaves exposed to revolutionary ideas engaged in open resistance to white control.
in charleston south carolina for example thomas jeremiah a free black man was executed after white authorities learned of elaborate plans for a slave uprising.
slaveowners opposed the british efforts to emancipate their slaves but they also feared that the revolution itself would foment slave rebellions.
although the ideals of the revolution produced occasional challenges to slavery by white southerners including laws in virginia and maryland permitting slaveowners to free manumit their slaves if they wished white support for slavery survived.
southern churches some of which flirted briefly with voicing objections to the system quickly rejected the antislavery ideas of the north and worked instead to reinforce white superiority.
in much of the north by contrast the combination of revolutionary sentiment and evangelical christian fervor helped spread antislavery sentiments widely through society.
the first target was the slave trade which was prohibited by several states pennsylvania rhode island and connecticut among them.
the antislavery movement next attacked state laws forbidding owners from freeing their slaves.
quakers and other antislavery activists succeeded in pressuring legislatures to allow legal emancipation in all the northern states and even in kentucky and tennessee before the end of the revolution.
the final step was emancipation of all slaves in a state.
pennsylvania was the first state in 1780 to declare slavery illegal within its borders again in part because of the influence of the gradual emancipation in the north fiercely antislavery quakers.
one by one all the northern states except new york and new jersey abolished slavery before the end of the revolution.
new york followed in 1799 and new jersey in 1804.
but northern emancipation was a gradual process in most states despite changes in the law.
a significant although steadily dwindling number of slaves remained in the north for several decades.
the revolution exposed the continuing tension between the nations commitment to liberty and its simultaneous commitment to slavery.
to people in our time and even to some people in revolutionary times liberty and slavery seem incompatible with each other.
but to many white americans in the eighteenth century especially in the south that did not seem obvious.
many white southerners believed in fact that enslaving africans whom they considered inferior and unfit for citizenship was the best way to ensure liberty for white people.
they feared that without slaves it would be necessary to recruit a servile white workforce in the south and that the resulting inequalities would jeopardize the survival of liberty.
one of the ironies of the american revolution was that the american revolution 121 many white americans were fighting both to secure freedom for themselves and to preserve slavery for others.
native americans and the revolution indians also viewed the american revolution with considerable uncertainty.
most tribes ultimately chose to stay out of the war.
but many indians feared that the revolution would replace a somewhat trustworthy ruling group the british who had tried to limit the expansion of white settlement into tribal land with one they considered generally hostile to them the patriots who had spearheaded the expansion.
thus some indians chose to join the english cause.
still others took advantage of the conflict to launch attacks of their own.
in the western carolinas and virginia cherokee led by chief dragging canoe launched a series of attacks on outlying white settlements in the summer of 1776.
patriot militias responded in great force ravaging cherokee lands and forcing the chief and many of his followers to flee west across the tennessee river.
those cherokee who remained behind agreed to a new treaty by which they gave up still more land.
some iroquois despite the setbacks at oriskany continued to wage war against americans in the west and caused widespread destruction in agricultural areas of new york and pennsylvania.
the retaliating american armies inflicted heavy losses on the indians but the attacks continued.
in the end the revolution generally weakened the position of native americans in several ways.
the patriot victory increased white demand for western lands.
many whites resented the assistance such nations as the mohawk had given the british and insisted on treating them as conquered people.
others drew from the native american position weakened revolution a paternalistic view of the tribes.
thomas jefferson for example came to view the indians as noble savages uncivilized in their present state but redeemable if they were willing to adapt to the norms of white society.
the triumph of the american patriots in the revolution contributed to the ultimate defeat of the indian tribes.
to white americans independence meant among other things their right to move aggressively into the western lands despite the opposition of the indians.
to the indians american independence was the greatest blow that could have been dealt us one tribal leader warned.
womens rights and roles the long revolutionary war had a profound effect on american women.
the departure of so many men to fight in the patriot armies left women in charge of farms and businesses.
often women handled these tasks with great success.
but in other cases inexperience inflation the unavailability of male labor or the threat of enemy troops led to failure.
some women whose husbands or fathers were called away to war did not have even a farm or shop to fall back on.
cities and towns had significant populations of impoverished women who on occasion led protests against price increases rioted or looted food.
at other times women launched attacks on occupying british troops whom they were required to house and feed at considerable expense.
not all women stayed behind when the men went off to war.
some joined their male relatives in the camps of the patriot armies.
these female camp followers increased army morale and provided a ready source of volunteers to cook launder nurse and do other necessary tasks.
in the rough environment of the camps traditional gender distinctions proved difficult to maintain.
considerable numbers of women became involved at least intermittently in combat.
a few women even disguised themselves as men to be able to fight.
co ns ider t he s o urc e the correspondence of abigail adams on womens rights 1776 between march and may 1776 abigail adams exchanged letters with her husband john and with mercy otis warren one of the few female political writers of the day.
in these notes the correspondents discussed the matter of womens rights in revolutionary america.
abigail adams to john adams march 31 1776 i long to hear that you have declared an independancy sic and by the way in the new code of laws which i suppose it will be necessary for you to make i would desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors.
do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the husbands.
remember all men would be tyrants if they could.
if particuliar care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebelion and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice or representation.
that your sex are naturally tyrannical is a truth so thoroughly established as to admit of no dispute but such of you as wish to be happy willingly give up the harsh title of master for the more tender and endearing one of friend.
why then not put it out of the power of the vicious and the lawless to use us with cruelty and indignity with impunity.
men of sense in all ages abhor those customs which treat us only as the vassals of your sex.
regard us then as beings placed by providence under your protection and in immitation of the supreme being make use of that power only for our happiness.
john adams to abigail adams april 14 1776 as to declarations of independency be patient.
read our privateering laws and our commercial laws.
what signifies a word.
122 as to your extraordinary code of laws i cannot but laugh.
we have been told that our struggle has loosened the bands of government every where.
that children and apprentices were disobedient that schools and colleges were grown turbulent that indians slighted their guardians and negroes grew insolent to their masters.
but your letter was the first intimation that another tribe more numerous and powerful than all the rest were grown discontented.
this is rather too coarse a compliment but you are so saucy i wont blot it out.
depend upon it we know better than to repeal our masculine systems.
altho they are in full force you know they are little more than theory.
we dare not exert our power in its full latitude.
we are obliged to go fair and softly and in practice you know we are the subjects.
we have only the name of masters and rather than give up this which would completely subject us to the despotism of the peticoat i hope general washington and all our brave heroes would fight.
abigail adams to mercy otis warren braintree april 27 1776 he is very saucy to me in return for a list of female grievances which i transmitted to him i think i will get you to join me in a petition to congress.
i thought it was very probable our wise statesmen would erect a new government and form a new code of laws.
i ventured to speak a word on behalf of our sex who are rather hardly dealt with by the laws of england which gives such unlimited power to the husband to use his wife.
i requested that our legislators would consider our case and as all men of delicacy and sentiment are adverse to exercising the power they possess yet as there is a natural propensity in human nature to domination i thought the most generous plan was to put it out of the power of the arbitrary and tyranick to injure us with impunity by establishing some laws in favour upon just and liberal principals.
i believe i even threatened fomenting a rebellion in case we were not considered and assured him we would not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we had neither a voice nor representation.
in return he tells me he cannot but laugh at my extraordinary code of laws.
that he had heard their struggle had loosened the bands of government that children and apprentices were disobedient that schools and colleges had grown turbulent that indians slighted their guardians and negroes grew insolent to their masters.
but my letter was the first intimation that another tribe more numerous and powerful than all the rest were grown discontented.
this is rather too coarse a complement he adds but that i am so saucy he wont blot it out.
so i have helped the sex abundantly but i will tell him i have only been making trial of the disinterestedness of his virtue and when weighd in the balance have found it wanting.
it would be bad policy to grant us greater power say they since under all the disadvantages we labour we have the ascendency over their hearts.
and charm by accepting by submitting sway.
abigail adams to john adams may 7 1776 i can not say that i think you very generous to the ladies for whilst you are proclaiming peace and good will to men emancipating all nations you insist upon retaining an absolute power over wives.
but you must remember that arbitrary power is like most other things which are very hard very liable to be broken and notwithstanding all your wise laws and maxims we have it in our power not only to free our selves but to subdue our masters and without violence throw both your natural and legal authority at our feet.
charm by accepting by submitting sway yet have our humour most when we obey understand analyze evaluate 1.
what was abigail adamss opinion of men in power and what did she request of john adams as they declared independence.
to what other social developments did john adams compare his wifes request.
what did he mean by the despotism of the peticoat a womens undergarment.
what did abigail adams predict in her second letter to john adams.
what do you think of her assessment of arbitrary power.
source the adams family correspondence eds.
l h butterfield et al.
cambridge ma belknap press of harvard university press 1963 vol.
the emphasis on liberty and the rights of man led some women to begin to question their own position in society.
abigail adams wrote to her husband john adams in 1776 in the new code of laws which i suppose it will be necessary for you to make i desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors see consider the source the correspondence of abigail adams on womens rights adams was simply calling for new protections against abusive and tyrannical men.
a few women however went further.
judith sargent murray one of the leading essayists of the late eighteenth century wrote in 1779 that womens minds were as good as those of men and that girls as well as boys therefore deserved access to education.
but little changed as a result.
under english common law an unmarried woman had some legal rights but a married woman had virtually no rights at all.
everything she 123 124 chapter 5 owned and everything she earned belonged to her husband.
because she had no property rights she could not engage in any legal transactions on her own.
she could not vote.
few legal rights for women she had no legal authority over her children.
nor could she initiate a divorce that too was a right reserved almost exclusively for men.
after the revolution it did become easier for women to obtain divorces in a few states.
otherwise there were few advances and some setbacks including the loss of widows rights to regain their dowries from their husbands estates.
the revolution in other words did not really challenge but actually confirmed and strengthened the patriarchal legal system.
still the revolution did encourage people of both sexes to reevaluate the contribution of women to the family and society.
as the new republic searched for a cultural identity for itself it attributed a higher value to the role of women as mothers.
the new nation was many americans liked to believe producing a new kind of citizen steeped in the principles of liberty.
mothers had a particularly important task therefore in instructing their children in the virtues that the republican citizenry now was expected to possess.
the war economy the revolution also produced important changes in the structure of the american economy.
after more than a century of dependence on the british imperial system american commerce suddenly found itself on its own.
english ships no longer protected american vessels.
in fact they tried to drive them from the seas.
british imperial ports were closed to american trade.
but this disruption in traditional economic patterns strengthened the american economy in the long run.
enterprising merchants in new england and elsewhere began to develop new commercial networks in the caribbean and south america.
by the mid 1780s american merchants were also developing an important trade with asia.
when english imports to america were cut off states desperately tried to stimulate domestic manufacturing.
no great industrial expansion resulted but there was a modest increase in production.
trade also increased substantially among the american states.
the creation of state governments at the same time as americans were struggling to win their independence on the battlefield they were also struggling to create new institutions of government to replace the british system they had repudiated.
the assumptions of republicanism if americans agreed on nothing else they agreed that their new governments would be republican.
to them republicanism meant a political system in which all power came from the people rather than from some supreme authority such as a king.
the success of such a government depended on the character of its citizenry.
if the population consisted of sturdy independent property owners imbued with civic virtue then the republic could survive.
if it consisted of a few powerful aristocrats and a great mass of dependent workers then it would be in danger.
from the beginning therefore the ideal of the small freeholder the independent landowner was basic to american political ideology.
jefferson the great champion of the independent yeoman farmer once wrote dependence begets subservience and venality suffocates the germ of virtue and prepares fit tools for the designs of ambition the american revolution 125 another crucial part of that ideology was the concept of equality.
the declaration of independence had given voice to the idea in its most ringing phrase all men are created equal the innate talents and energies of individuals not their positions rhetoric of equality at birth would determine their roles in society.
some people would inevitably be wealthier and more powerful than others.
but all people would have to earn their success.
there might be no equality of condition but there would be equality of opportunity.
in reality of course the united states was never a nation in which all citizens were independent property holders.
from the beginning there was a sizable dependent labor force white and black.
american women remained both politically and economically subordinate.
native americans were systematically exploited and displaced.
nor was there ever full equality of opportunity.
american society was more open and more fluid than that of most european nations but the condition of a persons birth was almost always a crucial determinant of success.
nevertheless in embracing the assumptions of republicanism americans were adopting a powerful even revolutionary ideology and their experiment in statecraft became a model for many other countries.
the first state constitutions two states connecticut and rhode island already had governments that were republican in all but name.
they simply deleted references to england and the king from their charters and adopted them as constitutions.
the other eleven states however produced new documents.
the first and perhaps most basic decision was that the constitutions were to be written down because americans believed the vagueness of englands unwritten constitution had produced corruption.
the second decision was that the power of the curbing executive power executive which americans believed had grown too great in england must be limited.
pennsylvania eliminated the executive altogether.
most other states inserted provisions limiting the power of governors over appointments reducing or eliminating their right to veto bills and preventing them from dismissing the legislature.
most important every state forbade the governor or any other executive officer from holding a seat in the legislature thus ensuring that unlike in england the executive and legislative branches of government would remain separate.
even so most new constitutions did not embrace direct popular rule.
in georgia and pennsylvania the legislature consisted of one popularly elected house.
but in every other state there were upper and lower chambers and in most cases the upper chamber was designed to represent the higher orders of society.
there were property requirements for voters some modest others substantial in all states.
revising state governments by the late 1770s americans were growing concerned about the apparent instability of their new state governments.
many believed the problem was one of too much democracy.
as a result most of the states began to revise their constitutions to limit popular power.
by waiting until 1780 to ratify its first constitution massachusetts became the first state to act on the new concerns.
two changes in particular differentiated the massachusetts and later constitutions from the earlier ones.
the first was a change in the process of c onstitution massachusettss constitution 126 chapter 5 writing itself.
most of the first documents had been written by state legislatures and thus could easily be amended or violated by them.
massachusetts created the constitutional convention a special assembly of the people that would meet only for the purpose of writing the constitution.
the second change was a significant strengthening of the executive.
the 1780 massachusetts constitution made the governor one of the strongest in any state.
he was to be elected directly by the people he was to have a fixed salary in other words he would not be dependent on the legislature each year for his wages he would have significant appointment powers and a veto over legislation.
other states followed.
those with weak or nonexistent upper houses strengthened or created them.
most increased the powers of the governor.
pennsylvania which had no executive at all at first now produced a strong one.
by the late 1780s almost every state had either revised its constitution or drawn up an entirely new one in an effort to produce greater stability in government.
toleration and slavery most americans continued to believe that religion should play some role in government but they did not wish to give special privileges to any particular denomination.
the privileges that churches had once enjoyed were now largely stripped away.
in 1786 virginia enacted the statute of religious liberty written by statute of religious liberty thomas jefferson which called for the complete separation of church and state.
more difficult to resolve was the question of slavery.
in areas where slavery was already weak new england and pennsylvania it was gradually abolished.
even in the south there were some pressures to amend or even eliminate the institution every state but south carolina and georgia prohibited further importation of slaves from abroad and south carolina banned the slave trade during the war.
virginia passed a law encouraging the voluntary freeing of slaves.
nevertheless slavery survived in all of the upper and lower states.
there were several reasons racist assumptions among whites about the inferiority of blacks the enormous economic investments many white southerners had in their slaves and the inability of even such men as washington and jefferson who had moral misgivings about slavery to reasons for slaverys persistence envision any alternative to it.
if slavery was abolished what would happen to the black people in america.
few whites believed that black men and women could be integrated into american society as equals.
the search for a national government americans were much quicker to agree on state institutions than they were on the structure of their national government.
at first most believed that the central government should remain relatively weak and that each state would be virtually a sovereign nation.
it was in response to such ideas that the articles of confederation emerged.
the confederation the articles of confederation which the continental congress had adopted in 1777 provided for a national government much like the one already in place before indepenlimited power of the national government dence.
congress remained the central indeed the only institution of national authority.
its powers expanded to give it authority to conduct the american revolution 127 wars and foreign relations and to appropriate borrow and issue money.
but it did not have power to regulate trade draft troops or levy taxes directly on the people.
for troops and taxes it had to make formal requests to the state legislatures which could and often did refuse them.
there was no separate executive the president of the united states was merely the presiding officer at the sessions of congress.
each state had a single vote in congress and at least nine of the states had to approve any important measure.
all thirteen state legislatures had to approve any amendment of the articles.
during the process of ratifying the articles of confederation which required approval by all thirteen states broad disagreements over the plan became evident.
the small states had insisted on equal state representation but the larger states wanted representation to be based on population.
the smaller states prevailed on that issue.
more important the states claiming western lands wished to keep them but the rest of the states demanded that all such territory be turned over to the national government.
new york and virginia had to give up their western claims before the articles were finally approved.
they went into effect in 1781.
the confederation which existed from 1781 until 1789 was not a complete failure but it was far from a success.
it lacked adequate powers to deal with interstate issues or to enforce its will on the states.
diplomatic failures in the peace treaty of 1783 the british had promised to evacuate american territory but british forces continued to occupy a string of frontier posts along the great lakes within the united states.
nor did the british honor their agreement to make restitution to slave owners whose slaves the british army had confiscated.
disputes also erupted over the northeastern boundary of the new nation and over the border between the united states and florida.
most american trade remained within the british empire and americans wanted full access to british markets england however placed sharp restrictions on that access.
in 1784 congress sent john adams as minister to london to resolve these differences but adams made no headway with the english who were john adams ambassador to england never sure whether he represented a single nation or thirteen different ones.
throughout the 1780s the british government refused even to send a diplomatic minister to the american capital.
confederation diplomats agreed to a treaty with spain in 1786.
the spanish accepted the american interpretation of the florida boundary.
in return the americans recognized the spanish possessions in north america and accepted limits on the right of united states vessels to navigate the mississippi for twenty years.
but southern states incensed at the idea of giving up their access to the mississippi blocked ratification.
the confederation and the northwest the confederations most important accomplishment was its resolution of controversies involving the western lands.
the confederation had to find a way to include these areas in the political structure of the new nation.
the ordinance of 1784 based on a proposal by thomas jefferson divided the western territory into ten self governing districts each of which could ordinances of 1784 and 1785 petition congress for statehood when its population equaled the number of free inhabitants of the smallest existing state.
then in the ordinance of 1785 congress created a system for surveying and selling the western lands.
the territory north of the ohio river was to 128 chapter 5 the seven ranges first area surveyed rie ee 1st range lak pa ng um r ki us em l t t li o o hi ohio 1803 indiana cincinnati c d e virginia kentucky 1792 four sections reserved for subsequent sales r ve ri a b pennsylvania virginia northwest territory section 16 reserved for school funds 29 23 11 one section 640 acres 1 mile square a half section 320 acres b quarter section 160 acres c half quarter section 80 acres d e quarter quarter section 40 acres 26 20 8 one township 6 miles square 6 miles 2nd range 3rd range 4th range 5th range 6th range 7th range geographers line base line 1 mile land survey ordinance of 1785 in the ordinance of 1785 the congress established a new system for surveying and selling western lands.
these maps illustrate the way in which the lands were divided in an area of ohio.
note the highly geometrical grid pattern that the ordinance imposed on these lands.
each of the squares in the map on the left was subdivided into 36 sections as illustrated in the map at the lower right.
why was this grid pattern so appealing to the planners of the western lands.
be surveyed and marked off into neat rectangular townships each divided into thirty six identical sections.
in every township four sections were to be reserved by the federal government for future use or sale a policy that helped establish the idea of public land.
the revenue from the sale of one of these federally reserved sections was to support creation of a public school.
the precise rectangular pattern imposed on the northwest territory the grid became a model for all subsequent land policies of the federal government and for many other planning decisions in states and localities.
the grid also became characteristic of the layout of many american cities.
it had many advantages.
it eliminated the uncertainty about property borders that earlier more informal land systems had produced.
it sped the development of western lands by making land ownership simple and understandable.
but it also encouraged a dispersed form of settlement with each farm family separated from its neighbors that made the formation of community more difficult.
whatever its consequences however the 1785 ordinance made a dramatic and indelible mark on the american landscape.
the american revolution 129 the original ordinances proved highly favorable to land speculators and less so to ordinary settlers many of whom could not afford the price of the land.
congress compounded the problem by selling much of the best land to the ohio and scioto companies before making it available to anyone else.
criticism of these policies led to the passage in 1787 of another law governing western settlement legislation that became known as the northwest ordinance the 1787 ordinance abandoned the ten the northwest ordinance districts established in 1784 and created a single northwest territory out of the lands north of the ohio the territory could be divided subsequently into three to five territories.
it also specified a population of 60 000 as a minimum for statehood guaranteed freedom of religion and the right to trial by jury to residents of the region and prohibited slavery throughout the territory.
the western lands south of the ohio river received less attention from congress.
the region that became kentucky and tennessee developed rapidly in the late 1770s as slave owning territories and in the 1780s began setting up governments and asking for statehood.
the confederation congress was never able to resolve the conflicting claims in that region successfully.
indians and the western lands on paper the western land policies of the confederation brought order and stability to the process of white settlement in the northwest.
but in reality order and stability came slowly and at great cost because much of the land was claimed by the indians.
congress tried to resolve that problem in 1784 1785 and 1786 by persuading iroquois choctaw chickasaw and cherokee leaders to sign treaties ceding lands to the united states.
but those agreements proved ineffective.
in 1786 the leadership of the iroquois confederacy repudiated the treaty it had signed two years earlier.
other tribes had never really accepted the treaties affecting them and continued to resist white movement into their lands.
violence between whites and indians on the northwest frontier reached a crescendo in the early 1790s.
in 1790 and again in 1791 the miami led by the famed warrior little turtle defeated united states forces in two major battles.
efforts to negotiate a settlement failed because of the miamis insistence that no treaty was possible unless it forbade white settlement west of the ohio river.
negotiations did not resume until after general anthony wayne led 4 000 soldiers into the ohio valley in 1794 and defeated battle of fallen timbers the indians in the battle of fallen timbers.
a year later the miami signed the treaty of greenville ceding substantial new lands to the united states in exchange for a formal acknowledgment of their claim to the territory they had managed to retain.
this was the first time the new federal government recognized the sovereignty of indian nations in doing so it affirmed that indian lands could be ceded only by the tribes themselves.
that hard won assurance however proved a frail protection against the pressure of white expansion.
debts taxes and daniel shays the postwar depression which lasted from 1784 to 1787 increased the perennial american problem of an inadequate money supply a burden that weighed particularly heavily on debtors.
the confederation itself had an enormous outstanding debt accumulated during the revolutionary war and few means with which to pay it down.
it had sold war bonds that were now due to be repaid it owed money to its soldiers it had substantial debts 130 chapter 5 abroad.
but with no power to tax it could request money only from the states and it received only about one sixth of the money it asked for.
the fragile new nation was faced with the grim prospect of defaulting on its obligations.
this alarming possibility brought to prominence a group of leaders who would play a crucial role in the shaping of the republic for several decades.
robert morris the head of the confederations treasury alexander hamilton his young protg james madison of virginia and others all called for a continental impost a 5 percent duty on imported goods to be levied by congress and used to fund the debt.
many americans however feared that the impost plan would concentrate too much financial power in the hands of morris and his allies in philadelphia.
congress failed to approve the impost in 1781 and again in 1783.
the states had war debts too and they generally relied on increased taxation to pay them.
but poor farmers already burdened by debt considered such policies unfair.
they demanded that the state governments issue paper currency to increase the money supply and make it easier for them to meet their obligations.
resentment was especially high among farmers in new england who felt that the states were squeezing them to enrich already wealthy bondholders in boston and other towns.
throughout the late 1780s therefore mobs of distressed farmers rioted periodically in various parts of new england.
dissidents in the connecticut valley and the berkshire hills of massachusetts rallied behind daniel shays a former captain in the continental army.
shays issued a set of demands that included paper money tax relief a moratorium on debts and the abolition of imprisonment for debt.
during the summer of 1786 the shaysites prevented the collection of debts private or public and used force to keep courts from convening and sheriffs from selling confiscated property.
when winter came the rebels advanced on springfield hoping to seize weapons from the arsenal there.
in january shayss rebellion 1787 an army of state militiamen set out from boston met shayss band and dispersed his ragged troops.
daniel shays and job shattuck shays and shattuck were the principal leaders of the 1786 uprising of poor massachusetts farmers demanding relief from their indebtedness.
shattuck led an insurrection in the east which collapsed when he was captured on november 30.
shays organized the rebellion in the west which continued until it was finally dispersed by state militia in late february 1787.
the following year state authorities pardoned shays even before that the legislature responded to the rebellion by providing some relief to the impoverished farmers.
this drawing is part of a hostile account of the rebellion published in 1787 in a boston almanac.
granger nyc all rights reserved.
the american revolution 131 as a military enterprise shayss rebellion was a failure although it did produce some concessions to the aggrieved farmers.
shays and his lieutenants at first sentenced to death were later pardoned and massachusetts offered the protesters some tax relief and a postponement of debt payments.
but the rebellion had important consequences for the future of the united states for it added urgency to the movement to produce a new national constitution.
conclusion between a small inconclusive battle on a village green in new england in 1775 and a momentous surrender at yorktown in 1781 the american people fought a great and terrible war against the mightiest military nation in the world.
few would have predicted in 1775 that the makeshift armies of the colonies could withstand the armies and navies of the british empire.
but a combination of luck brilliance determination costly errors by the british and timely aid from abroad allowed the patriots as they began to call themselves to make full use of the advantages of fighting on their home soil and to frustrate british designs.
the war was not just a historic military event.
it was also a great political one for it propelled the colonies to unite to organize and to declare their independence.
having done so they fought with even greater determination defending now not just a set of principles but an actual fledgling nation.
by the end of the war they had created new governments at both the state and national level and had begun experimenting with new political forms.
the war was also important for its effects on american society for the way it shook the existing social order for the way it caused women to question their place in society and for the way it spread notions of liberty and freedom throughout a society that in the past had mostly been rigidly hierarchical.
even african american slaves absorbed some of the ideas of the revolution although it would be many years before they would be in any position to make much use of them.
victory in the american revolution solved many of the problems of the new nation but it also produced others.
what should the united states do about its relations with the indians and with its neighbors to the north and south.
what should it do about the distribution of western lands.
what should it do about slavery.
how should it balance its commitment to liberty with its need for order.
these questions bedeviled the new national government in its first years of existence.
key terms people places events abigail adams 123 american patriots 121 articles of confederation 110 battle of fallen timbers 129 benedict arnold 118 common sense 107 declaration of independence 110 george washington 111 hessians 107 john burgoyne 114 joseph and mary brant 114 lord cornwallis 118 loyalists tories 119 northwest ordinance 129 republicanism 124 saratoga 114 second continental congress 107 shayss rebellion 130 thomas jefferson 110 william howe 113 yorktown 118 132 chapter 5 recall and reflect 1.
what questions did the second continental congress debate and how did it answer them.
what was the impact of thomas paines common sense on americans view of the war with britain.
what were the ideological ideals of the new state and national governments and how did those ideals compare with the realities of american society.
what was the purpose of the articles of confederation.
how did the revolution affect the role of religion and the position of churches in american society.
the constitution and the new republic framing a new government adoption and adaptation federalists and republicans establishing national sovereignty the downfall of the federalists looking ahead 1.
what were the most important questions debated at the constitutional convention of 1787 and how were they resolved.
what were the main tenets of the federalist and antifederalist arguments on ratification of the constitution.
what were the origins of americas first party system.
by the late 1780s many americans had grown dissatisfied with the confeder ation.
it was they believed ridden with factions unable to deal effectively with economic prob lems and frighteningly powerless in the face of shayss rebellion.
a decade earlier americans had deliberately avoided creating a strong national government.
now they reconsidered.
in 1787 the nation produced a new constitution and a much more powerful government with three independent branches.
but the adoption of the constitution did not complete the creation of the republic for although most americans came to agree that the constitution was a nearly perfect document they often disagreed on what that document meant.
133 framing a new government time line annapolis conference constitutional convention constitution adopted 1787 1788 states ratify constitution washington becomes first president bill of rights the confederation congress had become so unpopular and ineffectual by the mid 1780s that it began to lead an almost waiflike existence.
in 1783 its members timidly withdrew from philadelphia to escape army veterans demanding their back pay.
they took refuge for a while in princeton new jersey then moved on to annapolis maryland and in 1785 settled in new york.
delegates were often scarce.
only with great difficulty could congress produce a quorum to ratify the treaty with great britain ending the revolutionary war.
french revolution judiciary act first bank of u s chartered washington reelected whiskey rebellion jays treaty pinckneys treaty john adams elected president xyz affair alien and sedition acts 1798 1799 quasi war with france virginia and kentucky resolutions jefferson elected president 134 advocates of reform in the 1780s some of the wealthiest and most powerful groups in the population began to clamor for a stronger national government.
by 1786 such demands had grown so intense that even defenders of the existing system reluctantly agreed that the government needed strengthening at its weakest point its lack of power to tax.
the most effective advocate of a stronger national government was alexander hamilton the illegitimate son of a scottish merchant in the west indies who had become a successful new york lawyer.
hamilton now called for a national convention to overhaul the articles of confederation.
he found an important ally in james madison of virginia who persuaded the virginia legislature to convene an interstate conference on commercial questions.
only five states sent delegates to the meeting which took place at annapolis in 1786 but the conference approved a proposal by hamilton for a convention of special delegates from all the states to meet in philadelphia the next year.
at first there seemed little reason to believe the philadelphia convention would attract any more delegates than had the annapolis meeting.
then early in 1787 the the constitution and the new republic 135 news of shayss rebellion spread throughout the nation alarming many previously apathetic leaders including george washington who promptly made plans to travel to philadelphia for the constitutional convention.
washingtons support gave the meeting wide credibility.
a divided convention fifty five men representing all the states except rhode island attended one or more sessions of the convention that sat in the philadelphia state house from may to september 1787.
these founding fathers as they became known much later the founding fathers were relatively young the average age was forty four and well educated by the standards of their time.
most were wealthy property owners and many feared what one of them called the turbulence and follies of democracy.
yet all retained the revolutionary suspicion of concentrated power.
the convention unanimously chose washington to preside over its sessions and then closed it to the public and the press.
it then ruled that each state delegation would have a single vote and that major decisions would require not unanimity as they did in congress but a simple majority.
almost all the delegates agreed that the united states needed a stronger central government.
but there agreement ended.
virginia the most populous state sent a well prepared delegation to philadelphia led by james madison thirty six years old who had devised in some detail a plan for a new national government.
the virginia plan shaped the agenda of the madisons virginia plan convention from the moment edmund randolph of virginia opened the debate by proposing that a national government ought to be established consisting of a supreme legislative executive and judiciary even that brief description outlined a government very different from the confederation.
but the delegates were so committed to fundamental reform that they approved the resolution after only brief debate.
there was less agreement about the details of madisons virginia plan.
it called for a national legislature of two houses.
in the lower house states would be represented in proportion to their population.
members of the upper house were to be elected by the lower house under no rigid system of representation thus some of the smaller states might at times have no members at all in the upper house.
the proposal aroused immediate opposition among delegates from the smaller states.
william paterson of new jersey offered an alternative the new patersons new jersey plan jersey plan that would retain the essence of the confederacy with its one house legislature in which all states had equal representation.
it would however give congress expanded powers to tax and to regulate commerce.
the convention rejected patersons proposal but supporters of the virginia plan now realized they would have to make concessions to the smaller states.
they agreed to permit members of the upper house what became the senate to be elected by the state legislatures.
many questions remained unresolved.
among the most important was the question of slavery.
there was no serious discussion of abolishing slavery during the convention.
but other issues were debated heatedly.
would slaves be counted as part of the population in determining representation in congress.
or would they be considered property not entitled to representation.
delegates from the states with large slave populations wanted to have it both ways.
they argued that slaves should be considered persons in determining representation but as property if the new government levied taxes on the states on the basis of population.
representatives from states where slavery had disappeared or was expected soon to disappear argued that slaves should be included in calculating taxation but not representation.
