chapter 30 entering a new time 867 30 1 significant dates hi 2001 m2 wj 2002 io j 20q3 2004 2005 2006 2008 2009 2010 2012 2013 george w bush inaugurated as u s president apple itunes and wikipedia launched president bush signs tax cut legislation terrorist attack on world trade center and pentagon united states installs new interim government in afghanistan bush signs no child left behind education legislation united states invades iraq overthrows saddam hussein abuse of iraqi prisoners in abu ghraib prison comes to light the 9 11 commission report issued bush defeats john kerry to be reelected hurricane katrina hits new orleans and the gulf coast after republican election losses rumsfeld replaced as secretary of defense in a sign of growing financial trouble bear stearns absorbed by jp morgan financial crisis including lehman brothers bankruptcy barack obama defeats john mccain barack obama inaugurated as president of the united states republican scott brown wins ted kennedy s seat in the u s senate republicans win majority of house of representatives obama reelected for a second term u s supreme court rules part of defense of marriage act unconstitutional in united states v windsor 30 1 at 9 37 a m american flight 77 crashed into the pentagon.
by this time passengers on united flight 93 had learned from cell phone calls that they were part of a massive terrorist plot.
as the plane headed for washington dc heroic passengers overpowered the hijackers and the plane crashed in a field in somerset county pennsylvania.
many acts of heroism occurred on that chaotic morning.
betty ong a flight attendant on american airlines flight 11 stayed on her cell phone reporting minute by minute until the plane crashed into the world trade center.
in new york city nick gerstle a technician for verizon knew cpr and thought he could be helpful at ground zero the now horrific site where the twin towers of the trade center had stood.
in the midst of the rubble he and some firefighters found two trapped new york city police officers.
he heard the officers say please.
dont let us die.
and they didnt.
the two officers were among the few rescued from the collapsed buildings.
julia martinez and margaret espinoza were paraprofessionals teacher aids at the high school for leadership and public service that was only a block away from the world trade center.
they began moving two wheelchair bound students out of the chaos found their way blocked by debris and with the aid of two strangers simply picked up the girls and carried them to safety blocks away.
new yorkers pentagon employees passengers on the flights and average americans did heroic things.
that day changed history as few others had.
ihe focus of this chapter is on the decade and more after that tragic day during which public and personal events were shadowed by what came to be called simply 9 11.
the impact of september 11 2001 analyze the impact of 9 11 on the nation and presidency of george bush and the impact of bush administration policies around the world.
in the first moments and hours after the horrific crashes no one knew what to make of the attack on the world trade center and pentagon.
on first hearing the news on radio or tv most people had the same reaction as florence engoran who worked in the south tower of the world trade center.
when she arrived at her office on the 55th floor someone said a small plane hit the other building she remembered i wasnt especially upset by the news and tended to agree with her coworker who said oh just sit down lets keep working.
we have to get out some focus reports within minutes however as she saw flames and heard another crash engoran realized that something much more serious was happening.
although she was 5 months pregnant engoran headed for the stairs and walked down the 55 flights.
before she made it to the bottom the lights were off and the stairwell was filled with dust but she made it.
most of those working in the buildings made it out.
but many did not.
handicapped people who could not walk down the stairs were stuck.
people on the higher floors could not get past the fires.
some 78 police officers and 400 firefighters who had responded to the emergencies remained in the buildings trying to evacuate people when the structures collapsed.
it all happened very fast.
at 9 58 a m just 1 hour after the crash the south tower of the world trade center collapsed floor by floor showering a wide area with rubble.
thirty minutes later the north tower also collapsed.
what had been two of the tallest buildings in the world that morning were now simply a giant hole in the ground.
the worst violence on united states soil since the civil war had just taken place.
nearly 3 000 people died 246 passengers on the planes 2 600 at the world trade center including workers in the two towers police and fire rescue workers and a few unlucky passersby and 125 people at the pentagon.
the fear loss anger and fortitude generated from that day would shape a new reality for the nation.
at 9 30 a m the federal aviation administration grounded all flights within the united states.
for the week that followed the skies would be clear of everything but high flying military planes.
airports would be eerily quiet.
at a little after 1 00 p m that tuesday president bush just 9 months into his first term addressed the nation 868 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present the twisted ruins of the world trade center in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 from an air force base in louisiana telling people that massive security measures were in effect and that the united states would hunt down and punish those responsible for these cowardly acts though at that point no one was quite sure who they were.
at 8 30 p m president bush spoke to the nation for a second time this time from the oval office asking for prayers for the families and friends of the victims and again promising retaliatory action.
ground zero was still a mass of burning rubble and would be for weeks.
the pentagon fire was contained but not under control.
the nation tried to make sense of what had happened.
finding the terrorists al qaeda the taliban afghanistan in the initial confusion of the morning of september 11 no one was quite sure who was behind the attack.
by early afternoon george tenet the director of the cia informed president bush that while the agency was still investigating all the evidence pointed to an attack by al qaeda ordered by its leader osama bin laden.
by late that evening when the president met with what he then called his war council they all agreed that plans needed to be developed to punish not only the perpetrators of the 9 11 attack but any who harbored them.
on september 20 president bush spoke to a joint session of congress.
he said tonight we are a country awakened to danger he said of the government of afghanistan that they will hand over the terrorists or they will share their fate and he told the rest of the world either you are with us or you are with the terrorists there would be no neutrals in the war on terror.
the president said that the war was with terrorists not with islam.
he insisted the enemy of america is not our many muslim friends.
it is not our many arab friends.
our enemy is a radical network of terrorists and every government that supports them nevertheless the militant tone of the speech while reassuring some worried many.
in the immediate aftermath of the attacks international support and sympathy for the united states was high.
even nations long hostile to the united states such as syria were expressing support.
but with bush s response some of the support began to fade.
9 11 attack the attack of september 11 2001 on the world trade center and the pentagon organized by al qaeda.
chapter 30 entering a new time 869 30 1 bo.
i american voices 9 11 memories michael muskal september 11 2013 veryone who lived through the day had their own experience of 9 11 one they will not forget.
twelve years later a los angeles 303 i times reporter looked back on his own memories and those of j others who contacted him.
i even 12 years later the events of sept 11 2001 sear 30 j j americans memories.
j in comments posted on people remember the tragic events of the day the moments both good and bad heroic and fearful that are summed up by the numerals 9 11.
it was early morning when the first airplane hit one of the towers of the world trade center in lower manhattan.
on the east coast commuters were rushing to their jobs schools were filling with educators and students.
it seemed an ordinary day until 8 46 a m when it wasn t.
on 9 11 2001 i was having a national sales meeting in our offices at the world trade center.
we had visitors from chicago california and new orleans.
everyone was looking forward to getting together to recharge writes keith webster of malibu.
at 8 45 a m while standing in our boardroom looking at the statue of liberty in the south harbor all hell was about to break loose.
we heard a pop then a swoosh.
a stream of debris crossed the sky.
it looked like a ticker tape parade but only a few thousand feet higher.
in an instant i knew what was happening in my mind s eye an image of a terrorist walking onto my floor with a bomb vest flashed.
i could see my lobby vaporized and in flames.
webster also writes about his eventual rescue by heroic responders.
maralynn mash of ft lauderdale fla says she was at an elementary school near the world trade center that day.
the children were headed toward the basement for safety when police and fire officials came into the building thinking it was empty but then we were directed to run run for your lives.
teachers and students under the guidance of an incredibly able principal ran ahead of the second cloud north on greenwich what i remember is a day of bravery a year of dedication in response to an act of cowardice.
so very proud to be a new yorker and an american.
on the west coast people were just waking up many watched the tragedy in new york unfold on television.
instead of the usual fodder of second day news lifestyle features and celebrity pomp viewers saw the horror of the deadliest terrorist attack on u s soil.
the images of the towers crashing and exploding gave me a sense of insecurity that something like this could happen in downtown los angeles writes maricela of la puente.
i remember arriving at raymond a villa intermediate school in santa ana calif.
it was an ordinary day.
i hung out with my friends for a little bit headed to first period sat at my desk the usual.
i was in sixth grade at the time.
around the middle of class my teacher put the tv on writes lene de leon now of san antonio.
i will never forget the images or the confusion i felt upon seeing the videos replaying over and over again.
i tried so hard not to cry for fear of being made fun of but i was hurting for all those people and my country.
everything happening was so painful to watch.
the second plane hitting people desperate for help and waving white flags out of the windows people jumping out of the windows the towers falling.
all the images were engraved in my memory and are still vivid.
they are etched onto the nation s soul nation too and are freshly renewed every 9 11 as officials relatives and mourners gather in new york pennsylvania and washington.
in all nearly 3 000 people died.
as kendra of auburn ala writes mom said to me this day will be a day to remember for the rest of your life.
source michael muskal 9 11 memories all hell was about to break loose los angeles times september 11 2013.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what different emotions do people remember when recalling 9 11.
have the emotions changed in the 12 years between the event and when this article was written.
comparison in what ways were the memories of those who were in or near the world trade center similar to and in what ways different from the memories of others who lived much farther away but shared the same moment in the nation s history.
870 by the time bush spoke cia and u s army forces had been dispatched to pakistan and uzbekistan to prepare for an attack on afghanistan whose taliban government was protecting bin laden and al qaeda.
in early october the united states attacked sites within afghanistan while building on the ground alliances with afghan warlords who were hostile to the taliban regime.
soon u s ground forces allied with the warlords began an assault on the taliban government.
on november 9 the northern city of mazar e sharif fell to the u s led coalition forces and a few days later the taliban government fled the capital of kabul.
by early december the united states and its local allies were in control of the country and on december 22 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present hamid karzai a leader of one of the anti taliban factions was installed as the new leader of afghanistan.
for the most part however the taliban leaders had escaped.
many afghans celebrated the defeat of the austere and tyrannical taliban even as they kept a wary eye on the americans and on each other.
late in 2001 u s backed forces attacked the remaining al qaeda strongholds in a region of mountainous caves known as tora bora.
perhaps a quarter of all al qaeda and taliban operatives were killed or captured but the rest including bin laden and his chief lieutenant ayman al zawahiri escaped into the lightly governed provinces on the pakistani side of the border from which they continued to operate with considerable freedom.
the united states did not track bin laden down until may 2011 almost 10 years later.
in the aftermath of the attack president bush under considerable pressure from families of victims agreed to appoint a special commission to study the 9 11 attack and make recommendations regarding future policy.
the chair of the commission former republican governor of new jersey thomas kean and vice chair lee h hamilton former democratic representative from indiana were careful to say we write with the benefit and handicap of hindsight.
we are mindful of the danger of being unjust to men and women who made choices in conditions of uncertainty and in circumstances over which they often had little control nevertheless they noted significant mistakes.
they reported that while presidents and cia directors are inundated with information a lot of information had pointed to a possible large scale al qaeda attack.
as early as december 1998 the cias presidential daily brief for bill clinton said suggests bin laden and his allies are preparing for attacks on u s including an aircraft hijacking a report to george w bush on august 6 2001 included a detailed note headlined bin laden determined to strike in us they also noted that the united states was unprepared for dealing with an attack.
although air force planes were launched after the first plane crashed into the world trade center the pilots had no clear instructions and the commission had great doubts that if the passengers had not caused the fourth plane to crash in pennsylvania it could have been stopped before reaching washington dc.
the most important failure they concluded was one of imagination.
we do not believe leaders understood the gravity of the threat the terrorist danger from bin laden and al qaeda was not a major topic for policy debate among the public the media or in the congress.
it had barely come up during the 2000 presidential campaign.
30 1 i while the defeat of the taliban brought new opportunities to many afghans especially women who could again study in school and take jobs it did not bring stability to the country.
chapter 30 entering a new time 871 no child left behind federal legislation requiring that all students be tested and that schools show adequate yearly progress in the test scores of all students.
the george w bush presidential agenda once in office in january 2001 george w bush did not waste any time implementing his own agenda.
while the events of the following september would make foreign policy central to that agenda he did not come to office with such a focus.
indeed most early initiatives focused on domestic policy.
as his administration took shape especially his choices for members of his cabinet many wondered about his promise to be a uniter he had selected a cabinet with more racial minorities and more women than any previous one but they were a very conservative lot.
three days after the inauguration bush announced that he would use the upcoming renewal of the elementary and secondary education act first passed under lyndon johnson in 1965 see chapter 22 to change the course of federal education policy.
he had campaigned on a promise to address what he called the soft bigotry of low expectations for poor students and he acted quickly on that promise.
he called his new proposal no child left behind and announced he would seek a bipartisan education reform that would be the cornerstone of my administration in spite of the highly partisan split around his election two of the most liberal democratic members of congress massachusetts senator edward m kennedy and california house member george miller played key roles in developing the act and shepherding it through congress.
the core of no child left behind was a requirement that to receive federal funds states must develop clear standards then test all students from the third to the eighth grade and use the test results to measure whether individual schools and districts were making adequate yearly progress ayp in improving the education of all students and closing the achievement gap although many supported the legislation its implementation quickly generated criticism of the amount of testing involved the constraints imposed by the regulations and the lack of funding available for implementation.
bush moved with equal speed on his other top priority an across the board tax cut.
during the campaign he had insisted that the clinton budget surpluses should be given directly back to taxpayers.
alan greenspan of the federal reserve board told congress that bushs proposed tax cut of 1 6 trillion over 10 years would not harm the economy and might do some good.
there was general consensus about some sort of cut and bush was able to sign a phased in tax cut of 1 4 trillion on june 7 2001 less than 5 months after the inauguration.
the new law cut the highest tax rate from american classrooms like this one were transformed by the expectations included in the no child left behind legislation.
in this 2003 photo ron paige secretary of the department of education under george w bush answers questions from students during a visit to the skinner magnet center in omaha nebraska.
872 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 30 1 39 6 percent to 35 percent a significant cut though still above the reagan rates.
it also created a new lower tax bracket of only 10 percent for the working poor exempted many people from any federal tax and phased out inheritance taxes.
almost immediately many tax payers received rebate checks.
cutting taxes was a very popular policy.
the tax cut legislation however posed two serious problems.
the first was that most of the major cuts were to be phased in and people were impatient.
pressure mounted to speed up the implementation of the tax cuts and in less than 2 years bush proposed and congress passed the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 which speeded tax reductions significantly.
the second problem was that with reduced taxes the u s treasury took in a lot less money.
while some especially within the administration argued that the tax cuts were stimulating the economy and creating jobs most economists outside of government saw little evidence for the claim.
both sides had to acknowledge that the tax cuts along with significantly increased spending by the administration especially after 9 11 were creating a growing federal deficit.
the surpluses of the late clinton years disappeared.
for the rest of the bush term the federal deficit grew significantly.
some like vice president dick cheney said deficits don t matter economists and many leaders of both parties were less sure.
education reform and tax cuts were the most significant domestic policy agendas of george w bushs 8 years in office and both were enacted during his first year.
a number of other policy initiatives however were also important to the president.
bush came to office committed to what he called faith based initiatives he believed that religious communities were often better than the federal government at delivering direct human services.
nine days after the inauguration he proposed what he called charitable choice legislation that would allow religious groups to apply for federal funds as long as they were not to be used for worship or proselytizing.
while legislation made it through the house two different bills were blocked in the senate.
in frustration bush issued executive orders in december 2002 that prohibited federal agencies from discriminating against religious charities and established faith based offices in several cabinet departments.
for religious communities that sought federal funds it created an especially friendly atmosphere.
bush had also campaigned on a promise to reform social security giving individuals greater choice in the investment of the funds they contributed to the social security system.
while other priorities dominated his early years bush devoted a significant amount of his 2005 state of the union speech the first of his second term to his proposal to allow more choice in the use of social security funds.
by 2005 however bush was distracted by the war and democrats were far less willing to give in to the presidents initiatives.
little movement happened on allowing greater choice in social security and after the 2008 financial crisis when people realized that such choices might have been financially devastating the idea died.
bush had little patience with conservationists.
he signed legislation allowing drilling in the arctic national wildlife refuge in alaska and supported offshore oil exploration.
he did not move on environmental issues or global warming.
because of his own religious convictions he opposed stem cell research in spite of dramatic appeals from many including nancy reagan.
his appointments especially to the federal courts tended to be very conservative.
while the 2000 presidential election had been fought almost exclusively over domestic issues the events of september 11 2001 changed everything.
from then onward foreign policy and the impact of international issues on the internal politics of the united states would be the dominant agenda of the bush administration until his last few months in office when a new economic crisis returned attention to the domestic agenda.
in the meantime however terrorism took center stage.
the war on terror at home the report of the 9 11 commission made recommendations to tighten security within the united states and abroad.
however they noted many of our recommendations call for the government to increase its presence in our lives therefore while chapter 30 entering a new time 873 30 1 ii 1 r if m usa patriot act j legislation that sought to protect zzr americans by authorizing significant new j data gathering by the federal government.
protecting our homeland americans should be mindful of threats to vital personal and civil liberties whether the bush administration or the obama administration that followed kept the right balance has been a subject of continuing debate.
even before the commission finished its work congress at bush s request passed the usa patriot act which the president signed on october 26 2001 only weeks after the attack.
the act expanded not only the authority of the department of justice to search telephone e mail medical financial and library records without a court order but also the authority to increase monitoring of the u s borders and of noncitizens within the country.
it also gave the treasury the right to monitor financial records and bank transactions.
in the midst of the fears generated by 9 11 the patriot act passed by large majorities in both houses of congress.
most defended the laws provisions as necessary at a time of national emergency.
nevertheless some were deeply troubled by the bill.
richard armey a conservative republican member of the house insisted that the act have a sunset provision and expire in 5 years.
wisconsin liberal democratic senator russell feingold the only member of the senate to vote against the law said some have said rather cavalierly that in these difficult times we must accept some reduction in our civil liberties in order to be secure.
of course there is no doubt that if we lived in a police state it would be easier to catch terrorists but that probably would not be a country in which we would want to live the debate about the patriot act continued long after it passed.
in january 2003 the american library association worried about increasing searches of library records condemned the patriot act as a present danger to the constitutional rights and privacy rights of library users others disagreed.
john yoo who had served as one of the lead attorneys in the u s department of justice advising president bush and eric posner a law professor wrote a piece for the american enterprise institute in december 2003 in which they said the worst thing about the patriot act is its orwellian name.
if the act marginally reduces peacetime liberties this is a reasonable price to pay for a valuable weapon against al qaeda while the debate continued president bush signed a renewed version of the patriot act in march 2006 and president barack obama signed two further extensions of the law in 2010 and 2011.
the war in afghanistan and iraq from the moment the first plane hit the world trade center some people were convinced that iraqs saddam hussein was somehow behind it or at least allied with al qaeda.
deputy secretary of defense paul wolfowitz insisted that iraq had to be dealt with if terrorism was to be defeated.
vice president cheney supported a u s attack on iraq.
others urged caution.
the cia and others in the national security council initially found no compelling case against iraq.
indeed evidence showed considerable antipathy between the very religious al qaeda leader osama bin laden and a secular leader like saddam hussein in iraq.
so in the immediate aftermath of 9 11 the focus stayed on the al qaeda strongholds in afghanistan see map 30 1.
however the issue of iraq never went away.
british prime minister tony blair supported plans for an attack on iraq but jack straw blairs foreign minister insisted saddam was not threatening his neighbors and his wmd weapons of mass destruction capability was less than that of libya north korea or iran as talk of a possible u s attack on iraq circulated an article appeared in the wall street journal on august 15 2002 by brent scowcroft who had been the national security adviser in the administration of h w.
scowcroft wrote dont attack saddam he argued that such a war could lead to armageddon in the middle east and urged instead that the united states should be pressing the united nations security council to insist on an effective no notice inspection regime for iraq some speculated that scowcrofts article was in fact a warning from bushs father a close friend of scowcroft but if it was it came too late.
874 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 30 1 map 30 1 afghanistan and iraq.
after a 2001 attack on the taliban government of afghanistan the united states turned its attention to iraq which it attacked in 2003.
in january 2002 just 4 months after the attacks in new york and washington dc bush gave his state of the union message in which he singled out iraq along with iran and north korea as an axis of evil bush said iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward america and to support terror this is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world a conservative columnist charles krauthammer wrote if there was a serious internal debate within the administration over what to do about iraq that debate is over the only remaining debate seems to have been whether the united states and great britain needed to seek authorization from the u s congress and united nations to attack iraq.
although british prime minister blair supported the attack on iraq he insisted on united nations approval.
the un had imposed a financial and trade embargo on iraq after it invaded kuwait and among other things required it to disclose and eliminate weapons of mass destruction wmd and to allow un inspections to confirm the status of any such weapons.
u s secretary of state colin powell urged seeking support from congress and the un.
ever since the earlier 1991 u s war with iraq over kuwait the united states had protected kurds in northern iraq and maintained a boycott of iraqi oil.
now the united states was preparing to do much more.
after considerable debate congress voted to authorize the use of military force if diplomacy with iraq failed.
the resolution passed the senate by a vote of 77 to chapter 30 entering a new time 875 23 and the house by 296 to 133.
while almost everyone supported the invasion of afghanistan and the attack on al qaeda divisions ran deep about iraq.
the two liberal democratic senators from massachusetts were divided.
john kerry said i believe that a deadly arsenal of weapons of mass destruction in his saddam hussein s hands is a threat and a grave threat in contrast the senior senator from massachusetts edward m kennedy voted no as did the most senior member of the senate west virginia senator robert byrd.
a young barack obama had not yet been elected to the senate but he told a rally this is a dumb war after the congressional vote colin powell took the arguments to the united nations security council.
powell put his personal prestige on the line to convince the security council of the need to topple saddam husseins government.
the vote was 15 to zero in favor.
france russia and china all of which had grave reservations about a war in iraq hoped that the authorization would force iraq to agree to tougher inspections to avoid an invasion.
with authorization from congress and the un the united states great britain and a coalition of other countries most of whom sent only token forces went to war and toppled saddam hussein with lightning speed.
on march 19 2003 u s forces began the war with a huge attack using bombers over 1 500 flights a day plus launching navy cruise missiles.
the u s military called it shock and awe after the air attack ground forces moved across the country.
by the first week in april the airport at baghdad fell to u s led troops and u s tanks roared into the capital city.
the iraqi minister of information was captured most of the rest of the leadership fled and saddam hussein was a fugitive in the country he had long dominated.
u s and british casualties were very low.
the war it seemed had been won skillfully.
on may 1 president bush announced major combat operations in iraq have ended.
in the battle of iraq the united states and our allies have prevailed the next steps would not be so easy however.
securing a country as large and as tightly regulated as iraq was no easy task.
many iraqis who were delighted to see hussein gone were uneasy about the role of foreign troops in their country.
an iraqi professor told american reporter anne garrels you understand you will now have to be in complete control and we will resent you under a sign proclaiming mission accomplished president bush announced the end of combat operations in iraq on may 1 2004 the worst of america s difficulties in iraq however were just beginning.
876 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 30 1 every step of the way.
in fact the united states never sent enough forces to manage the country once the old government had been removed.
very little planning had gone into preparation for the postinvasion world of iraq.
most officials assumed that iraqis would quickly return to work.
as condoleezza rice then the national security adviser said the concept was that we would defeat the army but the institutions would hold everything from ministries to police forces it did not happen.
as soon as the old authority was gone looters began to pillage government buildings.
they stole computers televisions and metal to be sold for scrap which they raided from places such as towers holding communication lines and metal file cabinets filled with important documents.
at the central bank looters drilled into the vaults and ran out with the money much of it in u s dollars or euros that could not be traced.
they broke into the national museum and carried off 15 000 ancient objects of extraordinary value.
defense secretary rumsfeld responded stuff happens most iraqis and people around the world were less understanding.
one military advisor said were incompetent as far as they re concerned in august 2003 thomas friedman wrote in the new york times it would be a tragic irony if the greatest technological power in the history of the world came to the cradle of civilization with its revolutionary ideas and found itself defeated because it couldnt keep the electricity on in may 2003 secretary rumsfeld appointed a u s diplomat l paul jerry bremer as head of the coalition provisional authority cpa to bring order to iraq.
bremer was an experienced diplomat but he was not familiar with the middle east.
he set up his headquarters in the fortified green zone a former hussein palace and issued two orders that in retrospect seemed a serious mistake.
modeling the first order on the de nazification of germany after world war ii bremer ordered the de baathification of iraq.
the baath party had been husseins political party the only one allowed in the country.
government officials senior officials police officers and teachers were required to be members.
the order that no member of the baath party could work in the new administration immediately threw some 30 000 to 50 000 out of work.
the idea that ministries or the police could quickly be up and running was gone.
a week later bremer dissolved the iraqi army.
the initial u s plans for a postwar government had focused on removing a few generals and then reestablishing the army since it was solid and had discipline as well as credibility inside iraq.
with his order bremer dissolved this source of structure and order.
he also infuriated some 400 000 iraqi soldiers who thought they had been promised that if they would not resist the americans they could keep their jobs after the war.
now they were out of their jobs and had lost their pensions but still had access to arms.
as it became clear that the united states did not have enough troops in iraq to maintain order iraqis not only became angry at the americans but also became angry at one another.
husseins dictatorship had maintained tight control over a country whose people were deeply divided.
within weeks members of the sunni muslim minority of which hussein was a part and which had been the nation s elite were attacked by members of the shiite muslim majority.
the sunnis fought back.
on august 29 two car bombs killed moderate shiite leader ayatollah mohammad baqir al hakim and 124 of his followers and destroyed the mosque where they were worshipping.
while sunnis and shiites fought in the center and south of the country iraqi kurds in the north who had been protected for 12 years by the no fly zone now fought to maintain their autonomy.
reprisal followed reprisal.
within months of the victory iraq was close to a civil war and the americans were caught in the middle of it.
more american soldiers were killed between may and october of 2003 in postwar fighting than from march to may of that year in the actual invasion.
between 2003 and 2004 u s forces searched the country trying to find weapons of mass destruction and the escaped dictator saddam hussein.
in spite of the fact that those weapons had been one of the prime reasons for going to war none were ever found.
hussein apparently had wanted to keep up the pretense that they existed to frighten the ml coalition provisional authority cpa the temporary governing authority for iraq set up after the u s invasion in march and april of 2003.
30 entering a new time 877 united states and his old enemies like iran.
in fact the weapons were not there.
bush wrote in his memoirs in retrospect of course we all should have pushed harder on the intelligence and revisited our assumptions however hussein himself was found not far from his hometown of tikrit in december 2003.
after an extended trial hussein was executed by the u s backed provisional government of iraq in december 2006.
as iraq spiraled into civil war u s soldiers complained that they had no training for serving as an occupying force.
in the city of fallujah some 2 500 marines battled abu ghraib prison an iraqi prison taken over by u s forces after the invasion.
iraqi detainees wait to be released at abu ghraib prison west of baghdad in iraq june 2006.
pictures taken in abu ghraib prison of tortured prisoners circulated around the world including i the muslim middle east.
with 1 200 dissidents in street to street sometimes room to room fighting.
in the end the u s forces won but then withdrew from the city and the dissidents regrouped.
similar battles took place elsewhere.
iraqi sunnis made an alliance with al qaeda.
the home grown version of al qaeda in iraq known as al qaeda in mesopotamia grew stronger as much of the country experienced anarchy.
electricity worked in baghdad for perhaps 8 hours a day even in the summer when air conditioning was desperately needed.
oil was being pumped only at very low levels.
another disaster took place at a prison in bagdad.
hussein had built abu ghraib prison as a fortress prison for dissidents.
by late summer 2003 husseins prisoners had been freed and the u s military was using the prison to hold some 4 000 prisoners of their own.
they had orders from the pentagon to get information from the new prisoners at abu ghraib.
in the search for information they humiliated prisoners by keeping some naked in front of female guards by piling them on top of each other and by making them crawl and bark u s troops took pictures of what they were doing.
in april 2004 the whole sordid mess at abu ghraib came to light.
cbs news the new yorker magazine and news organizations around the world including arab news sources like al jazeera showed the pictures and reported what was happening at abu ghraib.
hearing the reports u s general james mattis responded when you lose the moral high ground you lose it all a year after the invasion the u s commanding officer general ricardo sanchez described the situation as a civil war and added whats more we had created these conditions ourselves paul bremer said weve become the worst of all things an ineffective occupier at home in the united states opposition to the war and the occupation was growing.
there were no weapons of mass destruction.
there was no order in iraq.
there was no end in sight.
the war in iraq dominated u s elections.
in the 2004 presidential contest the democrats nominated a vietnam era war hero senator john kerry of massachusetts after a spirited contest in which howard dean the governor of vermont and a virtual unknown on the national stage was the first candidate to make the internet the core of his campaign.
although the dean campaigns success at raising funds and recruiting volunteers did not lead to his nomination it transformed future political campaigns.
once kerry secured the democratic nomination the party united behind him and focused not only on the war in iraq but also on bushs handling of the economy.
kerry had voted for the war but he had become a major critic.
he called the war and the subsequent u s occupation of iraq a colossal blunder and said that the president was deliberately misleading the american people about the war.
bush responded that the world is better off without saddam hussein outside political groups supporting bush sought to tarnish kerrys military record.
kerry struck a chord with his criticism but he was not a strong campaigner indeed one critic called him a genius at 878 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present self destruction.
in the end the president won by a very small margin of 62 million to 59 million or 50 7 percent of the popular vote to kerrys 48 3 percent.
the electoral vote was also close 286 to 251.
nonetheless bush had won a second term.
in addition republicans also maintained control of congress.
two years later protests against the war had grown much stronger as it continued into its fourth year.
although the president was not on the ballot his policies were and democrats won a majority in both houses of congress in the 2006 midterm elections.
by 2006 the war s cost in lives and dollars was a top issue in the election.
democrat nancy pelosi replaced republican dennis hastert as speaker of the house of representatives the first woman in history to serve as speaker and democrat harry reid replaced republican mitch mcconnell as majority leader in the senate.
two new women were added to the senate bringing the total of women to 16 a then all time high.
many thought the republicans were going to be in trouble in the 2008 presidential election.
in the meantime president bush knew he would face an unfriendly congress during his last 2 years in office.
looking at the situation in iraq in 2006 one american official said weve taken samarra four times and weve lost it four times we need a new strategy in november 2006 after the midterm elections president bush fired defense secretary rumsfeld and replaced him with robert gates a less ideological administrator.
a new u s ambassador to iraq ryan crocker who spoke arabic and who knew the middle east well was appointed.
general david petraeus was made the overall commander of military forces in the region.
he developed a very different strategy in iraq.
first there was the surge an infusion of an additional 30 000 u s troops to provide strength in numbers.
but instead of staying in fortified enclaves petraeus placed units in population centers.
their mission was to get to know and protect the iraqi people to find out what their complaints were and try to respond.
if troops took control of an area they stayed and tried to build a new infrastructure.
troops felt vulnerable and losses were high.
slowly however the troops and the iraqi government began to take control of the country.
by fall one journalist reported from baghdad some shops stay open until late in the evening.
children play in parks young women stay out after dark restaurants are filled with families and old men sit at sidewalk cafes playing backgammon and smoking shisha pipes it was a peace of sorts.
30 2 quick review did the war on terror dominate george w bush s presidency at home and abroad.
hurricane katrina and its aftermath 30 2 explain the impact of hurricane katrina on the gulf coast.
early monday morning august 29 2005 hurricane katrina one of the most powerful and deadly hurricanes in american history hit new orleans and the gulf coast of louisiana mississippi and alabama.
hurricanes have naturally pounded florida and the gulf coast since long before the first europeans or africans arrived but katrina was a natural disaster compounded by human failure.
the result was hours and days of anguish for many over 1 800 deaths and more than 75 billion in damage.
the surge a plan for the handover of authority to a new government for iraq and an eventual orderly withdrawal of all u s forces.
hurricane katrina a massive storm that hit new orleans and the gulf coast in august 2005 leading to widespread death and destruction.
the failure to prepare only 4 years after it was founded new orleans was swept away by a hurricane in september 1722.
in 1849 the levees protecting new orleans failed flooding more than 200 city blocks.
hurricanes in 1893 and 1919 flooded the city and killed many the great mississippi river flood of 1927 devastated the city.
after the 1927 floods the army corps dredged the lower mississippi river which made for easier transport chapter 30 entering a new time 879 but changed the rivers course.
development and the pumping of oil and gas from underground further degraded the mississippi delta and hundreds of square miles of swampland simply disappeared under water leaving new orleans much more vulnerable to storms coming from the gulf of mexico.
in 2005 a giant storm arrived.
as hurricane katrina began to strengthen in late august 2005 more immediate failures added dangerously to the already vulnerable area.
weather forecasters began to realize that hurricane katrina might be the big one the hurricane that people feared.
nevertheless new orleans mayor ray nagin louisiana governor kathleen blanco and mississippi governor haley barbour all refused to issue mandatory evacuation orders.
an offer by amtrak to take people by train was ignored and the last trains left the city with empty passenger cars.
at least a quarter of new orleans population did not own cars and the school buses that could have been used to evacuate people sat idle and eventually flooded.
as the storm grew stronger on sunday morning august 28 mayor nagin opened the superdome the citys massive sports complex as a shelter of last resort.
some 8 000 or 9 000 people moved in before the storm hit.
however most of the poorest people in new orleans lived too far from the superdome to get there and no transportation was offered.
then katrina hit.
the storm it started raining in biloxi mississippi around 5 00 p m on sunday august 28.
by 9 00 p m it was raining in new orleans and the wind was starting to pick up.
by midnight the storm surge hit mississippi.
between 2 00 and 6 00 a m the wind rain and storm surge was pounding the gulf coast and new orleans.
winds were blowing steadily at 150 miles per hour.
sometime between 3 00 and 5 00 a m the levees on the 17th street canal gave way.
new orleans lost electric power at 5 15 a m and telephone service at 7 11 a m ihe hurricanes winds splintered buildings toppled power lines collapsed highway bridges tore off part of the roof of the new orleans superdome and stirred up waves on lake pontchartrain that weakened the levees.
the wind also drove a huge surge of water onto the shore and up the mississippi river.
finally in new orleans the weakened levees failed and a wall of water poured into neighborhoods where it rose rapidly destroyed buildings and trapped people in upper floors and attics.
examples of the power of the storm were everywhere.
in st bernard parish just across the mississippi river from new orleans the rising water filled st ritas nursing facility and 35 bedridden patients were drowned.
in waveland mississippi where police were riding out the storm in the brick police headquarters water filled the building and then the storm toppled it.
twenty seven officers ended up swimming to safety some clinging to a nearby tree for 3 hours before they were rescued.
the worst destruction came in new orleans itself however especially in its poorer neighborhoods.
by the time katrina hit new orleans almost 80 percent of its 485 000 people had evacuated.
the 100 000 or so who were left were those too stubborn or too poor to go anywhere.
the lower ninth ward had been a working class african american community for generations.
it had strong community institutions from churches to the neighborhood bars where jazz blues and iconic new orleans style music thrived.
the area was 7 feet below sea level but the levees were designed to keep the water out.
people in the lower ninth ward had no transport to the superdome no transport out of town and few options rather than trying to ride out the storm.
at 8 14 a m the industrial canal that brought cargo ships in but also channeled water away from the lower areas filled from the storm surge.
pumps failed and the walls were breached.
within an hour much of the ninth ward was filled with 6 8 feet of water and the water kept rising.
in a very short time the lower ninth ward was devastated.
the most famous resident of the lower ninth ward was the 77 year old fats domino the famous rock n roll musician.
domino his wife and their five children 880 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present v ninth ward residents stranded on the roof of their homes await rescue.
the death and destruction that came with hurricane katrina was unimaginable to most americans.
j 30 j and their families were riding out the storm at their house on marais street.
then the water from the breech started pouring in and quickly rose to the top of first floor.
ihe water was full of mud sewage oil and stank of death.
workers would later call it a toxic stew.
with 8 feet of mud filled water destroying everything in the house and reaching the ceiling the family ran to the attic.
some neighbors thought they had all drowned but the water in the domino house did not rise higher.
by afternoon a new orleans harbor police rescued the family.
fats domino his wife and his children joined what was by then 20 000 survivors in the superdome.
the mementos of a life time were gone.
the cleanup few failed to notice that the worse scenes of suffering and death were in african american communities.
the new orleans police department was part of the problem.
many of the officers simply deserted their posts leaving new orleans to its own devices.
some of those who remained offered heroic help but others were eventu ally convicted of criminal activity.
in addition the federal emergency management agency fema failed to live up to its responsibilities.
fema had been created during the carter administration to coordinate the diverse federal agencies that might be needed in the case of a natural disaster.
however for too long during katrina and its aftermath fema did nothing.
fema staff were asking why arent we getting the orders.
why isnt this being treated like a real emergency femas director in 2005 michael brown was a political appointee with no experience in managing any disas ters.
when brown assured mississippi governor haley barbour that fema had lots of hurricane practice in florida barbour responded i dont think you ve seen anything like this it was one of the kinder statements brown heard that week as peo ple waited for federal help that did not come.
chapter 30 entering a new time 881 american voices surviving hurricane katrina mary gehman 2005 veryone who lived through hurricane katrina has their own memories.
mary gehman shares this one.
all through the night gusts of incredibly heavy wind battered the house from the east side.
it started out mild but eventually i was awakened by the noise snug on my living room couch.
i could only hope the upstairs rooms were going to hold tight.
finally about noon on monday the winds started to diminish.
there were another few hours of rain and some gusts but the storm s fury had been spent for about an hour or two late that afternoon after the storm had quieted and the rain stopped i enjoyed a sense of relief and self righteous victory.
i had been right to follow my gut feeling about being able to weather the hurricane.
the water outside in the street had risen higher than i had ever seen it before in my 27 years living in the alley.
it flowed fast like a roiling creek lapping the second step of my porch.
by 5 00 p m that evening the creek outside my front steps had turned from a greenish grey to black and the water was imperceptibly inching up.
the flow had slowed somewhat but there was no sign of it stopping or receding.
with a sickening feeling i watched as it came up to the threshold and began to ooze in under the front door.
a few minutes later water pressed in through the baseboards i knew we were in for a fight.
the radio reported there had been a massive break in the 17th street canal levee and the water would rise farther before it stopped hopefully the water would stop in an hour or two.
by tuesday 3 a m the water had risen to cover the second step as i eased into it from the slick hardwood stairs it came up above my knees to mid thigh well over two feet deep the floor boards were slippery coated i assumed by a film of oil and filth by about 3 00 that afternoon i had pretty much made up my mind to get out.
what to do about the dogs was the one remaining block.
i knew the boats and helicopters that were picking people up were not taking large dogs i glanced at the photos of my sons their wives and my grandchildren on my night stand and thought how useless i d be to them were i to be found dead my two old dogs keeping guard over me.
no i had to prioritize things in a rational manner out on the balcony i could not look at the dogs not even as i set out a bucket of water and a dish of food for each it was dusk by the time a flat bottomed boat manned by bossier city louisiana firefighters finally pulled up in the alley by the house where i was sitting on the roof peak.
i scrambled down grabbed the school bag and my purse pulled the tall window shut behind me and handed my things down to a man in the boat.
the red cross would be providing food and water so no need to take more than the absolute minimum the man in the boat assured me the dogs pressed against me and i petted them for the last time my eyes welling over with tears all i know is that on my return to the house five weeks later there was no trace of the dogs.
i don t regret that i stayed through the storm i was able to salvage a lot of important papers and items that are now of great comfort to me.
the overpass will never feel the same to me as i pass over it nearly every day.
my lovely dogs still haunt me.
their questioning faces swim up to the surface of my consciousness now and then i tell them i left them for their own good.
they seem to understand.
they have no choice.
none of us does.
source downloaded august 14 2011.
thinking critically 1.
historical interpretation what does gehman s description of the crisis tell you about her response to it.
contextualization how does gehman s descriptions of her actions fit with the actions that government leaders did or did not take regarding the storm.
by wednesday august 31 2 days after the storm two hospitals in new orleans charity and university lost their generators.
it was over 100 degrees in the hospitals.
with no electricity staff and volunteers used hand pumps to keep oxygen flowing to desperately ill people.
with virtually no water or supplies only the most rudimentary medical aid was possible.
those in the superdome were trying to survive in horrifying primitive conditions with no sanitation and dead bodies laying exposed in hallways.
not until thursday were thousands of people finally evacuated to houston texas where shelter was offered.
new orleans never returned to its pre katrina population and a year after the storm whole neighborhoods were virtually abandoned even as others like the ninth ward slowly rebuilt and came back to life.
3 2 quick review based on this information why do you think people from all over the country volunteered to help the city and people of new orleans.
882 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present the financial crisis of 2008 30 3 explain the costs and consequences of the 2008 financial crisis.
30 1 ihe headline on the wall street journal for monday september 15 2008 was double the normal size and ran across all six columns of the paper.
it said crisis on wall street as lehman totters merrill is sold and aig seeks to raise cash by the time most people read the paper lehman was no longer tottering the storied bank had declared bankruptcy.
bank of america bought merrill lynch and bankers and federal authorities were trying to save the american international group aig.
before the day was over the stock market fell by 504 48 points.
it would fall much further.
the financial exuberance of the last 2 decades had come to a sudden end.
in one extraordinary weekend saturday and sunday september 13 and 14 most of the nations leading bankers and senior government officials led by the secretary of the treasury henry hank paulson tried to salvage the american economy.
although the government and the bankers failed to save lehman brothers they avoided a far worse fate of massive bankruptcies and the coming of a second great depression.
nevertheless they did not succeed in saving the thriving economy of the last 2 decades.
the extent of the financial crisis of 2008 came as a surprise even to treasury secretary paulson who had warned that a crisis was coming since becoming the top federal financial official in july 2006 and to timothy geithner then the head of the new york federal reserve bank.
the size and complexity of the crisis that hit the country in 2008 was much more severe than they would have predicted.
ihe economy had been growing rapidly since the early 1990s.
interest rates had remained low in part because of policies at the federal reserve bank in part because of the clinton era efforts to cut the size of the federal deficit and in part because bankers and governments in asia especially china were willing to make low interest loans to americans and european borrowers particularly to finance their purchases of asian goods.
during the 1990s and later because of policies fostered by the clinton and bush administrations bankers got much more freedom from federal regulations than had been the case in any period since the depression.
in 1999 with bipartisan support congress passed the gramm leach bliley act that repealed a section of the 1933 glass steagall act.
glass steagall which was passed at the height of the great depression created the federal deposit insurance corporation fdic to provide federal insurance for bank accounts but also required that insured banks not use their money to speculate that is to make risky investments.
for decades insured banks provided mortgages to families that wanted to buy a home usually up to 80 percent of the price of a house so people could pay off their homes over a 20 to 30 year time span.
banks were cautious in making loans insisting on detailed documentation of a familys ability to pay back the loan.
most of the time a bank that issued a mortgage continued to hold it until the loan was paid off.
investment banks like lehman brothers and goldman sachs were free to speculate on the stock market or in other investments but they were not federally insured they were risking their own money not that of the taxpayers.
what had been a hard and fast divide between investment and commercial banks in 1933 had been slowly eroding and after 1999 had became a very porous wall.
two further developments changed the way banks operated and mortgages were issued in the united states.
president george w bush talked of an ownership society in which americans would be invested in their communities because they owned their own homes.
liberal democrats like massachusetts representative barney frank insisted that mortgages be available to allow poorer people to own their own homes.
30 2 30 3 30 4 financial crisis of 2008 a significant economic downturn that began with the housing mortgage market and ultimately led to high unemployment.
chapter 30 entering a new time 883 inflated housing prices and problems with home mortgages helped cause the financial crisis of 2008.
as a result many people were evicted or forced to sell homes they could no longer afford which produced a glut on the housing market and a significant drop in home prices and values.
at the same time banks found new ways to handle and profit from home mortgages.
rather than issue a mortgage and then hold it banks divided mortgages into small shares sliced and diced them as some said and then sold the mortgage shares at a profit to many different banks and investors.
as a result banks could invest in pieces of many different mortgages in ways that seemed to lower the risk of individual mortgage defaulting since investors held portions of many mortgages rather than the whole amount of a few.
with interest rates low and mortgages easier than ever to sell to other banks mortgage lenders also began issuing mortgages to people who never before would have been eligible.
they issued mortgages with no down payment and no required documentation of income or ability to pay in what became known as the subprime mortgage market and then sold these mortgages at a profit.
the institution that had issued the mortgage was not at risk if the person who took out the mortgage later defaulted because that institution had long since sold the mortgage probably in pieces to several different investors.
with such easy funding available sellers found they could ask higher prices for homes and housing prices climbed at an extraordinary rate.
between 2001 and 2006 housing prices kept rising interest rates stayed low and bankers made a lot of money.
the investment bank goldman sachs generated an average income of 661 000 per employee in 2007.
goldmans chief lloyd blankfein earned 54 million that year.
mortgages were no longer merely for primary residences but for investment.
people bought houses as investments and then sold them for higher amounts known as flipping which enabled them to buy more expensive houses with the profits or simply pocket the money.
everyone seemed to be making money and many argued that only fools were left out of the process.
the situation was a classic bubble very much like every other bubble from the tulip bubble of the 1600s in holland to the stock market bubble of 1929 to the bubble of the 1990s.
in 2006 the housing bubble reached its peak.
housing prices stopped rising.
people who had bought houses they could not afford and had planned to flip them could not sell them.
people who had bought homes with flexible interest rates thinking that they would refinance for a lower rate later could not find a new mortgage.
more people started defaulting on loans.
as defaults grew banks who held the mortgages started to get into trouble.
even if mortgages had been sliced and diced banks that owned slices of mortgages that were in default were now themselves in trouble.
initially most people thought the crisis would be limited to a few mortgage lenders who had taken too many risks.
they were wrong.
before long it became clear that large and supposedly stable investment banks like lehman and goldman sachs which held portions of many sliced loans were in a lot of trouble.
bankers who had taken risks throughout their careers confident that there was always a way out could not find a way out of the crisis.
over the weekend of september 13 14 2008 while treasury secretary paulson was trying to maintain confidence he privately called his wife to share his worries.
what if the system collapses he asked.
in the end the nations financial system did not collapse.
but it did not resume the financial health that had characterized most of the 1990s and early 2000s.
at the end of september secretary paulson and congressional leaders put together troubled asset relief program tarp legislation that would stop the continuing financial collapse.
when tarp was put to a vote in the house of representatives in spite of the support of leaders of both parties the bailout was rejected by a 228 to 205 vote by members of both parties who did not think it was the governments business to use taxpayer money to bail out investors who had taken too many risks with their own funds.
immediately after the vote the dow jones industrial average lost another 777 points the biggest 1 day drop ever.
another report 884 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present indicated that 159 000 jobs had been lost in september.
the crisis was spreading far beyond the banks.
as credit and confidence dried up people saw jobs savings and pensions disappear.
the american economy seemed to be teetering badly.
finally on friday october 3 under pressure from president bush and from both major presidential candidates congress passed the tarp legislation.
the law created a 700 billion fund to buy the worst of the troubled assets from the banks and stabilize the system.
we have shown the world that the united states will stabilize our financial markets and maintain a leading role in the global economy bush said.
in may 2009 congress created a financial crisis inquiry commission to study the crisis.
the commission held a number of hearings.
at one of them in june 2010 the financier warren buffett was asked who was to blame.
i ts a little bit like cinderella at the ball buffett said.
people may have some feeling that at midnight it s going to turn to pumpkin and mice but its so darn much fun theres no villain.
others thought there was some specific blame to be assigned.
people blamed lehman brothers and other banks.
they blamed the auditing companies that should have looked more closely at the account books of the banks.
they blamed the repeal of glass steagall.
and many saw the crisis as one more in the sad long line of investment bubbles that when they burst hurt not only those caught up in the speculation but the economy of the whole nation and indeed of the world.
certainly the crisis could have been worse and the work of the treasury secretary and the tarp legislation may have kept the country from another great depression.
however as congressman barney frank said of paulsons efforts you dont get any credit for disaster averted after 2008 unemployment rates stayed stubbornly high.
in 2009 and 2010 the united states had an official unemployment rate of 10 percent and if one counted discouraged and part time workers it was closer to 16 percent.
those who lost their jobs were out of work for increasingly longer periods of time.
high unemployment creates its own negative cycle.
for the unemployed it is devastating.
when unemployed people do not buy cars computers and refrigerators the whole economy slows down.
as the nation entered the 2012 election cycle economic movement was very slow.
the crisis of 2008 also brought other economic problems to light.
firms like lehman brothers had been painting a rosier picture of their finances than the situation warranted and others were engaged in much more corrupt practices.
three months after the collapse of lehman brothers a new york financier bernard madoff was arrested and charged with securities fraud.
madoff s investment securities company was in reality a giant ponzi scheme see chapter 21 for information on the first such scheme by charles ponzi.
madoff delivered grand returns on investments made with his company but it turned out that madoff simply used the funds that were invested with his company to pay out high returns on older funds.
he did not invest or even save them.
as long as more money kept coming in madoff was able to keep up the illusion of amazing success and investors were happy.
when the nation s finances seized up in the fall of 2008 madoff was not able to keep the investments coming in and without them the payments could not keep going out and the whole house of cards collapsed.
madoff was sentenced to 150 years in prison investors lost between 10 and 17 billion.
in may 2011 another highly regarded investor raj rajaratnam head of galleon a multibillion dollar hedge fund or speculative investment group was convicted of 14 counts of securities fraud for bribing corporate employees to provide information that allowed galleon to guess future stock values and make a fortune.
by 2011 business leaders and especially investors were not highly regarded by a large segment of the american public.
business leaders were not the only ones held in low esteem however.
government officials both democrats and republicans were distrusted.
why people asked did the government bailout banks and the auto industry.
why was so much taxpayer money needed to stabilize investment banks when bankers were still getting huge bonuses but unemployment stayed stubbornly high.
were the high officials in the 30 1 302 30 3 304 chapter 30 entering a new time 885 treasury department really on the side of the average american.
some wondered when the real recovery would begin.
some wondered whether the united states was at the beginning of a permanent decline while other nations especially perhaps china might replace it as the worlds leading financial powerhouse.
38 3 quick review how did policies legislation and events from the 1990s onward lead to the financial crisis of 2008.
new liberals new conservatives 30 4 analyze the most recent political developments in the united states.
barack obama was elected as a u s.
senator from illinois just as george w bush won a second term in 2004.
from the day he entered the senate obama was better known than most newcomers.
his upset win in a 7 way illinois democratic primary and his keynote speech calling for a new politics of hope at the 2004 convention that nominated john kerry followed by his continuing telegenic appearance his life story and his ability to rally people all led many to notice him.
nevertheless he was a senate freshman and when the majority leader harry reid called him in for a meeting obama was surprised.
as he headed toward the meeting obama told robert gibbs his scheduler i wonder what we screwed up but reid stunned the young senator.
as obama recounted the meeting to gibbs he said harry wants me to run for president he really wants me to run for president reid had certainly noticed obamas discomfort with the senates slow pace but more important he had noticed the way obama could connect with voters.
reid also had another reason to look carefully at obama.
the obvious front runner for the democratic nomination was hillary clinton first lady from 1993 to 2001 and since 2001 the u s.
senator from new york.
in the senate clinton had established a solid track record.
reid liked her.
obama liked her.
but a lot of americans did not like her.
since her days as first lady and leader of president bill clintons health care task force hillary clinton had been a lightning rod for opposition to expanded government policies and for some for opposition to the role of women in politics.
a lot of voters hated her.
like many democrats including reid she had voted to authorize the war in iraq and by 2006 it was becoming clear that with the war going badly such a vote was a terrible burden among liberal democrats.
finally for reid and many of the democratic partys senior leaders the worst nightmare was the nomination of hilary clinton followed by some new revelation about her husbands behavior like the monica lewinsky scandal that would end up bringing another republican to the white house.
they were desperate for another candidate and in obama they thought they had found one.
the unprecedented election of 2008 in modern american politics being anointed by the partys leaders is a far cry from being nominated.
running for high office required obama and the other candidates to slog through months of primary elections including the iowa caucuses and the new hampshire primary in january until the midsummer nominating convention.
all along the way voters are more than happy to overrule the party elite.
obama needed to decide whether he was going to run for president or not.
david plouffe one of obamas inner circle of campaign leaders warned him that he could stay in the senate and enjoy weekends and vacations with his family or he could run for president have every aspect of his life pried into travel constantly and lead a lonely miserable life.
there was no middle ground.
obama needed time to talk it over with his wife michelle.
in the end they were both in.
most people still considered it a long shot but slowly the long shot turned into reality.
886 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present in one of the first steps toward seeking the 2008 democratic presidential nomination then senator obama visited netscape founder marc andreessen see chapter 29 and told him that he wanted to run the most sophisticated digital campaign on record.
andreessen was impressed that the senator was personally interested in the rise of social networking facebook youtube and user generated content several veterans of the dean campaign also signed on to help the new campaign and with the help of the internet obama was able to raise twice the funds of his main rival hillary clinton and go on to win the nomination in spite of a long and bruising race between obama and clinton that remained close through the end of the primary season.
only in june was it clear that obama had won the nomination.
it had been a historic contest.
hillary clinton was the first woman to come so close to the presidential nomination and barack obama was the first african american to win.
perhaps some thought the nation was past the point where either gender or race mattered as they had in the past.
others insisted that gender and race were still very powerful forces but in clinton and obama the country had two extraordinary candidates who transcended the odds to accomplish what they did.
the battle for the republican nomination was almost as hard fought in 2008.
president bush could not run for a third term and his popularity had sunk as a result of the war and financial crisis.
arizona senator john mccain was the front runner throughout the campaign.
although he had almost defeated bush for the nomination in 2000 and was a war hero having been a prisoner of war in vietnam mccain also had a hair trigger temper and had divorced after having an affair and then remarried.
the 2006 midterm republican losses probably strengthened mccains chances.
mccains reputation as a moderate and an independent meant that he would not be tarred with all of bushs troubles.
in spite of several primary challengers mccain won key republican primaries and by march it was clear he would be the republican nominee for president.
the only remaining question was who he would select to be his running mate.
john mccain knew that his selection of a vice presidential candidate was especially important.
obama led in fund raising and public opinion polls.
mccain needed a game changing move.
mccain wanted connecticuts democratic senator joe lieberman.
lieberman was a staunch democrat and had served as al gores running mate in 2000 but he had broken with the majority of his own party on the war in iraq which he supported and he was already campaigning for mccain.
his selection would reinforce mccains credentials as an independent.
but in the end other republicans convinced mccain that proposing a democrat who more important was prochoice on the issue of abortion would split the party.
mccain rejected his friend lieberman and selected the 44 year old governor of alaska sarah palin.
she was popular in alaska and had all the credentials needed as a conservative republican.
palin became a campaign sensation but her lack of familiarity with national politics and her feuding with the mccain campaign staff probably hurt as much as it helped.
when obama asked delaware senator joseph biden to be his running mate the contrast between someone with decades of national experience and alaska s 20 month governor could not have been greater even if obama also had only served in the senate for that amount of time.
ihe september financial crisis played to obamas strengths.
mccain always said that economic issues were not his strong point and when after the lehman bankruptcy he said the fundamentals of our economy are strong the same words herbert hoover had used at the height of the great depression his advisors started to panic.
in contrast obama had a comprehensive economic plan and in the days after lehmans collapse he spent his time learning from people like bushs treasury secretary paulson and federal reserve chair ben bernanke both of whom came to respect him.
at the same time the economy and the war in iraq continued to hamper the republicans.
on election day obama defeated mccain by 53 percent to 46 percent of the vote carrying 365 electoral votes to mccains 173 votes.
ihe natron winch 30 1 30 2 303 30 4 chapter 30 entering a new time 887 health care reform the top priority of the obama administration to provide universal health care for all americans.
had fought a civil war and witnessed a long civil rights movement over issues of race had just elected its first african american president.
it was an historic moment.
now people were about to see what sort of change barack obama had been talking about.
in november 2008 barack obama was elected president of the united states a time of celebration for many.
obama s agenda stimulus and a health plan president elect obama asked his former opponent hillary clinton to serve as his secretary of state.
she was reluctant to leave the independence of the senate but obama pressed and clinton took the job.
obama told clinton ihe economy is a much bigger mess than imagined and he needed a very strong secretary of state to run foreign policy.
he knew that while the bailout of the banks had been a first step much more needed to be done.
nevertheless economic experts political leaders and average voters all disagreed sharply about what should be done.
obama was famous for his use of a blackberry and an iphone during his senate career and his presidential campaign.
bemoaning the need to give up his iphone for security reasons once elected president obama continued to use a blackberry as well as his personal twitter account his macbook pro and an ipad2.
the world of high technology arrived in the white house in january 2009.
immediately on taking office in january 2009 obama proposed the american recovery and reinvestment act and it passed within weeks.
the act pumped money into the economy providing funds for road improvements railroads and unemployment benefits.
the recovery and reinvestment act was standard economics an effort to prime the pump and get the economy moving by spending funds so employment would rise private spending would pick up and the government could step back.
unfortunately for obama the emergency spending piled further debts on top of those already in place and many began to worry about the cost.
while the administration struggled with the economy obama also moved quickly to implement what he hoped would be his signature initiative health care for all americans.
from harry truman on every democratic administration sought to implement health care reform but every effort had failed.
obama wanted to be the democrat who accomplished what others had failed.
after a long and bitter fight he was able to sign the patient protection and affordable care act on march 23 2010.
unlike the stimulus legislation however health care was a long fight filled with compromises.
it dominated the congress that came to office with obama.
from the beginning the republican minority was dedicated to defeating the measure.
the senate rule that a filibuster could stop all legislation unless 60 senators voted to close debate provided effective leverage for republicans and democrats.
the senate included only 60 democrats so every one of them could demand special consideration and exemptions and many did before the final vote.
the result was that the historic health care legislation passed only after a political process that discouraged almost everyone.
the new law required every american to have health insurance prohibited insurance companies from excluding anyone including those with preexisting conditions provided government subsidies for those who have trouble buying insurance and penalized employers not offering health insurance.
a number of state attorneys general challenged the legislation in court but in the spring of 2012 the u s supreme court in a split decision upheld the law.
surprising its supporters the law ended up being a political liability for a democratic president and his party in the midterm elections of 2010 and the presidential election of 2012.
888 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present the rise of the tea party occupy wall street and divided government in part because of anger at the health care legislation in part because of fears about the growing national debt and in part because of a long standing bias among americans against big government the huge plurality with which obama came to office started to evaporate rapidly.
on january 19 2010 just a year after obamas inauguration the growing voter anger became apparent to the nation particularly after one of the icons of american liberalism massachusetts senator edward m kennedy died of a brain tumor in august 2009.
kennedy had served in the u s senate since 1962 the fourth longest senate career in u s history.
a special election was called to fill kennedys unexpired term and almost everyone assumed that whoever received the democratic nomination would get the job.
but a little known republican state senator scott brown campaigned hard telling people it s not kennedy s seat its the peoples seat and promising to be the crucial 40th vote to sustain a filibuster in the senate against the health care legislation.
brown won easily telling his cheering supporters on election night what ive heard again and again on the campaign trail is that our political leaders have grown aloof from the people impatient with dissent and comfortable in the back room making deals although brown was not able to stop the passage of the health care law his election was a sign that something was shifting in american politics.
it was not the first such sign.
only weeks after obamas inauguration protests were springing up in many different places.
in seattle a 29 year old woman keli carender organized a small protest rally about the spending whether it was bushs tarp or obamas stimulus.
carender told a small crowd that i started thinking what are we getting ourselves into.
it didnt make sense to me to be spending all this money when we dont have it then a little while later on february 19 2009 a financial news commentator rick santelli said that obamas stimulus efforts were promoting bad behavior if they bailed out the losers who had taken out larger mortgages than they could afford.
santelli said were thinking of having a chicago tea party in july and the name took hold.
in september 2010 between 70 000 and 90 000 demonstrators converged on the mall in washington dc to protest the health care legislation and government spending.
some wore tricolor hats to symbolize their link to the original boston tea party.
some carried signs that said thank you glenn beck referring to the conservative television commentator who railed against the obama administration.
some alluding to fears that the health care legislation would limit treatments carried signs that said pull the plug on obama not grandma the national tea party coalition tried to coordinate efforts.
the republican vice presidential nominee from 2008 sarah palin adopted the tea party platform and spoke at its rallies.
nevertheless the movement was distrustful of self proclaimed leaders.
different groups in different places did as they pleased.
tea party candidates challenged republicans in primary elections all through 2009 and 2010 and sometimes defeated long standing republican moderates.
in november 2010 with solid tea party support republicans took control of the house of representatives and made gains in the senate.
but the tea party candidates were of a different sort than the older republicans not only more conservative but also far less willing to compromise.
the tea party was fueled by fear about the debt uncertainty about the economy and anger at big institutions most of all the federal government but also corporations and universities.
many in the tea party argued that the federal government should do no more than what was specifically authorized in the constitution and almost all of its members were generally distrustful of government programs especially those coming from the federal government and those designed to help the poor or minority groups.
it quickly became clear that the tea party was not going away even though its membership might be filled with internal contradictions.
tea party members disliked government but wanted their social security checks to arrive on time they hated the new health care but loved their medicare cards.
when the outgoing congress repealed tea party a protest group whose members sometimes modeled themselves on the tea party of the american revolution and objected to the rising federal debt obamacare and most government regulation.
chapter 30 entering a new time 889 level of student debt the lack of job opportunities and the fact that the economy seemed stacked in favor of the rich.
the dont ask dont tell ban on gay and lesbian personnel serving in the military in late 2010 the tea party was divided about its response neither the tea party nor the republicans made it a major issue.
still the tea party with its focus on economic issues and anger at big government was a powerful group.
in the summer of 2011 the new tea party fueled republican majority in the house of representatives brought the country to the brink of financial default as they refused until the last minute to raise the nations borrowing capacity.
standard poors one of the nations leading auditing agencies lowered the u s credit rating for the first time in history because of the governments seeming inability to deal with the federal debt.
as if in response to the tea party a new movement of students and other young people also emerged to protest conditions in the country.
while the tea party took a conservative stance on economic issues occupy wall street was closer to the left on most issues.
in september 2011 a group of young people held a rally near wall street in lower manhattan and then moved into nearby zuccotti park where they set up tents a library a communications center and a kitchen and planned to stay.
a canadian publication adbusters had been calling for just such a move and by late september it was a reality.
the rallying cry of occupy wall street was we are the 99 to differentiate themselves from the richest 1 percent including the bankers who surrounded them in lower manhattan.
although those gathering in protest consistently refused to issue a manifesto or platform occupy was an angry response to the financial crisis and the growing gap between rich and poor in the country.
they condemned the huge level of college debt that many young people were carrying and the difficulties for a new generation in getting jobs.
before long occupy movements were springing up all around the country occupy los angeles occupy oakland occupy denver occupy boston and occupy rochester.
in november some 3 months after the encampment at zuccotti park began new york police on orders from the mayor cleared the park.
mayors and police departments in other cities had generally acted sooner.
nevertheless the occupy movement was far from over.
through the winter and the following year occupy held rallies meetings and planning sessions.
neither occupy nor the tea party was going to go away and both would be forces to deal with.
governing a nation so deeply divided was going to be difficult.
the terms of the 2012 election were set.
the tea party movement named itself after those who had dumped tea in boston harbor in 1773 rather than pay a tax on it.
many in the modern movement shared the anti tax anti government sentiments of the earlier tea party while some dressed the part.
890 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present ill 30j thinking historically same sex marriage 302 on june 26 2013 in a 5 4 opinion in the case of united states v windsor the united states supreme court declared a significant part of the defense of marriage act unconstitutional.
writing for the majority justice anthony kennedy said doma s principal effect is to identify a subset of state sanctioned marriages and make them unequal by this dynamic doma undermines both the public and private significance of state sanctioned same sex marriages for it tells those couples and all the world that their otherwise valid marriages are unworthy of federal recognition.
this places same sex couples in an unstable position of being in a second tier marriage.
the decision was not without debate.
four justices opposed the majority.
writing for the minority justice antonin scalia said that the court should never have taken on the case and further that the decision would lead inevitably to the supreme court s declaring all state laws against gay marriage to be invalid.
nevertheless the majority opinion became the law of the land and as a result same sex couples married in the 13 states the district of columbia and under the five native american tribal governments that approved same sex marriage were provided all the benefits including tax advantages pension and visitation rights that all other married couples had.
it was a major change and one that came very quickly.
when the congress passed and president bill clinton signed the defense of marriage act in september 1996 no state recognized same sex marriage.
before the 1996 legislation congress had left decisions about what constituted a legitimate marriage to the states.
but fearing the potential of same sex marriage the republican congress passed the defense of marriage act and the democratic president signed it.
as a result federal law said that no matter what a state did in the eyes of the federal government for federal income tax for federal pensions for benefits for spouses of government employees and armed forces personnel and many related matters a state sanctioned same sex marriage was invalid.
nevertheless as some feared and others hoped states started to act on their own.
in 2003 the massachusetts supreme judicial court declared that state laws prohibiting same sex marriage were invalid in that state and gay and lesbian couples began getting married there.
state courts in other states including california connecticut and iowa issued similar rulings.
then in 2009 the vermont legislature sanctioned same sex marriage new york followed in 2011 and in 2012 washington maine and maryland passed similar laws.
activists phyllis lyon and del martin became the first same sex couple to be married in san francisco on february 12 2004.
in june 2013 the united states supreme court said that same sex couples could not be denied federal marriage benefits.
same sex marriages illegal in every part of the united states in the 1990s were recognized in 2013 by states comprising 30 percent of the american population and by the federal government.
opinion polls indicated that the majority of the american people agreed with the new policies.
it was a rapid and dramatic change in american culture.
thinking critically 1.
comparison how would you compare the political mood in the united states when the defense of marriage act was passed in 1996 and when it was declared unconstitutional in 2013.
contextualization what other developments in american culture and political debate might help explain decisions like those of the massachusetts supreme court the vermont legislature or in 2013 the u s supreme court.
how much does context impact such decisions.
mil chapter 30 entering a new time 891 united states v windsor a june 2013 supreme court decision that declared americans in same sex marriages had the same federal rights as all other married citizens.
the election of 2012 as president obama and the democrats looked to the 2012 election they did so with considerable optimism.
the worst of the financial crisis was past and the wars in iraq and afghanistan were at least winding down.
at the same time the president and his party were aware of some significant liabilities.
the economy remained far from robust the health care law which some called obamacare remained unpopular especially among people who resented all forms of government intrusion in their lives.
many of those who had voted for the first time in 2008 to support obama were disillusioned with the slow pace of change and might well not bother to vote in 2012.
it was going to be a close contest.
the battle for the republican nomination was a long one.
in the early stages many wondered whether 2008 vice presidential nominee and tea party darling sarah palin would enter the race but she never did.
once the contest for the republican nomination got under way former massachusetts governor mitt romney who had been a serious contender for the 2008 nomination was always a front runner.
but many in the republican party thought romney was too liberal and a number of other candidates including former minnesota governor tim pawlenty former speaker newt gingrich businessman herman cann and representative michele bachmann gave romney a strong challenge.
in the end romney won the nomination and asked congressman paul ryan who had earned his conservative credentials with a series of tax cutting proposals to be his running mate.
in the fall election obama was generally considered to be the front runner but many thought the race was too close to call.
in the first presidential debate obama performed poorly seeming disinterested and romney surged.
in the later debates however obama came on strong.
one of romneys great strengths his years of business experience came to hurt him as democrats exploited the numbers of layoffs that had taken place in romney owned companies.
late in the campaign a polls open obama leading n romney leading polls closed obama won romney won i i llj i ivimr au z i ne ciecuon or zui z nap captures tne extent of obama s presidential election triumph and underscores the realignments of republican red states and democratic blue states.
892 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present private conversation in which romney had told a group of supporters that 47 percent of the electorate would never support him because they were dependent on the government angered many.
on election day obama won by a solid 51 percent to 47 percent majority and carried 332 electoral votes to romneys 206 see map 30 2.
the congress however remained divided with democrats having a majority in the senate and republicans in the house.
at his second inauguration in january 2013 on what was martin luther king jr s birthday president obama laid out the themes that he said would be most important in his second term.
appealing to some important moments in american history he said we the people declare today that the most evident of truths that all of us are created equal is the star that guides us still just as it guided our forebears through seneca falls and selma and stonewall and then appealing to kings memory he added our individual freedom is inextricably bound to the freedom of every soul on earth and he continued it is now our generations task to carry on what those pioneers began.
for our journey is not complete until our wives our mothers and daughters can earn a living equal to their efforts.
our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law for if we are truly created equal then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well.
our journey is not complete until no citizen is forced to wait for hours to exercise the right to vote.
our journey is not complete until we find a better way to welcome the striving hopeful immigrants who still see america as a land of opportunity until bright young students and engineers are enlisted in our workforce rather than expelled from our country.
our journey is not complete until all our children from the streets of detroit to the hills of appalachia to the quiet lanes of newtown know that they are cared for and cherished and always safe from harm.
his address was not a set of policy recommendations but rather a way of carving out a vision.
30 1 303 303 30 4 began his second term the united states was more diverse than ever with some king optimistically toward the future and others looking nostalgically toward the past.
chapter 30 entering a new time 893 former speaker newt gingrich who had contested the republican nomination said of obamas speech that he approved of 80 percent of president barack obama s inaugural address however the rest gingrich said was goofy left wingism deciding where any consensus might be found would be more difficult than gingrichs response might imply.
soon after the inauguration obama said he would use executive authority to institute action on climate change and quickly issued tough new limitations on emissions.
the president had promised as much in his inaugural address which had led gingrich to say the whole section about climate change is nonsense ihe divides on that issue as on so many issues that had split the congress and the country during obamas first term seem destined to continue for the foreseeable future.
many spoke of their desire for greater national unity and good will but it remained an illusive goal.
quick review how have domestic issues contributed to divisions in the government and the country since 2008.
conclusion george w bush in the first year of his presidency achieved two major domestic policy goals education reform and tax reform.
but september 11 2001 permanently shifted the focus of the bush administration from domestic problems to international terrorism.
henceforth the war on terror would dominate his presidency and remain a key issue for his successor in office barack obama.
in the days after the september 11 attacks it became clear that al qaeda and its leader osama bin laden were responsible.
the bush administration immediately developed a strategy to punish not only the direct perpetrators but also those who harbored them.
when it was determined that the taliban government of afghanistan was protecting bin laden and al qaeda u s ground forces invaded the country and quickly overthrew the taliban regime.
although the united states had forced a change in government in afghanistan and had killed or captured many al qaeda operatives both bin laden and his chief lieutenant had escaped into pakistan.
it took another 10 years to find bin laden but taliban insurgents continued to engage the u s military and destabilize afghanistan and other parts of the world.
while the united states waged war in afghanistan the bush administration turned its attention to iraq.
despite the fact that neither the cia nor the un nations found compelling evidence that iraq was connected to the september 11 attacks many in the administration favored u s military intervention.
ultimately the united states and great britain obtained un and congressional approval for an invasion based on alleged iraqi possession of weapons of mass destruction.
major combat operations in iraq ended quickly but the united states was ill prepared to serve as an occupying force.
u s troops lacked clearly defined military objectives and iraq quickly descended into civil war.
by 2004 public opinion was turning against the war.
u s casualties were high iraq was in chaos and no weapons of mass destruction had been found.
still the u s mission in iraq continued until december 2011.
894 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present from 2005 until 2008 domestic problems also plagued the bush administration.
in 2005 the federal response to hurricane katrina was wholly inadequate and the u s economy was in 2008 in a deep recession.
the 2008 presidential election took place against this backdrop and culminated in the election of the nations first african american president barack obama.
obama moved quickly to address the financial crisis but while the economy was stabilized unemployment remained high.
the obama administrations highest priority was to get congress to approve a federal health insurance system which was signed into law in 2010.
in the midst of a very slow recovery in which ordinary americans suffered greatly new protests including the tea party and the occupy movements emerged to express voter dissatisfaction with continual war and with the economic meltdown.
by the time of the 2012 presidential election the nation was more divided than it had been in decades.
nevertheless many liberal americans celebrated when obama won a second term in november 2012 and when in june 2013 the u s supreme court declared portions of the federal defense of marriage act to be unconstitutional giving people in a same sex marriage the same federal rights as other married people.
still the nation entered obamas second term deeply divided on social and economic issues and lasting resolutions seemed hard to find.
chapter e how did the election of 2012 encompass issues that plagued the united states since 2000.
chapter 30 entering a new time 895 hear the audio file on watch the video critical visions chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 on the morning of september 11 2001 19 young arab men boarded four planes on the east coast.
all belonged to the islamic extremist organization known as al qaeda.
within half an hour after take off they stormed the cockpits of their planes with box cutters and mace killed the american pilots and installed their own pilots who had each received flight instruction in private american aviation schools to fly the planes into predetermined targets.
at 8 46 a m the first plane plowed into the north tower of the world trade center in new york city an internationally recognized landmark that symbolized american dominance over the world economy.
seventeen minutes later a second plane hit the south tower.
the nation now understood that what had first looked like a tragic accident was actually a coordinated attack against the united states.
a third plane crashed into the pentagon headquarters of the u s department of defense in virginia the building most closely associated with u s military might in the eyes of the world.
meanwhile passengers in the fourth hijacked plane reached the cockpit and prevented the terrorists from flying the plane into the capitol a worldwide symbol of democratic government.
this plane instead crashed into a pennsylvania field.
the blazing world trade center towers quickly crumbled with the office workers and firefighters still inside the buildings as onlookers ran for cover.
the skeletal ruins and mountains of debris became the burial site for thousands.
one onlooker echoed the nations sense of disbelief this is america.
how can it happen in america.
how the 9 11 attacks as they came to be known reshaped the ongoing debate about americas role in the world and the best way to protect american citizens.
only 20 years earlier americans had savored their victory in the cold war as communist governments in eastern europe and the soviet union collapsed.
when the cold war ended americans believed that their nation would take the lead in creating a new world order even as they disputed how best to spread democracy protect the u s economy and flex the nations military muscle.
enjoying prosperity for most of the 1990s the country paid little attention to the new threat that loomed before the worlds sole remaining superpower terrorist strikes by antiamerican islamist extremists such as al qaeda.
political debate instead centered on whether the liberal or conservative vision of government would prevail at home.
after 9 11 president george w bush moved with resolve to restore the image of america as a powerful and triumphant nation.
he led the country into two wars the first in afghanistan the second far more controversial in iraq.
in 2008 americans provided a different sort of history making moment by electing the first african american president of the united states.
by then the worst financial crisis since the great depression posed an additional challenge for the nation.
none of us will ever forget this day yet we go forward to defend freedom and all that is good and just in our world president george w bush speaking to the nation on the evening of september 11 2001 chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 a moment rich with promise on his inauguration day in 1989 george h w bush announced that he had become president at a moment rich with promise the fall of communism throughout eastern europe and the soviet union within the next two years seemed to confirm this judgment.
however the end of the cold war did not mean peace the united states immediately fought two short wars in panama and the persian gulf.
conflict also arose at home as a huge federal deficit and simmering racial tensions that occasionally exploded into violence left some feeling that americas promise lay unfulfilled.
the election of 1988 the son of a former connecticut senator george h w bush served as a congressman ambassador central intelligence agency cia director and vice president before becoming the republican candidate for president in 1988.
in this sense the decorated world war ii pilot and former oilman was the ultimate insider a man familiar with the corridors of power in washington and the exclusive private clubs where financial deals were negotiated.
a moderate republican with a patrician style bush never projected the same charisma or the passion for conservative causes that had drawn voters to ronald reagan the man he hoped to follow as president.
bushs campaign had to overcome these obstacles when he faced massachusetts democratic governor michael dukakis in the presidential contest.
when dukakis proposed increased spending on health care education and housing the bush team ridiculed the democrat as a big spending liberal and began calling him the governor of taxachusetts in his stump speeches bush also tapped into white peoples fears of so called black criminality by frequently mentioning willie horton an african american prisoner who had taken advantage of a weekend furlough program in massachusetts and gone on a crime rampage that included raping a white woman.
adding to his woes dukakis made critical missteps including one ill advised photo op during which he donned an oversized helmet and military jumpsuit to ride a tank 29 1.
most americans felt that the photo made dukakis look ridiculous not presidential.
by election day bush had defined dukakis as someone who would raise taxes and let criminals out of jail and was a failed photo op seeking to appear like a commander in chief 1988 democratic presidential candidate michael dukakis was instead ridiculed for riding around in a tank in a suit and tie.
how did george h w bush prevail in the 1988 presidential election.
read the document george h w bush inaugural address 1989 moment rich with promise unprepared to be commander in chief.
he defeated dukakis 426 to 111 in the electoral college capturing 53 percent of the popular vote.
popular revolts against communism when bush became the 41st president of the united states in 1989 the former director of the cia remained suspicious about soviet premier mikhail gorbachevs true motives for instituting internal reforms and reaching out to the united states see chapter 28.
officials worried that gorbachev was attempting to kill us with kindness according to national security advisor brent scowcroft.
gorbachev was equally distrustful of bush and his inner circle these people were brought up in the years of the cold war and still do not have any foreign policy alternative caught off guard by the quick demise of communism in eastern europe within a year bush had changed his mind about gorbachev by 180 degrees in the first sign of the upheaval to come communist hungary decided to take down the barbed wire fence between it and democratic austria in may 1989.
the east german government watched in dismay as thousands of its citizens drove to the hungarian austrian border and then walked across to defect to the west.
turning to moscow for help east germany received a surprising reply we cant do anything about it a similarly uncharacteristic soviet reaction greeted news that candidates from the democratic polish workers union solidarity had won control of polands new bicameral parliament forming the first democratic government in postwar eastern europe.
this is entirely a matter to be decided by poland a soviet official announced.
soviet hungarian and polish leaders lifted restrictions on speech voting and economic activity to save their communist regimes unleashing a tide of popular revolt against communist rule that soon overwhelmed them.
perhaps nowhere did the fall of communism come faster and more unexpectedly than in east germany.
on november 9 1989 a botched news conference by a harried east german official triggered the destruction of the berlin wall.
instead of announcing a relaxation in rules governing travel between east and west berlin a confused east german official mistakenly told the press that starting immediately east germans could freely leave through any of the border crossings electrified by the news that the wall was open thousands of people gathered at armed crossing points places where over 175 east germans had been shot trying to cross over the last 28 years see chapter 24.
when confused guards opened the gates streams of east germans poured across and joined with west germans to rejoice atop the berlin wall.
images as history the fall of the berlin wall page 878 examines the media images that shaped americans reactions to this event.
further evidence of televisions power to mold history came in the following days as thousands of east berliners headed for downtown department stores in west berlin.
concrete walls had not prevented east berliners from viewing american sitcoms dubbed in german showing the abundance of goods available in the west.
television stoked desires for worksaving gadgets well stocked pantries attractive surroundings and a touch of luxury one reporter contended helped bring the berlin wall down.
gorbachevs refusal to intervene with armed force was also critical.
within a year east and west germany had reunified into one democratic nation an american goal since the cold war began in the late 1940s.
by the end of 1989 the soviet union no longer dominated eastern europe losing territory that it had controlled since the end of world war ii.
one by one the individual states that formed the soviet union also demanded their independence secession movements that gorbachev tried to squash with economic embargos and occasionally troops.
desperate to stop the hemorrhaging hard line communist insiders orchestrated a coup attempt in august 1990.
they put president gorbachev under house arrest in his vacation home and ringed the soviet parliament in moscow with troops and tanks.
hesitating the coup leaders lost the militarys support and the overthrow attempt failed.
with the populace now demanding economic reforms and communist party officials blaming gorbachev for losing control he resigned as head of the communist party on august 24 1990.
five days later the soviet communist party itself was dissolved.
by december 25 1991 he was also no longer president as the soviet union ceased to exist and all its member states including russia became independent nations.
after decades of trying to contain weaken and defeat the soviet union the united states declared victory in the cold war.
the soviet union did not simply lose the cold war the western democracies won bush announced.
what role did ordinary citizens play in ending communism in east germany and the soviet union.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 images as history the fall of the berlin wall photographs of berlin had already punctuated key moments in the cold war for americans including images of the 1948 1949 berlin airlift and the walls construction in 1961 to prevent east berliners from defecting to west berlin see chapter 24.
presidents john f kennedy and ronald reagan had made welldocumented pilgrimages to the site where they publicly denounced the berlin wall as a symbol of communist oppression.
now from the comfort of their living rooms tv viewing americans watched as east and west berliners climbed atop the wall throughout the night on november 9 1989 to demand the reunification of their divided city.
the fall of communism in europe reinforced american faith in the superiority of capitalism over communism but some commentators urged the united states to undertake economic reforms at home to ensure that capitalism operated more fairly.
what competing views do this photograph and political cartoon offer americans about the importance of the berlin wall falling.
what counter arguments could critics offer.
what symbolic importance did the fall of the berlin wall have.
after the evening celebrations east german guards reclaimed the top of the wall and impassively watched german civilians attack the graffitiladen western side of the wall with chisels and hammers.
president bush told the press that he had no desire to dance on the wall worried that any gloating might goad gorbachev into sealing up the wall or prompt soviet hardliners to overthrow gorbachev.
both reporters and ordinary people brought cameras to document this historic moment.
the image of one man destroying the wall piece by piece with his hammer resonated with americans it symbolized the ability of common people to make history and their desire to collect pieces of the wall as souvenirs.
attacking the berlin wall with a hammer would the fall of communism usher in a better world.
many americans believed so but cartoonist pat oliphant offered a competing view by implying that free market capitalism did not always benefit everyone equally.
the befuddlement of the hungry homeless man dressed in rags suggests that there is no we in the united states rich and poor view events like the fall of the berlin wall differently.
pat oliphant questions the triumph of capitalism over communism many americans celebrated the fall of the berlin wall as a triumph of the nations democratic capitalist vision over a competing autocratic anti capitalist communist one.
in the 1980s the number of homeless people living and begging on the streets grew to a level not seen in urban america since the progressive era.
view the closer look images as history the fall of the berlin wall moment rich with promise the u s battle against communism was not over however.
on the other side of the world the chinese communist regime made different choices when faced with a popular revolt.
in april 1989 university students occupied tiananmen square in central beijing to protest the removal of a high ranking communist official who had called for economic and political reforms.
behind closed doors chinese communist officials debated whether to end the demonstrations with troops or adopt a gorbachev like approach and accommodate some of the students demands.
on the morning of june 4 tanks appeared in tiananmen square signaling that discussion within the inner circle had ended.
troops shot hundreds as they cleared the area of protesters.
two days later a lone man walking down the deserted avenue of eternal peace made a solitary gesture of defiance by standing steadfast in the middle of the street as 17 tanks approached.
when the lead tank swerved right to avoid hitting him the man stepped right.
when it swerved left he stepped left.
finally the tanks stopped and the man jumped onto the first one shouting to its driver why are you here.
my city is in chaos because of you associated press photographer jeff widener captured this encounter in an award winning photo seen on newspaper front pages around the globe 29 2.
americans hailed tank man as he became known for his inspirational defense of peace and human rights.
no one in china however except for the bystanders who whisked him away and the chinese authorities who probably executed him ever knew of this encounter.
as the economic relationship between the united states and china changed chinas violent suppression of democracy movements provoked competing visions over how to proceed.
in 1900 america wanted to sell china goods by 1990 american companies increasingly outsourced manufacturing jobs to china using cheap chinese labor to satiate american consumers demands for affordable goods.
some critics argued that by helping the chinese government improve the standard of living for ordinary citizens americans were also bolstering the autocratic communist regime.
others countered that recent events in eastern europe demonstrated that exposing chinese citizens to western values and goods would sow the seeds for an eventual democratic and capitalist revolution.
a third faction worried that a prosperous and industrially strong china might replace the united states as the worlds strongest power.
29 2 standing up for democracy in china 1989 two days after the chinese military brutally suppressed a popular rebellion in tiananmen square a lone man stopped army tanks in their tracks the world cheered his courageous stand.
why did popular uprisings against communism in europe and china have different outcomes.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 domestic policy in the bush administration 29 3 los angeles police beat motorist rodney king 1991 many whites saw the police trying to control an unruly black man who had resisted arrest for speeding but many blacks saw racist police brutality.
the growing trade deficit with china the united states bought more than it sold was only one economic issue troubling americans during the bush years.
read my lips no new taxes bush had proclaimed during the 1988 campaign.
once in office however he reneged on his pledge by raising income taxes.
faced with the largest deficit in american history the result of increased defense spending during the reagan years without any corresponding tax increases and bushs own decision to bail out the failing savings and loan industry in 1989 see chapter 28 he saw no other option.
his decision angered many conservative republicans and some never forgave him.
read my lips i lied ran one new york post headline.
the combination of a huge deficit and an unfriendly democratic majority in congress discouraged bush from proposing dramatic new domestic initiatives.
a revolution of sorts nonetheless occurred when bush signed the americans with disabilities act a 1990 civil rights law that prohibited discrimination against the disabled in employment public accommodations and telecommunications.
the disabled gained unprecedented freedom of movement as legally required elevators ramps and sloped curbs became commonplace.
which gender and racial issues dominated the headlines in the early 1990s.
during the campaign bush had courted the conservative wing of the republican party by promising to appoint like minded judges.
he fulfilled this pledge by nominating a conservative african american judge clarence thomas to the supreme court when thurgood marshall the courts first african american justice retired.
controversy erupted when anita hill a former colleague accused thomas of sexual harassment and thomas responded by calling the televised confirmation hearings a high tech lynching the senate ultimately confirmed thomas by a narrow majority in 1991.
with workplace sexual harassment front page news an unprecedented number of women won congressional seats in the 1992 elections including the first female african american senator carol mosley braun a democrat from illinois.
while the thomas hearings exposed gender discord the 1991 los angeles riots brought simmering racial and ethnic tensions to the surface.
in march a 78 mile car chase along los angeles freeways ended with white police brutally beating rodney king an african american when he resisted arrest for speeding.
a nearby resident captured the incident on film but americans differed on what the video revealed 29 3.
most blacks and some sympathetic whites saw a poorly trained and racist police force that harassed blacks echoing complaints that had set off the watts riots in 1965 see chapter 27.
read the document william julius wilson the urban underclass moment rich with promise c ussr as pi turkmenistan an kabul s georgia black sea a fgh an ista n ea azerbaijan armenia afghanistan us airstrikes against al qaeda bases 1988 us invades 2001 turkey istanbul tehran ankara pa k i s ta n mosul i r a n iran syria iraq iran war 1980 88 baghdad pakistan osama bin laden s alleged hideout 2003 2011 u s special forces kill osama bin laden may 2 2011 cyprus jerusalem karachi iraq mediterranean lebanon beirut damascus sea basra amman pe rs kuwait israel jordan kuwait iraq invades 1990 bahrain ian g ulf strait of hormuz qatar united arab emirates egypt riyadh saudi arabia oman arabian sea saudi arabia un staging ground for persian gulf war 1991 r e d s e a others including the jury consisting of ten whites one latino and one asian american that acquitted the officers offered a competing vision.
they saw overworked police doing their job to protect law and order in a dangerous neighborhood.
the not guilty verdict set off four days of rioting in los angeles during which latinos also took to the streets to air their frustration with failing schools and entrenched poverty.
television networks continuously aired footage of black youths assaulting a white truck driver but paid little attention to the asian american owned stores that blacks and latinos ransacked as payback for allegedly having refused to serve or hire young men of color.
yemen arab republic yemen bush did not propose any new initiatives to address gender racial or ethnic inequities his real interest lay in foreign affairs.
as he contemplated the new role that the united states should assume in a post cold war world bush moved to address a festering problem close to home.
his administration felt particularly uneasy about returning the panama canal in 2000 see chapter 28 to a panamanian dictator who ruthlessly suppressed political opponents and oversaw lucrative drug trafficking schemes.
in december 1989 bush launched operation just cause the largest american military campaign since the vietnam war to remove manuel noriega from power.
the panamanian invasion continued the nations long tradition of maintaining central america as a u s sphere of influence.
a crisis in the middle east however offered bush the opportunity to propose a new focus for u s foreign policy now that the cold war was watch the video president george bushs early response in the persian gulf war allied air attacks area of ground combat us battleships us aircraft carriers iraq war 2003 us led land campaign al qaeda suicide bombers attack uss cole 2000 panama and the persian gulf war gulf war 1990 1991 peoples democratic republic of yemen aden over.
bush faced the severest test of his administration when iraqi dictator saddam hussein whose nations oil fields supplied 11 percent of global oil exports invaded the neighboring nation of kuwait a small country that provided 9 percent of the worlds oil on august 2 1990 29 4.
the 1979 carter doctrine see chapter 28 had already established the oil rich persian gulf as a region vital to national economic and strategic interests.
throughout the 1980s iranian financed terrorist attacks and hostage crises in lebanon convinced the u s government that the fundamentalist islamic government in iran not iraq posed the major threat in the persian gulf.
during the eightyear iraq iran war the united states supplied iraq with weapons and intelligence.
oil rich arab nations including saudi arabia and kuwait had also lent iraq billions of dollars to prevent iranian revolutionary religious fervor from spreading to their kingdoms.
when the war ended inconclusively in 1988 after nearly one million combatant deaths saddam demanded that arab nations forgive iraqs debt.
he harbored particular animosity against 29 4 america and the middle east 1980 2003 the united states fought two major wars against iraq one in 1991 and the other beginning in 2003.
what problems did the united states face in the middle east from 1980 2003.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 kuwait which he accused of exporting too much oil and depressing world oil prices thereby hurting the iraqi financial recovery from the war.
when kuwait refused his demands saddam declared that kuwait had historically been part of iraq and invaded.
after the iraqi army easily overran kuwait president bush rushed american troops and ships to saudi arabia.
operation desert shield the president assured the public was solely a defensive measure to prevent iraq from attacking saudi arabia.
after saddam announced that he was annexing kuwait bush began to question whether a purely defensive strategy was enough.
now in control of 20 percent of the worlds oil overnight iraq became a major rival of saudi arabia which had 26 percent of global oil supplies.
with the president now contemplating war general colin powell chair of the joint chiefs of staff urged bush to follow the rules of military engagement established in the reagan years.
the powell doctrine asserted that america should go to war only as a last resort when the president had full support from the nation and the international community could employ overwhelming military force to win without serious loss of american life and had a clear exit strategy.
to amass overwhelming military strength bush sent secretary of state james baker on a diplomatic tour to build an international coalition that eventually included 34 nations.
bush secured a united nations un resolution authorizing military action if saddam did not withdraw by january 15 1991.
with saudi arabia agreeing to serve as the staging ground for the invasion nearly 500 000 u s troops and 65 warships made their way to the persian gulf.
the powell doctrine called for more than overwhelming force it also required enthusiastic support from the american people for an overseas military campaign.
bush faced stiff opposition from congressional democrats who argued that the president a former texas oilman was primarily interested in protecting the lucrative profits of his former oil business associates who imported oil from the persian gulf.
instead of war democrats promoted a competing vision that relied on economic sanctions to force hussein to withdraw.
bush countered that husseins atrocities against his own people notably his 1988 poison gas attacks against kurdish villagers in northern iraq made him worse than hitler echoing bushs claim this political cartoon 29 5 showed saddam holding a paper labeled kuwait takeover as he looked into the mirror and asked adolf hitlers smiling reflection howm i doing bush a decorated world war ii veteran reminded americans that the worlds failure to act when hitler began his expansionist drive in 1938 had led to world war ii.
if an emboldened saddam next attacked saudi arabia he would control nearly half of the worlds oil reserves.
bush also claimed that saddam was actively trying to acquire nuclear weapons and if he succeeded he would be unstoppable.
these arguments did not sway democrats.
with a vote split mostly along partisan lines congress voted to authorize war according to the terms spelled out in the un resolution.
when the un deadline for withdrawal passed the american led un coalition attacked iraq the next day.
once the fighting started public debate ceased and americans rallied around the flag.
the persian gulf war unfolded in two phases.
in the 29 5 mirror mirror on the wall howm i doing first phase u s forces bombed this 1990 political cartoon supported president george h w bushs iraqi installations in kuwait claim that iraqi dictator saddam hussein was a modern day hitler.
how did the powell doctrine influence bushs preparations for war against iraq in 1991.
read the document george bush allied military action in the persian gulf 1991 moment rich with promise and major cities in iraq for 39 days.
in kuwait the massive bombing terrified many poorly trained occupying iraqi soldiers and nearly one quarter of the 400 000 man force deserted.
a news team from the cable television news network cnn stayed in baghdad the capital of iraq throughout the bombing and each night americans watched their own nations missiles streak across the sky and explode.
the bombing destroyed iraqs power grid water treatment plants radio and television stations and roads hampering its military activities but also leaving civilians without power or clean water.
with iraqi defenses in shambles from the air attacks the wars second phase began when ground troops attacked the iraqi forces occupying kuwait on february 23 1991.
general norman schwarzkopf led coalition forces during operation desert storm a massive assault that soundly defeated the iraqi army within four days pushing it out of kuwait.
when american soldiers crossed into iraq bush abruptly halted the fighting.
the war had lasted a total of 42 days.
the war beyond its original goal bushs approval ratings soared to 89 percent.
the un peace agreement prohibited saddam from rearming or acquiring nuclear weapons restrictions enforced by un inspectors who stayed in iraq until 1998.
the establishment of no fly zones over shiite and kurdish areas stopped saddam and his sunni dominated government from launching aerial attacks against these minorities within his own nation.
the un also instituted an oil embargo to prevent him from acquiring funds to reconstitute his nuclear weapons program.
critics charged that the embargo led to widespread food and medicine shortages among the civilian population and failed to prevent iraq from rearming.
instead of caring for his people saddam used the nations meager cash flow to continue his lavish lifestyle and secured funds to amass a large arsenal of conventional weapons by illegally smuggling oil through jordan turkey syria and egypt.
when the un initiated a foodfor oil program in 1996 that allowed saddam to export some oil legally if he used the profits by god weve kicked the vietnam syndrome once and for all an exultant president george h w bush at the end of the persian gulf war 1991 american forces bush declared had met their goal of ending saddams occupation of kuwait and had no intention of conquering iraq.
the united states would henceforth rely on sanctions to curb saddam returning to the strategy of containment that had succeeded against the soviet union to win the cold war.
neoconservatives embraced a competing vision.
they viewed the war as an opportunity to remove saddam from power.
bush advisors including secretary of defense dick cheney however saw no advantage to staying in iraq.
they argued that it would be difficult if not impossible to bring together the nations three different ethnic and religious groups sunnis shiites and kurds each of which inhabited distinct regions to form a democratic government.
abiding by the powell doctrines emphasis on a clear exit strategy bush wanted to avoid a long protracted war that could become a vietnam like quagmire.
having suffered relatively few casualties 148 battlefield deaths and avoided widening for humanitarian purposes civilian conditions improved slightly.
victory in the persian gulf war along with the end of the cold war led to a revaluation of american foreign policy goals.
after defeating iraq bush announced that the united states would build a new world order which he defined as playing an active global peacekeeping role dedicated to spreading democracy and prosperity.
some of his defense advisors encouraged the president to go even further to protect american dominance.
in 1992 cheney and his neoconservative aide paul wolfowitz asserted that the united states needed to respond immediately and preemptively to any foreign nation that challenged american military superiority or attempted to overturn the established political and economic order bush never publicly embraced these neoconservative principles but his son george w bush the 43rd president of the united states proved more receptive to these ideas.
what vision of american world leadership did neoconservatives promote.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 contested visions of government the reagan years had redefined the american political landscape shifting the political center away from new deal and great society liberal assumptions that government could be a positive force in citizens lives.
to succeed in this changed political climate a new breed of democratic politician was needed socially liberal but fiscally conservative.
the most successful and most controversial new democrat was william bill jefferson clinton who defeated george h w bush in the 1992 presidential election and won reelection in 1996 against kansas senator bob dole.
when republican george w bush won the presidency in the heavily disputed 2000 election he restored the conservative vision of low taxes and limited regulation that the political right had long championed.
clintons new democrats clinton was relatively unknown when the 1992 presidential campaign began.
while governor of arkansas at just 44 years of age clinton had chaired the democratic leadership council a group committed to shifting the democratic party to the political center by accepting market based solutions to social problems and ending deficit spending.
exuding boundless energy and a vast knowledge of government clintons magnetic personality and compassionate nature soon won him a dedicated following.
i feel your pain became his mantra as he bear hugged voters on the campaign trail.
clinton one commentator noted cultivated the image of the president as the guy next door who struggles like the rest of us with his weight his marriage and his golf game worried about the nations finances third party candidate ross perot a self made texas billionaire entered the race and focused almost exclusively on how the federal deficit had ballooned under bush.
winning 19 percent of the popular vote perot registered the best third party showing since theodore roosevelts run as the progressive party candidate in 1912.
clinton defeated bush in the electoral college 370 to 168 but only 43 percent of the electorate voted for him.
widely praised for his political skills clinton nonetheless stumbled badly during his first few weeks in office when he tried and failed to fulfill a campaign pledge to lift the ban against gays in the military.
proponents viewed the issue as a straightforward question of protecting civil rights opponents countered that ignoring heterosexual soldiers objections to serving alongside gay soldiers would undermine military discipline and hurt recruitment.
how did clintons centrist vision affect his policy decisions.
clinton pleased no one with his compromise.
rather than lift the ban he instituted a policy of dont ask dont tell which allowed closeted homosexuals and lesbians gays who kept their sexual preferences hidden to serve in the military.
clintons domestic agenda was ambitious including a comprehensive plan to provide all americans with health care.
he delegated this major policy initiative to hillary rodham clinton his wife an attorney with extensive experience in public service.
republicans successfully attacked the plan as socialized medicine that would deprive americans of the freedom to choose their healthcare providers.
the plan failed to win congressional approval.
clinton achieved a more modest victory with his tax proposals.
overcoming republican opposition he passed an economic stimulus package that offered tax incentives for job creation and increased taxes for large corporations and wealthy americans reversing reagans decision to lower taxes on the richest citizens.
clinton also addressed economic problems caused by the recent globalization of the american economy.
as late as 1970 most u s businesses manufactured strictly for the american market and few stores stocked items made overseas.
by the early 1980s the united states exported and imported more goods than ever before.
exports rose from 43 billion in 1970 to 178 billion in 2000 while imports surged from 40 billion to 519 billion in 2000 all figures adjusted for inflation.
importing more than it exported the nation questioned whether this trade deficit hurt or helped the overall economy.
american companies selling products at home now faced stiff competition from foreign manufacturers while u s companies shifted production to places like china and mexico where watch the video bill clinton sells himself to america presidential campaign ad 1992 contested visions of government workers earned less.
globalization however also lowered costs for consumers and gave them a greater selection of products.
clinton helped accelerate the trend toward globalization when he broke with organized labor to back the 1992 north american free trade agreement nafta a treaty that lifted trade barriers among the united states mexico and canada.
labor unions opposed nafta because they feared that it would encourage u s factories to relocate to mexico resulting in fewer jobs for american workers.
american businesspeople liked nafta because it prohibited mexican companies from manufacturing knock offs of american products such as films drugs and clothing essentially protecting their overseas and domestic markets by stopping the flow of counterfeit goods.
clintons emphasis on free trade reflected his desire to move the democratic party to the political center but his republican opponents cited his failed healthcare initiative as evidence that he subscribed to the same 1960s liberal vision that had spurred the creation of the great society see chapter 27.
in the 1994 midterm elections georgia congressman newt gingrich mobilized the new right see chapter 28 with his call to end the corrupt liberal welfare state the republicans captured both the house and the senate for the first time since 1952.
gingrichs manifesto the contract with america envisioned smaller government less regulation term limits for members of congress welfare reform and adding a balanced budget amendment to the constitution.
little of this ambitious agenda was enacted partly because clinton stole some of gingrichs thunder by undertaking his own program of welfare reform.
modifying legislation passed during the new deal he joined with republicans and conservative democrats in congress to reduce the time that families mostly single mothers with dependent children could receive financial assistance.
clinton also tried to appeal to fiscal conservatives by balancing the federal budget for the first time in 30 years.
clinton used his superior political skills not only to weaken the republican resurgence but also to survive the scandals that plagued his presidency.
in 1994 a special federal prosecutor kenneth starr began investigating charges that the president had read the document articles of impeachment against william jefferson clinton participated in a fraudulent land deal during his tenure as arkansas attorney general.
during his investigation starr learned that president clinton had engaged in a sexual relationship with a white house intern named monica lewinsky.
clinton was not the first president to have extramarital dalliances but when giving testimony under oath on an unrelated matter he denied the affair.
seven months later the president publicly acknowledged that he had lied as seen in this new york daily news headline reporting his televised address to the nation 29 6.
republicans argued that clintons failure to tell the truth warranted impeachment.
in 1998 the republicancontrolled house of representatives completed the first stage of impeachment by voting that the president had lied under oath and obstructed justice.
the senate now had to decide whether these infractions met the constitutional test of high crimes and misdemeanors needed to remove a president from office.
ten republican senators joined with democrats in defeating the first charge of perjury by a vote of 55 to 45.
the second charge of obstructing justice resulted in a 50 to 50 tie.
neither charge obtained the requisite two thirds vote required to remove clinton from the white house.
clinton survived impeachment by cultivating the same everyman appeal that won him the presidency.
the essence of clintons success has been to persuade america that this scandal is about human weakness not crime and that at its core is not a string of felonies but a sin familiar to all adultery lamented conservative commentator patrick buchanan.
the strong economy also helped keep clintons approval ratings near 60 percent throughout the ordeal.
29 6 clintons sex scandal when clinton finally admitted to an inappropriate relationship with white house intern monica lewinsky the lies he had previously told to cover it up led to his impeachment.
how did clintons sex scandal compare to the reagan era iran contra scandal see chapter 28.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 the disputed election of 2000 the election of 2000 again offered voters two competing notions of the role that the government should play in american society.
democrat al gore then serving as vice president under bill clinton ran against republican george w bush the son of former president george h w bush.
more liberal than clinton gore was a well known environmentalist whose pedantic manner often made him appear wooden.
bush was a born again evangelical christian who had cultivated a folksy persona while governor of texas.
reflecting the generally prosperous times the two candidates put forward competing visions on how to spend the projected federal surplus.
calling it the peoples money bush proposed enormous tax cuts that he argued would fuel investment and economic growth.
rejecting the democrats emphasis on federal government activism bush vowed to create an ownership society where people had more control over their wealth social security retirement accounts health care and property.
gore adhered to the traditional democratic vision of using government regulation and federally funded programs to promote equity environmental responsibility and prosperity.
he charged that bushs tax cuts would disproportionately help the wealthy and starve federal programs for the poor.
gore proposed saving the surplus to prepare for the coming explosion in social security payments once the baby boom generation began retiring.
green party candidate ralph nader a consumer advocate who railed against corporate greed and the conservative patrick buchanan who ran on the reform party ticket also entered the race.
29 7 hanging chads a florida election worker uses a magnifying glass to try to determine which candidate this voter had selected reflecting the closeness of the 2000 presidential election.
why was the 2000 presidential election so controversial.
in an age of machine counted votes and instantaneous communication americans expected complete results on election night.
however with several states too close to call that evening it took a few days before gore emerged with 266 electoral votes three short of the 270 required to win the presidency to bushs 246.
all eyes now turned to florida where a riveting 36 day drama unfurled over recounting ballots that vote counting machines had rejected because voters had not completely punched the perforated box next to the candidates name.
gores team went to state court and won a hand recount in four primarily democratic counties.
election inspectors like the one pictured here 29 7 spent hours examining hanging chads partially punched boxes to determine voters intent.
arguing that time for a recount had run out republican florida officials certified that bush had won the state.
the battle now moved to the supreme court where conservative justices accepted the republican argument that the different standards used by inspectors to include or reject ballots violated the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment.
as the map 29 8 shows although gore won the national popular vote by winning florida bush had the 271 electoral votes to win the election.
echoing the outraged democratic response to the supreme courts decision to halt the recount justice john paul stevens wrote although we may never know with complete certainty the identity of the winner of this years presidential election the identity of the loser is perfectly clear.
it is the nations confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law subsequent privately funded recounts undertaken by major news organizations all concluded that bush had indeed won florida.
the election results continued to rankle democrats.
besides questioning poor ballot design and supreme court partisanship democrats charged that florida republicans had used shady tactics contested visions of government 29 8 presidential election 2000 a mere 537 votes in florida decided the outcome of the 2000 presidential contest.
8 4 initiatives that funded church run community programs arguing that local clergy understood their neighbor14 hood problems better than government bureaucrats.
federal money flowed to churches offering after school tutoring to students transportation for the elderly counseling for drug addicts and soup kitchens for the homeless.
critics saw little compassion for the poor in some of bushs other economic electoral vote popular vote electoral vote by state initiatives.
ignoring the elections evi271 50 50 456 062 48 2 dence that strong competing visions of george w bush republican governing continued to divide the nation albert gore jr 266 50 50 996 582 48 7 bush relied on the republican controlled democrat congress to win swift congressional ap0 0 2 882 955 3 ralph nader proval for the tax cuts and deregulation green party of financial markets that he had proposed buchanan 0 0 448 895 0 4 during the campaign.
faced with the beginnings of a recession as overinflated stock prices collapsed bush and other conservative to disenfranchise african americans such as inrepublicans offered a new rationale for slashing correctly claiming they were felons who could not taxes by an average of 15 percent.
over 40 percent vote.
the post election recriminations also targeted liberals who had rejected the centrist direction of the of the tax cuts went to the wealthy the people whose companies and investments would provide democratic party and voted for nader.
the green the jobs and capital to jump start the economy the party candidate received 97 488 votes in florida a president argued.
when the short recession ended state that bush won by a mere 537 votes.
bush and his congressional supporters credited their tax cutting.
some economists suggested that the overinflated housing market was the real reason for the economic rebound.
home prices doubled bush entered office proclaiming that his adminbetween 1997 and 2005 as speculators bought and istration would move away from the laissez faire sold homes quickly to take advantage of rising antigovernment message championed by past prices.
low interest loans encouraged homeowners congressional republican leaders like gingrich.
he instead embraced a new vision termed compas to use their houses as collateral to borrow money which they used to purchase consumer goods.
for sionate conservatism a philosophical approach to the moment the credit fueled rise in housing prices governing that emphasized using private industry infused cash into the economy but the day of reckcharities and religious institutions rather than the government to provide community services.
adher oning was ahead.
despite his antigovernment philosophy bush ents of compassionate conservatism argued that the sometimes proved willing to strengthen the federal poor quickly became dependent on government run governments power.
the bipartisan 2001 no child social welfare programs losing the motivation and left behind law tried to improve public schools drive to improve themselves.
as one bush adminisby linking federal funding to student performance tration official put it compassionate conservatives on annual standardized exams.
bush also dramatibelieved that the government should encourage cally increased the investigative powers of the justhe effective provision of social services without tice department in the wake of the terrorist attack providing the service itself in keeping with this against the united states on september 11 2001 philosophy the president championed faith based 10 3 compassionate conservatism how did george w bush reshape the conservative vision of governing.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 transforming daily life in the 1990s computers altered daily life in countless ways becoming essential to work and leisure.
the monica lewinsky scandal broke on the internet revealing how the emergence of the world wide web transformed the way americans communicated with one another in the 1990s.
demographic shifts also reshaped american society.
fewer heterosexual american couples married while the desire of gay couples to wed provoked heated debate over the meaning of marriage.
a sizable population of senior citizens emerged and new immigrant communities formed across the nation.
meanwhile environmentalists worried about humaninduced climate changes and entreated americans to stop using fossil fuels to run their cars and factories.
american family structure 1972 not married children 10 not married no children 16 married no children 29 married with children 45 educated workers and developed global markets for their products.
going the way of the horse and buggy when at key moments in american history transportation cars were invented typewriters became obsolete or communication breakthroughs transformed daily when people from office workers to students began life.
the intercontinental railroad and federal highusing computers to write letters and essays.
at first way system had quickened the movement of goods computer users printed copies of these documents and people.
telegraphs telephones and televisions broke down the barrier of distance among people liv and delivered them in traditional ways such as by mailing letters or handing a teacher a completed ing in different regions.
thanks to these inventions assignment.
by the end of the decade however americans could speak directly to loved ones living more and more americans relied on the internet to elsewhere learn instantaneously about events deliver busifar from home ness and social and laugh at the correspondence same jokes told electronically.
on weekly telethe internet vision shows.
in evolved from the 1990s coma primitive puter technolcomputer sysogy especially tem designed president bill clinton personal comin the 1960s to puters and the facilitate the internet again changed how americans communicated shopped exchange of data among geographically disparate military installations.
the creation in the late 1980s and received information.
of a computer network linking universities and five first introduced in the 1980s see chapter 28 national supercomputer centers paved the way to by the late 1990s millions of americans spent hours providing instantaneous computer communication a day at work or home typing on personal computamong civilians.
when engineers in switzerland deers.
the lucrative computer industry fueled by the veloped the world wide web a system for organizconstant invention of ever improving components and programs supplanted the car and steel industry ing electronic information internet use exploded.
in 1994 six million americans were connected to the as the engine that drove prosperity.
as manufacinternet.
by 2001 the 130 million americans who turing plants continued to close in the midwest surfed the web daily in offices libraries schools or areas where high tech enterprises clustered like at home accounted for a quarter of all global intersilicon valley in northern california boomed.
net traffic.
computer giants microsoft which produced the computers and the internet quickly reshaped computer operating system windows and apple became powerful corporations that employed highly how americans worked and played at the dawn of the computer age when i took office in 1993 only high energy physicists had ever heard of what is called the world wide web now even my cat has its own page.
which technological innovations of the twentieth century had the greatest impact on daily life.
view the image eniac computer transforming daily life the twenty first century.
virtual business meetings now took place among geographically dispersed colleagues who looked into small cameras attached to their computers to converse with the people they saw on their screens.
office workers working in the same building sent a stream of e mails to each other throughout the day rather than telephoning or delivering a message in person.
many companies replaced paper records with computer databases that stored personal and commercial data.
americans differed on the benefits that children derived from this new technology.
a generation of youth hooked on computer games alarmed commentators who worried that their sedentary lifestyle was fueling an epidemic of childhood obesity.
others fretted that violent computer games desensitized children to real world violence.
schools however quickly brought the internet into the classroom.
by simply typing a phrase into an internet search engine researchers of all ages gained instant access to information from libraries throughout the world.
the internet facilitated the spread of misinformation as well.
anyone could create a web site allowing virtual communities to form around almost any issue.
a great resource for researching a medical condition the internet also helped terrorists publicize their causes and killings around the world.
the internet reshaped commerce becoming a virtual shopping mall and entertainment center as entrepreneurs rushed to market their wares.
shopping on the internet however differed from taking a stroll down main street.
the internet based company not only sold books more cheaply but built virtual communities in which readers posted their own reviews of books and sold used copies.
the privacy and accessibility that the internet afforded gave the pornography and gambling industries a boost drawing millions of customers on a daily basis.
to pay the credit card bills that they accumulated while shopping online many americans stopped sending checks through the mail and began using the internet to pay their bills electronically.
droves of americans stopped watching their favorite shows on tv when broadcast preferring instead to watch them through the internet when it was convenient.
title characters decision to have a child.
quayle voiced the new rights lament that marriage had lost ground to nontraditional family arrangements.
the charts american family structure 1972 and american family structure 1998 29 9 show that the composition of the american family had indeed changed radically in less than a generation.
by 1998 47 percent of american families lived in non married households both with and without children compared to 26 percent in 1972.
gender roles within families also changed.
in the traditional model of marriage the husband worked and the wife stayed at home.
by the end of the 1990s most married couples worked outside the home.
changing family structure prompted sometimes acrimonious debate between the new right who wanted to reverse these trends and liberal democrats who championed the right of non married partners to cohabitate and of single women to have children.
many people who considered themselves liberal on myriad economic and social issues however joined with the new right in condemning same sex or gay marriage.
while many americans were willing to tolerate same sex couples living american family structure 1972 not married children 10 not married no children 16 married no children 29 married with children 45 american family structure 1998 not married children 14 married no children 26 the changing face of families in 1992 george h w bushs vice president dan quayle attacked a popular television series murphy brown for positively portraying the unmarried not married no children 33 married with children 27 29 9 changes in american family structure 1972 1998 these graphs reveal that the percentage of married households with children dropped significantly by the end of the twentieth century.
what changes in family structure do these charts illustrate.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 regardless of how you feel about marriage its wrong to treat people differently under the law an ad equating bans against gay marriage with past laws prohibiting interracial marriages i can marry a princess in a competing ad a young girl suggests that schools will promote legalized gay marriage together people on both ends of the political spectrum drew the line at same sex marriages.
in 1996 congress passed the defense of marriage act doma a law that defined marriage as a legal union between a man and a woman.
under this statute states that banned same sex marriages did not have to accept legal marriages performed in other states if a gay couple moved to their jurisdiction.
in 2011 only massachusetts connecticut vermont new hampshire iowa washington d c and new york allowed same sex marriages.
nine other states authorized civil unions between same sex partners that granted them rights similar to those accorded married couples.
most of the remaining states either through referendum or stature prohibited same sex marriage.
but after lower federal courts ruled doma unconstitutional the justice department stopped defending legal challenges to it in 2011.
this opened up the possibility that all states would be required to recognize samesex marriages performed elsewhere.
the debate over gay marriage received a tremendous amount of press exposure but few reporters paid much attention to how the graying of america was altering family life.
life expectancy had increased thanks to improved medical care and decreasing poverty.
many middle aged parents finished raising their children only to discover that their aging parents needed full time caretaking.
as the population aged social security and medicare payments went up but a declining birthrate meant that there were fewer native born workers available to pay the taxes that kept this social welfare system afloat.
over the last 25 years of the twentieth century the birth rate had declined from 18 4 births for every 1 000 people in 1970 to 14 8 in 1996.
faced with a labor shortage of able bodied workers the nation turned as it had in the past to immigrants to fill available jobs.
what competing visions emerged over same sex marriage.
a wave of immigration the massive wave of immigration that began after congress eliminated national quotas in 1965 initiated another important social transformation.
between 1931 and 1965 around five million immigrants came to the united states.
these numbers skyrocketed to 4 5 million in the 1970s 7 3 million in the 1980s and 9 1 million in the 1990s.
hundreds of thousands more entered the country illegally.
most of these immigrants came from asia africa and latin america only two million europeans settled in the united states between 1980 and 2000.
some americans satirically referred to the exploding hispanic immigrant population in the southwest as the reconquista or reconquest of territory that mexico had lost to the united states after the mexican american war of 1848 see chapter 11.
overall the united states attracted twice as many immigrants as all of the other nations in the world combined.
competing claims about the economic benefits of immigration emerged a debate explored more fully in competing visions the economic costs of immigration.
the new right also feared dire cultural consequences as the nation fragmented into permanent ethnic enclaves.
if america is to survive as one nation one people we need to call a time out on immigration to assimilate the tens of millions who have lately arrived exhorted patrick buchanan.
to protect the nations cultural cohesion these right leaning critics organized campaigns to make english the nations official language.
both democrats and republicans worried that immigrants who were willing to work for less took jobs away from native born workers.
critics especially denounced illegal immigration arguing that people who sneaked across the border often violated other laws as well.
illegal immigrants sent their transforming daily life competing visions the economic costs of immigration to this day americans continue to disagree about the economic costs of immigration.
in the following passage harvard economist george j borjas paints a pessimistic economic portrait.
tamar jacoby disputes his claim that three decades of high immigration have hurt the u s economy.
what factors does each emphasize to make a case.
george j borjas suggested that immigration affected socioeconomic groups differently in his 1996 article the new economics of immigration affluent americans gain poor americans lose new research has established a number of points.
the relative skills of successive immigrant waves have declined over much of the postwar period.
in 1970 for example the latest immigrant arrivals on average had 0 4 fewer years of schooling and earned 17 percent less than natives.
by 1990 the most recently arrived immigrants had 1 3 fewer years of schooling and earned 32 percent less than natives the large scale migration of less skilled workers has done harm to the economic opportunities of less skilled natives.
immigration may account for perhaps a third of the recent decline in the relative wages of less educated native workers the increasing welfare dependency in the immigrant population suggests that immigration may create a substantial fiscal burden on the most affected localities and states there exists a strong correlation between the skills of immigrants and the skills of their american born children so that the huge skill differentials observed among todays foreign born groups will almost certainly become tomorrows differences among american born ethnic groups.
in effect immigration has set the stage for sizable ethnic differences in skills and socioeconomic outcomes which are sure to be the focus of intense attention in the next century current immigration redistributes wealth from unskilled workers whose wages are lowered by immigrants to skilled workers and owners of companies that buy immigrants services and from taxpayers who bear the burden of paying for the social services used by immigrants to consumers who use the goods and services produced by immigrants immigration changes how the economic pie is sliced up the harmful effects of immigration will not go away simply because some people do not wish to see them.
view the closer look competing visions the economic costs of immigration in her 2002 article too many immigrants tamar jacoby argued that large scale immigration benefited the united states economically.
the most commonly heard complaint about foreign workers is that they take jobs from americans.
not only is this assertion untrue nobody has found real evidence to support it but cities and states with the largest immigrant populations new york los angeles and others boast far faster economic growth and lower unemployment than cities and states that do not attract immigrants.
in many places the presence of immigrants seems to reduce unemployment even among native born blacks probably because of the way immigrants stimulate economic growth even if borjas is right that a native born black worker may take home 300 less a year as a result of immigration this is a fairly small amount of money in the overall scheme of things.
more to the point globalization would have much the same effect on wages immigrants or no immigrants what about the costs imposed by immigrants especially by their use of government services.
it is true that many immigrants though far from all are poorer than nativeborn americans and thus pay less in taxes.
it is also true that one small segment of the immigrant population refugees tends to be heavily dependent on welfare.
as a result states with large immigrant populations often face chronic fiscal problems but if we shift the lens to the federal level and include the taxes that immigrants remit to the irs the calculation comes out very differently immigrants pay in more than they take out 28 million immigrants form but a small part of the 12 trillion u s economy and most of the fiscal costs and benefits associated with them are relatively modest.
besides fiscal calculations are only a small part of the larger economic picture.
how do we measure the energy immigrants bring the pluck and grit and willingness to improvise and innovate.
not only are immigrants by and large harder working than the native born they generally fill economic niches that would otherwise go wanting.
are contemporary concerns about immigration similar or different from objections made earlier in the twentieth century.
chapter 29 29 10 competing views on immigration americans continue to debate whether immigrants are a burden or an asset.
building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 children to school and received health care in hospitals all at taxpayer expense they charged.
unions and their supporters complained that undocumented workers could not join labor unions making it more difficult to organize labor to improve working conditions and wages.
champions of immigration mostly from the political left pointed to the nations past success in assimilating immigrants and argued that immigrants took the low paying jobs such as busboys gardeners and nannies that few americans wanted.
countering claims that new immigrants failed to assimilate advocates of immigration noted the high rate of interethnic marriages among second generation immigrants.
they also viewed complaints about multiculturalism as a racist attempt to protect the united states as a primarily white society.
the different meanings attached to the word benefits in this political cartoon by brian fairrington 29 10 encapsulated the debate over whether immigrants drained the economy by seeking taxpayer funded social services or contributed to overall prosperity by working for very little.
climate change the computer revolution and shifting demographics were not the only factors changing american daily life.
scientists worried that accelerated climate change threatened to reshape the physical space that americans inhabited and urged the nation to reverse human induced environmental damage.
they entreated americans to switch from gas guzzling cars like sport utility vehicles suvs to automobiles that burned little or no fossil fuels.
americans 4 5 percent of the global population drove 24 percent of the worlds 590 million cars.
ingrained driving habits however were hard to change.
environmental scientists claimed that average temperatures had risen 1 8 degrees fahrenheit over the last 100 years a phenomenon called global warming.
they attributed this climate shift to the widespread burning of fossil fuels coal and oil that pumped carbon dioxide into the air.
carbon dioxide was one of several greenhouse gases that trapped the suns heat in the earths atmosphere.
while the suns rays were essential to human life environmentalists blamed the rapidly rising levels of greenhouse gases for global warming.
this 2007 world map 29 11 shows which nations emitted the greatest amounts of carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels.
the united states china russia india and japan head the list.
developing nations in africa with few cars or heavy industry emitted relatively little carbon dioxide.
besides emitting more total greenhouse gases than most other nations the united states ranked tenth in the amount of greenhouse emissions per person.
why did global warming matter.
the quickerthan normal melting of the arctic ice cap environmentalists warned was causing sea levels to rise.
if unchecked rising waters would soon wash over sea level lands throughout the world including the mississippi delta in the united states.
scientists also speculated that global warming affected rainfall patterns and storms increasing droughts wildfires and hurricanes.
not everyone in the united states accepted these dire predictions.
some americans questioned the scientific evidence linking climate change to human activity.
fluctuations in the earths average temperature had occurred before they argued disputing the claim that permanent or catastrophic change in the atmosphere was underway.
in 1997 the united states signed the kyoto protocol an international agreement that set targets for reducing greenhouse emissions in industrial nations.
in 2001 however president george w bush argued that the agreement was flawed because it exempted china and relied on governmental controls not market incentives to develop green technology.
the united states subsequently became the only nation besides australia to sign but not ratify the treaty.
for americans to reduce the amount of fossil fuels burned in cars and factories lifestyles what core arguments support and question the theory of global warming.
transforming daily life r u s s i a u s a china japan india carbon dioxide emissions thousands of metric tons 1 000 000 300 000 to 1 000 000 100 000 to 300 000 50 000 to 100 000 20 000 to 50 000 5 000 to 20 000 1 000 to 5 000 0 to 1 000 29 11 global carbon dioxide emissions this 2007 map depicts the proportion of carbon dioxide gases emitted from burning fossil fuels mostly in factories and cars by each nation.
the united states and china were the worst polluters along with japan russia and india.
needed to change.
enjoying low gas prices few americans felt compelled to invest time or money into developing green technology.
national security concerns proved more effective in motivating the nation to re examine its energy policy.
the united states imported 65 percent of its oil with canada providing the largest share.
after 9 11 a consensus emerged that the ongoing american presence in the middle east which provided 11 percent of the oil americans consumed bred resentment among arab populations that helped islamist terrorists recruit members.
republicans and democrats however disagreed over how to wean the nation off its dependence on foreign oil.
the bush administration championed bolstering oil production at home by lifting restrictions on drilling in the arctic national wildlife refuge a nationally protected wilderness in alaska.
this proposal enraged environmentalists and democrats who worried that drilling accidents could contaminate this pristine area.
they also feared losing valuable time in the battle against global warming by continuing rather than ending fossil fuel consumption.
we are entering a period of consequences global warming at least the modern nightmare version is a myth al gore who won the 2007 nobel peace prize for publicizing the global warming crisis view the closer look competing visions global warming good science or media hype.
british botanist david bellamy what accounts for the disparity in carbon dioxide emissions on this map.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 new threats in the post cold war world middle east oil remained critical to the american economy throughout the 1990s and 2010s.
containing iraqi leader saddam hussein presented an ongoing challenge for presidents bill clinton and george w bush.
ethnic cleansing in eastern europe and africa raised additional questions of how much responsibility america should assume to prevent massacres worldwide.
when islamic terrorists attacked u s targets overseas and at home competing visions also arose over how to defend the nation from this new threat.
ethnic cleansing and terrorism in the 1990s the nation faced a new foreign policy dilemma when or whether to intercede on humanitarian grounds to stop massacres in parts of the world strategically unimportant to the united states.
in 1992 images of a civil war induced famine in somalia a country in east africa flooded american airwaves and newspapers.
this image of a somali woman and her starving child 29 12 echoed the madonna and child compositions used 29 12 and 29 13 competing views of civil turmoil in somalia 1992 and 1993 photographs like this one of a starving somali woman and child prompted americans to demand that the united states send troops to end the civil war responsible for the famine.
a year later angered by a photograph of somali rebels dragging the corpse of an american soldier through the streets americans called for the return of u s troops.
both images encouraged americans to view african nations as dysfunctional places where famine and fighting were endemic.
how did media coverage influence american views of africa.
by jacob riis during the gilded age see chapter 17 and dorothea lange during the depression see chapter 22 to rally popular support for aiding the poor.
president george h w bush responded to the public outcry by sending u s troops to help un peacekeepers restore order aid that incoming president bill clinton continued.
public opinion shifted dramatically in 1993 however when news cameras captured the image of cheering somalis dragging the corpse of an american soldier through the streets of mogadishu the capital city of somalia after rebel somali warlords downed a u s helicopter 29 13.
the new threats in the post cold war world public now demanded an immediate withdrawal and clinton complied.
the un also withdrew its troops and years of anarchy in somalia followed.
reluctant to jeopardize american soldiers lives again clinton proceeded cautiously in april 1994 when hutus the majority ethnic group in rwanda a nation in central africa unleashed a 100 day genocidal rampage that killed 800 000 tutsis a minority ethic group.
this time clinton came under attack for failing to intervene decisively with force.
the photo of somalis desecrating the corpse of an american soldier had other repercussions.
osama bin laden the saudi exile who headed al qaeda a fundamentalist islamic terrorist organization concluded that terrorist attacks against the united states would work because americans had no stomach for casualties.
one american pilot was dragged in the streets of mogadishu and you left.
the extent of your impotence and weaknesses became very clear he jeered in 1996.
such pronouncements caused paul watson the photojournalist who took the pulitzer prize winning image to conclude that the storm of outrage over his photo taught terrorists that they could rely on publicity in the western media to amplify the impact of their terrorist attacks.
during his first years in office clinton also had to respond to ethnic cleansing the intentional mass killing of one ethnic group by another in the balkans a mountainous region of southeastern europe.
when communist yugoslavia dissolved in 1991 ethnic and religious differences provoked a civil war among croatia bosnia and serbia all former parts of yugoslavia.
clinton resisted intervening until july 1995 when serbian forces forced 25 000 bosnian muslim women and children to leave the town of srebrenica and murdered the 7 500 muslim men and boys who remained behind.
the united states participated in nato air strikes of serbian military positions and helped broker the 1995 dayton peace accords which settled disputed territorial boundaries and placed nato troops including americans on the ground as peacekeepers.
preoccupied with humanitarian tragedies overseas americans paid less attention in the early 1990s to signs that the terrorist threat was moving closer to home.
many arabs saw the united states and israel as one blaming both for taking away land that belonged to the palestinians.
overseas hostagetakings and plane hijackings in the 1970s and 1980s kept the arab israeli conflict in the news.
in 1993 kuwaiti and iraqi born terrorists exploded a massive car bomb in the parking garage of the world trade center two towering skyscrapers in the heart of new york citys financial district that housed governmental agencies and companies involved in foreign trade.
the explosion killed six people and created a six story hole in the ground.
the fbi captured the culprits easily when one tried to recover his deposit from a car rental agency for the van used in the attack.
reassured that law enforcement agencies had done their job and that the terrorists were inept the public and government quickly forgot the incident.
but al qaeda which maintained training bases in afghanistan resolved to try again.
determined to launch a jihad or holy war against western nonbelievers bin laden relied on his familys fortune and donations from saudi arabians to construct a clandestine terrorist network that recruited disciples from the middle east asia and africa.
not all terrorist threats during this period originated overseas.
on april 19 1995 timothy mcveigh parked a rental truck filled with explosives in front of a federal building in oklahoma city.
the blast killed 168 people including many children in a day care center and wounded 800.
mcveigh and his accomplice terry nichols viewed the attack as payback for the federal governments recent assaults against private paramilitary groups and their rural compounds filled with caches of weapons.
militia supporters like mcveigh rejected any legal restriction on their second amendment right to bear arms citing gun laws as just one example of government tyranny.
the bombing remained the deadliest terrorist attack against american civilians until 9 11.
meanwhile al qaeda attacked u s targets overseas.
issuing a fatwa or religious decree declaring war against all americans bin laden demanded that the united states remove its troops from saudi arabia stationed there since the 1991 persian gulf war and end its support of israel.
it is more important for muslims to kill americans than other infidels bin laden declared.
this pronouncement was more than rhetoric.
in august 1998 al qaeda terrorists bombed the u s embassies in nairobi the capital of kenya and dar es salaam a city in tanzania.
clinton ordered an immediate retaliatory attack and tomahawk cruise missiles rained down on eight al qaeda training camps in afghanistan and on a pharmaceutical plant in sudan which was thought to have supplied bin laden with chemical weapons.
his advisors presented clinton with competing views over the next possible step.
his antiterrorist advisor recommended continuing the bombing until the taliban afghanistans fundamentalist islamic why did foreign and domestic terrorists attack americans.
chapter 29 29 14 the world trade center collapses this photograph conveyed the panic that spread through lower manhattan as rubble and smoke from the collapsing world trade center towers rained down on the streets.
building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 government turned bin laden over to the united states.
pentagon officials opposed sustained bombing worried that mounting civilian casualties would inflame anti american sentiments throughout the middle east.
assassinating bin laden others argued would turn him into a martyr whose death fundamentalists would certainly avenge.
faced with these conflicting views clinton chose to rely on the cia to thwart terrorist attacks against u s targets overseas.
these covert agents uncovered several planned attacks but failed to prevent al qaeda from sending a small explosiveladen boat into the side of the uss cole a destroyer which was anchored near the middle eastern how did the nation and government respond to the 9 11 attacks.
country of yemen.
the october 12 2000 assault killed 17 sailors and injured 40.
clinton left office still waiting for verification that al qaeda was behind this attack.
incoming president george w bush received that confirmation but had not settled on a response when al qaeda struck again on september 11 2001.
9 11 on the morning of september 11 2001 in an attack that became known as 9 11 19 terrorists operating from al qaeda cells inside the united states hijacked four planes.
the terrorists from saudi arabia egypt lebanon and the united arab emirates flew two planes into the world trade center towers and a third into the pentagon.
the fourth plane crashed in shanksville pennsylvania after the passengers seized control of the cockpit thwarting the terrorist plan to fly it into the capitol.
on this day of terror americans watched in horror as the world trade center towers crumbled causing rescue workers victims and onlookers to run for safety as the massive structures collapsed in a heap 29 14.
a total of 2 973 people died in the attacks.
president bush immediately announced that we will make no distinction between the terrorists who committed these acts and those who harbor them he issued an ultimatum to afghanistans taliban government turn over al qaeda members living there including bin laden or face invasion.
the taliban refused.
receiving overwhelming support from congress the american people and most foreign nations the united states attacked afghanistan on october 7 2001.
u s forces first bombed al qaeda training camps and arms depots and then joined with the northern alliance an afghan rebel group to drive the taliban from power.
the two month conflict failed however to capture bin laden who had likely escaped into the mountains of neighboring pakistan with help from pakistani sympathizers.
most americans had supported the invasion but many grew uneasy about how the bush administration was conducting the war.
these critics accused bush of condoning torture by allowing cia agents to use water boarding an interrogation tactic that simulated drowning to try to extract information from captured al qaeda suspects held prisoner at the u s naval base in guantnamo bay in cuba.
the decision to incarcerate captured prisoners indefinitely at guantnamo bay denying them the right to a fair trial also aroused controversy.
read the document george bush address to congress september 20 2001 new threats in the post cold war world responding to criticism that the nations security agencies had failed to prevent the 9 11 attack the president created the department of homeland security a new umbrella organization that housed the nations intelligence gathering and law enforcement agencies.
he also secured congressional approval for the 2001 patriot act which expanded the governments investigative and police powers.
critics soon attacked the law as an unconstitutional assault on civil liberties.
this 2002 political cartoon by pulitzer prize winner clay bennett 29 15 exposed a familiar wartime dilemma how to protect the nation against enemy agents operating on american soil while simultaneously safeguarding the privacy rights of americans.
in the cartoon determined federal workers remove planks from a couples home to build a security fence exposing their personal lives to public scrutiny.
in the weeks after the 9 11 attacks the fbi arrested hundreds of arabs and muslims in an effort to destroy any remaining al qaeda cells in the united states.
acting hastily and often on flimsy evidence the fbi caught innocent people in its dragnet and some spent months in jail before being released.
scores of arab americans like japanese americans in world war ii hung american flags outside their businesses to counter suspicions that all muslims were terrorists.
in 2007 a federal court overturned the sections of the patriot act that made it easier for the government to secure search warrants as well as internet and phone records.
29 15 security versus privacy this cartoon suggests that invading the privacy of americans under the guise of increasing security worsened rather than improved their lives.
the iraq war americas war on terror soon spread to iraq.
containing saddam husseins ambition to acquire weapons of mass destruction nuclear chemical and biological weapons had been an ongoing goal since the end of the 1991 persian gulf war.
in 1998 the un halted its weapons inspection program after iraq refused to continue cooperating.
president clinton subsequently authorized operation desert fox a four day how do governmental efforts to prevent internal enemy attacks after 9 11 compare to those during world wars i and ii.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 bombing campaign in december 1998 against 100 iraqi military targets to destroy any weapons saddam was hiding.
neoconservatives publicly urged clinton to make removing saddam a goal of american foreign policy.
they had the chance to advance their views more forcefully once bush appointed neoconservatives to key defenserelated positions including secretary of defense donald rumsfeld and deputy secretary of defense paul wolfowitz.
this core of key neoconservative defense policy advisors included vice president dick cheney.
reversing his previous stand when he had counseled the first president bush to stop the persian gulf war without attacking baghdad cheney along with others urged the president to attack iraq while public concern about national security remained high.
do we wait and hope he doesnt do what we know he is capable of which is distributing weapons of mass destruction to anonymous terrorists or do we take preemptive action asked neoconservative richard perle chairman of the defense policy board.
these advisors championed preemptive war the doctrine that the united states should use force to remove hostile regimes before they could pose a serious threat.
our security will require all americans to be forward looking and resolute to be ready for preemptive action when necessary to defend our liberty and to defend our lives president george w bush announcing a shift in foreign policy from containment to preemption 2002 state department officials especially secretary of state colin powell disagreed.
they offered a competing vision that relied on the same cold war era containment policies that had eventually toppled the soviet union.
those urging restraint worried that a hostile fundamentalist islamic government might replace saddams secular regime fueling rather than dampening the terrorist threat against the united states.
better the devil we know than the one we dont one high ranking intelligence official reasoned.
choices and consequences launching a preemptive war examines what debates occurred within the bush administration over going to war against iraq in 2003.
the options before bush as he made his decision to attack iraq.
having privately resolved to topple saddam hussein bush began laying the groundwork for sending american troops into iraq.
in september 2002 his administration announced a new national security strategy.
the bush doctrine established the unilateral right to attack nations that harbored terrorists to launch preemptive military strikes to prevent future attacks on the united states and to replace autocratic governments with democratically elected ones.
the inclusion of preemptive war was new but other parts of the bush doctrine reiterated key principles announced by bushs father when he defined a new post cold war direction for american foreign policy in 1992.
neoconservative paul wolfowitz played a key role in both administrations devising a foreign policy that aggressively protected americas singular status as the worlds strongest military power.
in building his case for war the president repeatedly claimed that saddam hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction and had links to terrorist organizations including al qaeda.
by the summer of 2002 this rhetoric had convinced 54 percent of the american public of the falsehood that saddam was responsible for the 9 11 attacks.
to win support in the international community and at home bush sought both a un resolution demanding that iraq readmit weapons inspectors and a congressional joint resolution authorizing the use of force to enforce un mandates and remove the continuing threat that saddam posed.
in arguing for war the administration pointed to secret correspondence between iraq and niger provided by italian intelligence agents indicating that between 1999 and 2001 saddam had made overtures to buy uranium oxide material used to build a nuclear bomb from niger.
some cia agents including the envoy sent to niger to investigate privately doubted that saddam had tried to buy uranium from niger.
this charge however convinced wavering democrats to support the war.
when the international atomic energy agency announced that these incriminating letters were indeed forgeries antiwar advocates charged that bush had deliberately misled the country to build his case for war.
the iraq war followed the same pattern as the 1991 persian gulf war intense bombing followed by a ground invasion.
the bombing campaign began on march 19 2003 and within three weeks read the document george w bush national security strategy of the united states of america 2002 new threats in the post cold war world choices and consequences launching a preemptive war in 2002 the bush administration feared that iraqi dictator saddam hussein had acquired or was on the verge of acquiring nuclear weapons and was developing chemical and biological weapons.
president bush worried that once hussein acquired a sizeable arsenal he would use it against his neighbors including israel and help terrorists attack the united states.
his advisors gave bush three options about how to proceed.
choices launch a preemptive war to remove saddam from power.
work through the un to impose economic sanctions and send weapons inspectors to iraq.
support iraqi exiles plan to organize a coup that might trigger a mass uprising.
decision in february 2002 bush decided to fight.
he announced that saddam harbored weapons of mass destruction and had aided al qaeda.
he made a half hearted effort to work with the un to reconstitute the weapons inspection program halted in 1998 and secured support from a handful of potential allies if the united states went to war.
announcing that saddam had refused to cooperate adequately with un weapons inspectors the united states attacked iraq on march 19 2003.
consequences active combat lasted three weeks and toppled saddam.
no weapons of mass destruction were found.
iraq elected a democratic government that struggled to contain ethnic and religious strife.
u s forces came under daily attack until a surge of troops in 2008 weakened rebel insurgencies.
looking for a coherent iraq policy jack ohman the oregonian 2002 continuing controversies was the iraq war justified.
supporters of bushs policies argued that removing saddam benefited the iraqi people and the world.
building a stable democratic and militarily weakened iraq was necessary to protect american interests in the strategically and economically important persian gulf.
the 9 11 attacks demonstrated that the united states must act aggressively and preemptively overseas to prevent future strikes on its own soil.
critics argued that bush misled the american people by making false claims that saddam possessed weapons of mass destruction and had ties to al qaeda.
the war made america less secure by fanning antiamerican sentiments in the middle east that helped al qaeda recruit and diverted resources from the war in afghanistan where al qaeda was regrouping.
preemptive war set a dangerous precedent that lowered the threshold for going to war to simply feeling threatened by another nation.
what justifications and criticisms did the doctrine of preventative war arouse.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 american troops were in baghdad.
on april 10 2003 usa today was one of many newspapers and television newscasts 29 16 showing an iraqi crowd enlisting the aid of u s marines to pull down a huge statue of saddam.
the toppling of saddam husseins statue in baghdad will be recorded alongside the fall of the berlin wall as one of the great moments of liberty bush proclaimed.
although the event was initially seen as emblematic of iraqi celebration over the fall of saddam subsequent reports suggested that american army personnel had staged the event in a square across from the hotel housing international journalists to create a positive iconic image of the war similar to the world war ii image of u s marines raising the flag on iwo jima see chapter 23.
the controversy surrounding the picture mirrored americans debate over whether the war was based on lies or was as bush and his supporters maintained spreading democracy to the middle east.
after active combat operations ceased american troops faced a host of problems that kept them in iraq.
widespread looting greeted the fall of saddam hussein who eluded capture until december 13 2003.
he was held in prison then put on trial and executed on december 30 2006.
restoring law and order and creating a new democratic government proved difficult as sunnis shiites and kurds divided along ethnic and religious lines.
american soldiers caught up in the emerging civil war provided inviting targets for suicide bombers while iran and alqaeda penetrated iraq to expand their influence in the region.
controversy over the war continued at home especially when scandalous photographs taken by soldiers at the american run abu ghraib prison circulated in the mainstream media and on the internet in 2004.
while interrogating prisoners u s guards had taken photos of prisoners forced into humiliating sexual positions and being threatened with dogs.
other photos showed smiling american soldiers standing beside beaten and bloody corpses.
as with the 1968 my lai massacre in vietnam see chapter 26 americans held strong competing visions on what they felt the photos represented.
some saw rogue soldiers acting on their own others blamed the president for authorizing brutal interrogating techniques on suspected terrorists.
another group sidestepped the moral question and instead debated whether torture produced valuable information or simply encouraged suspects to say what interrogators 29 16 baghdad falls april 10 2003 wanted to hear.
initial news reports spoke of jubilant crowds cheering as u s marines helped them pull down a statue of saddam hussein but later reports suggested that the army had staged the incident.
what accomplishments and setbacks did the united states experience in the iraq war.
new threats in the post cold war world the election of 2008 in 2004 bush won reelection against democratic challenger massachusetts senator john kerry a vietnam war veteran whose record both as a decorated officer and peace activist came under republican attack during the campaign.
despite the growing unpopularity of the war in iraq the fresh memories of 9 11 bolstered bushs argument that only he could adequately protect the nation against terrorism.
in a close election bush won the popular vote by only 3 percent and captured the electoral college 286 to 252.
by 2008 however the presidents approval rates had sunk to historic lows only truman and nixon had polled lower.
these lows reflected the nations unease with its seemingly permanent presence in iraq and recoil at the white houses initial failure to react when hurricane katrina devastated new orleans predominantly black neighborhoods in 2005.
in the 2008 presidential contest democratic and republican candidates both repudiated the bush administration and ran campaigns that promised change.
the election soon assumed historic dimensions when hillary rodham clinton the former first lady and now a senator from new york announced her candidacy.
clinton had a long record of public service dedicated to healthcare issues but her initial support for the war in iraq angered antiwar democrats.
firstterm illinois senator barack obama the 47 year old son of a white woman from kansas and an african father astutely campaigned on his own consistent opposition to the war.
when the crowded democratic field narrowed to clinton and obama the 2008 election was guaranteed to make history.
for the first time either a woman or an african american would head the national democratic ticket.
at the end of a bruising primary battle obama prevailed to become the democratic nominee.
in the general election obama faced republican john mccain a former navy pilot whom the communist vietnamese had held captive for six years during the vietnam war.
the 72 year old senator from arizona had a reputation as a maverick for occasionally breaking ranks with fellow republicans.
hoping to make some history of his own and perhaps woo clinton supporters mccain selected alaska governor sarah palin as his running mate only the second time that a woman had received this honor.
obama pledged to end the war in iraq quickly and roll back the bush era tax cuts for the wealthy while mccain supported both.
debate over the iraq war watch the video video lecture the historical significance of the 2008 election faded when a cascade of bank and insurance company failures sent the stock market into a tailspin.
in the midst of the crisis economists offered the following explanation for the downturn that future investigations may or may not confirm.
during the last five years as housing prices rose dramatically and congress deregulated the banking and financial industries banks had made numerous risky loans that let people purchase homes they could not afford and wall street brokers had invested heavily in mortgage backed securities.
when housing prices started declining in summer 2007 the dominos began to fall.
bank foreclosures on people who could not pay their mortgages increased and even more ominously the declining value of mortgage backed securities threatened to bankrupt leading wall street firms wiping out many americans retirement investments.
to stabilize the mortgage market the government took over two leading lenders freddie mac and fannie mae.
treasury secretary henry paulson refused to intervene when lehman brothers a major investment firm went bankrupt in september 2008.
this bankruptcy shocked the financial sector.
credit markets froze as banks stopped lending and investors began moving money from stocks and bonds to u s treasury notes.
by mid september the bush administration decided that an infusion of 700 billion was needed to unfreeze the credit markets and stop the stock markets freefall.
enraged house republicans revolted.
in their view the government bail out used taxpayer money to reward bad behavior.
many democrats accepted the competing view that the government would recoup this money when the economy and value of these investments improved.
congress eventually authorized the funds which paulson used to infuse capital directly into banks rather than buying low valued assets.
what happened to this money became a major political question still unanswered.
obama was a captivating orator who drew thousands to his rallies.
even hillary clinton campaigned for him.
obama drew enthusiastic support from whites and blacks young and old hispanic and asian.
i t is that american spirit that american promise that pushes us forward even when the path is uncertain barack obama accepting the 2008 presidential democratic nomination what factors led to the economic downturn in 2008.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 29 17 obamanania almost overnight barack obama became an american icon a boon to washington d c area gift shops selling souvenirs to the 2 million people who braved freezing temperatures to see obama inaugurated as the nations 44th president on january 20 2009.
exuding confidence calm and charm obama amassed an inspired following who put his likeness on posters vans t shirts bridges boats and even tattoos.
the image of obama on the souvenir mugs in this photo 29 17 came from an iconic poster by artist shepard fairey.
the mugs paired obamas silhouette with the campaigns catchphrase change we can believe in by contrast faireys poster carried the single word hope a message that detractors modified into nope on their own tee shirts and bumper stickers.
an intensely disciplined candidate obama stuck to a clear message of economic reform.
the mccain campaign was more erratic one day highlighting economics the next portraying obama as the heir to sixties era radicalism.
thanks to support from swing voters those without strong ideological convictions momentum for obama built throughout the fall.
on november 4 2008 he became the first african american president of the united states by winning a decisive victory 365 to 173 electoral votes and 53 percent of the popular vote.
troubled times obamas emphasis on change during the campaign raised liberals expectations that he would move quickly to regulate wall street enact universal health care end the ban on gays in the military and how did past civil rights activism help make obamas election possible.
withdraw from iraq and afghanistan.
conservatives however adamantly opposed enlarging the role and cost of government.
within this highly contentious partisan environment obama found himself under attack from the right and left.
the economic crisis posed the most immediate challenge for obama.
with the democrats controlling both the house and senate he quickly secured passage of a massive government spending bill to stimulate the economy.
republicans including many who had supported bushs deficit spending vehemently opposed increasing the national debt.
when the economy failed to rebound quickly two competing views on the stimulus spending emerged.
the obama administration asserted that the infusion of government money prevented another great depression by staving off the collapse of the nations financial institutions and averting massive layoffs.
republicans countered that ineffective government interference stymied the recovery leaving taxpayers with a bill that would take generations to pay off.
liberals urged obama to hold wall street accountable for the misdeeds that caused the economic meltdown and congress did strengthen regulatory oversight of financial institutions.
americans increasingly however directed their anger over the ongoing economic crisis at washington.
concerns about the escalating debt and federal power energized watch the video video lecture the connection between obama and lincoln new threats in the post cold war world grassroots conservatives who used social networking media to draw crowds to their initial demonstrations.
the spectacular rise of the tea party movement had begun named to evoke the revolutionary spirit of the 1774 boston tea party.
support from conservative television pundits and high profile politicians like sarah palin also fueled the movements growth.
by actively opposing the presidents health insurance reform initiative the tea party solidified its influence within republican circles.
in pushing for health care reform obama hoped to succeed where truman and clinton had failed.
j r roses 2009 political cartoon aptly captured the political divide that characterized this rancorous debate 29 18.
to marshal support obama cited the many uninsured 16 percent of the population or 47 million people rising health care and insurance costs and troubling industry practices such as lifetime limits on coverage.
opting for a reform of private health insurance practices rather than the single payer government run system liberals favored obama angered his base and did little to assuage conservatives.
health insurance reform legislation passed in 2010 without receiving a single republican vote amid liberal criticism that the law did too little.
the laws requirement that all americans purchase health insurance became a flashpoint for conservatives and independents worried about intrusive governmental power.
states immediately challenged the constitutionality of this mandate.
the mixed rulings in federal district courts suggested that the supreme court would ultimately determine whether obamas attempt to establish universal healthcare would prevail.
sweeping republican victories in the 2010 mid term elections included tea party candidates who vowed to curb the power of government by repealing the healthcare law cutting the federal budget and making bush era tax cuts permanent.
focused on fiscal issues tea party activists had less interest in championing conservatives traditional social and cultural agenda.
instead of rallying supporters to reverse the 2010 repeal of the militarys dont ask dont tell policy that prevented gay servicemen from openly acknowledging their sexual orientation the tea party used its influence within the republican party to demand a permanent reduction in the size and scope of the federal budget.
liberal disenchantment with obama stemmed mainly from his foreign policy decisions especially escalating the war in afghanistan and continued operation of the guantanamo bay prison.
obama prohibited the use of water boarding but reaffirmed the bush era policy of holding prisoners indefinitely without charges.
sending an additional 30 000 troops to afghanistan in october 2009 obama tried to reassure his liberal base by setting a tentative withdrawal date of 2014 from afghanistan.
obama satisfied americans of all political persuasions when he announced on may 2 2011 that u s special forces had tracked down and killed osama bin laden in his pakistani hideout.
documents recovered during the raid provided crucial intelligence that allowed obama to claim that the united states for the moment had the upper hand in the war on terror.
he also moved decisively to draw down forces in iraq.
an influx of u s troops in 2008 had reduced insurgent attacks both improving the publics views of the iraq war and strengthening obamas claim that the war had been won.
in october 2011 obama announced that the u s military would leave iraq by years end.
after nearly nine years americas war in iraq will be over he announced a decision supported by 75 of americans.
a vigorous debate.
during the yearlong debate over health insurance reform democrats and republicans articulated competing visions of the role that the federal government should play in american society.
what challenges did obama confront during his first two years in office.
chapter 29 building a new world order the united states 1989 2011 fall of the berlin wall persian gulf war symbolizes demise of communism in eastern europe united states announces intention to build a new world order un withdraws weapon inspectors from an uncooperative iraq al qaeda strikes uss cole near yemen chinese students occupy tiananmen square soviet union ceases to exist chapter review communist government violently suppresses pro democracy movement united states declares victory in the cold war growing u s alarm over saddams drive to acquire nuclear weapons president bill clinton impeached cleared of charges but scandal mars clintons second term precursor to 9 11 attacks inside the united states george w bush elected president controversy over disputed recount in florida divides the nation review questions 1.
what values and ideas shaped key american foreign policy decisions in this period.
how did the media shape american attitudes about world events.
what controversies emerged over immigration and gay marriage.
how did the united states reconcile its domestic values with its new imperialistic ventures in the world from 1989 2009.
how did liberals and conservatives modify their long standing visions of the role government should play.
key terms powell doctrine general colin powells assertion that the nation should go to war only as a last resort when the president had full support from the nation and the international community could employ overwhelming military force to win without serious loss of american life and had a clear exit strategy.
dont ask dont tell the policy instituted during the clinton era that allowed closeted homosexuals and lesbians gays who kept their sexual preferences hidden to serve in the military.
north american free trade agreement nafta a 1992 treaty that lifted trade barriers among the united states mexico and canada.
compassionate conservatism a philosophical approach to governing that emphasized using private industry charities and religious institutions rather than the government to provide community services.
global warming the scientific theory that widespread burning of fossil fuels emitted greenhouse gases into the atmosphere that caused average global temperatures to rise.
al qaeda a fundamentalist islamic terrorist organization led by saudi exile osama bin laden.
9 11 september 11 2001 was the day of al qaeda attacks on the united states terrorists hijacked four planes and flew two into the world trade center towers and one into the pentagon one crashed on a field in shanksville pennsylvania.
patriot act a controversial 2001 law that greatly expanded the governments investigative and police powers.
preemptive war the notion that the united states should remove hostile regimes with force before they could pose a serious threat.
bush doctrine established the unilateral right to attack nations that harbored terrorists to launch preemptive military strikes to prevent future attacks on the united states and to replace autocratic governments with democratically elected ones.
chapter review al qaeda launches 9 11 attacks iraq war begins economic downturn begins tea party emerges united states begins war on terror overseas and at home preemptive war puts u s troops in iraq indefinitely economists predict worst financial crisis since the great depression grassroots conservative movement emphasizes limited government barack obama elected president health insurance overall congress passes the patriot act americans debate whether law protects nation or violates civil liberties first african american elected president establishes universal healthcare system myhistorylab connections visit for a customized study plan that will help you build your knowledge of building a new world order.
questions for analysis 1.
why does wilson conclude that class matters more than race in explaining urban poverty.
read the document william julius wilson the urban underclass p 880 2.
how did the president justify military action against iraq in 1991.
other resources from this chapter read the document george h w bush inaugural address 1989 p 876 articles of impeachment against william jefferson clinton p 885 george bush address to congress september 20 2001 p 896 view the closer look images as history the fall of the berlin wall p 878 competing visions the economic costs of immigration p 891 read the document george bush allied military action in the persian gulf 1991 p 882 3.
what are the competing views on global warming.
view the closer look competing visions global warming good science or media hype p 893 4.
what new vision of americas role in the world followed 9 11.
read the document george w bush national security strategy of the united states of america 2002 p 898 5.
what is the historical significance of electing the nations first african american president.
watch the video video lecture the historical significance of the 2008 election p 901 view the image eniac computer p 888 watch the video president george bushs early response in the persian gulf war p 881 bill clinton sells himself to america presidential campaign ad 1992 p 884 video lecture the connection between obama and lincoln p 902 1460 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present americas changing population as the twenty first century dawned the united states began experiencing dramatic social changes.
in 2015 the countrys population surpassed 322 million more than 80 percent of whom lived in cities or suburbs.
even more important the nations racial and ethnic composition was changing rapidly.
in 1980 the population was 80 percent white.
by 2015 that percentage had fallen below 63 percent.
in 2005 hispanics became the nations largest minority group.
in 1980 hispanics were 6 percent in 2015 that number had tripled to 18 percent and was growing rapidly.
more than 56 million americans were hispanic in origin and a third of them were under the age of eighteen.
african americans were at 13 percent asians about 8 percent and native americans 1 percent.
the rate of increase among those four groups was twice what it had been during the 1980s.
yet the fastest growing group in the nation were the nearly 10 million who described themselves as multiracial representing more than 3 percent of the entire population.
the primary cause of this dramatic change in the nations ethnic mix was a surge of immigration.
in 2015 the united states had more foreign born residents than ever before more than 45 million 11 million of whom were undocumented immigrants formerly classified as illegal aliens.
in the first decade of the twenty first century the united states became home to more than twice as many immigrants as all other countries combined.
for the first time the majority of immigrants came not from europe but from other parts of the world asia latin america and africa.
mexicans made up the largest share of hispanics followed by puerto ricans and cubans.
asian americans increased their numbers at a faster rate than any other ethnic group largely because of a surge in chinese immigrants.
the nations changing ethnic composition has had an increasingly significant impact on social life.
in 1980 hispanic americans lived mainly in five states california arizona new mexico texas and florida.
by 2014 every state had a rapidly growing hispanic population.
demographers projected that by 2044 whites would become a minority in the united states.
immigration also is having potent political effects as almost 1 million hispanics reach voting age each year.
hispanics are usually catholic and tend to vote democratic.
in 1980 there were six hispanic americans serving in the u s congress.
by 2010 there were more than five times as many.
in 1992 hispanics constituted only 2 percent of american voters by 2014 they were 10 percent.
americas changing population 1461 over the quota under the radar large numbers of chinese risked their lives to gain entry to the united states during the late twentieth century.
a freighter carrying undocumented immigrants ran aground near rockaway beach new york in june 1993 forcing its undocumented passengers to swim ashore.
only 23 percent of baby boomers born during and after the second world war consider the surge in american diversity a change for the better they worry that hispanics will always be a race apart from m ainstream american culture a permanent underclass of people tied closely to their ancestral homelands.
yet such concerns are countered by growing evidence that hispanics are integrating themselves into american society and embracing its ideals.
high school graduation and college enrollment rates among hispanics are rising teen pregnancy is falling and more and more are learning english.
in recent years more than a quarter of hispanic marriages have involved a non hispanic partner.
far from being a disaster the growing hispanic population is providing the nation with a surge of youthful energy and vitality and demonstrating such traditional american attributes as self reliance rugged individualism thrift close family ties strong religious beliefs disproportionate participation in the military and an ethic of hard work.
1462 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present the clinton presidency bill clinton arrived at the white house in 1993 with an almost legendary combination of strengths and weaknesses.
at forty six years old he was the third youngest president in history only slightly older than john kennedy and theodore roosevelt.
like ronald reagan clinton charmed people and his speeches inspired them.
he was shrewdly smart full of energy resilient persistent and a self described policy wonk who loved debating the fine points of new legislative ideas.
clinton resembled jimmy carter in his determination to be a centrist democrat who reached out to w orking and m iddle class voters who no longer trusted liberals to take their tax money and spend it with discipline yet while graced with charm and a common touch with voters as well as a commitment to fulfilling his campaign pledges clinton was also prone to self absorption self deception and self inflicted wounds.
a sucker for flattery with a compulsion to please and to be loved he often seemed to decide his stances on issues by finding out what others believed by studying the results of focus group interviews and public opinion surveys.
a creature of both inspired leadership abilities and unruly passions he at times seemed less a president than a flawed good ol boy capable of self righteous sleaziness and shameless misbehavior he would dismiss his impeachment as just a political deal.
in sum clinton was a bundle of warring impulses whose faults often confounded his talents.
yet he displayed legendary energy and slick resilience.
his nickname was the comeback kid he thrived amid storms.
one of his advisers predicted that clinton would make every mistake possible but he will only make it once like jimmy carter clintons career as a governor did not prepare him well for some of his presidential duties.
his inexperience in international affairs and congressional maneuvering led to several missteps in his first year as president.
like george h w bush before him he reneged on several campaign promises.
in a bruising battle with congress he was forced to abandon his proposed m iddle class tax cut to keep another campaign promise to reduce the federal deficit.
then he dropped his promise to allow gays to serve openly in the armed forces after military commanders expressed strong opposition.
he later announced an ambiguous policy that came to be known as dont ask dont tell dadt which allowed gays lesbians and bisexuals to serve in the military but only if they kept their sexual orientation secret.
i got the worst of both worlds clinton later confessed.
i lost the fight and the gay community was highly critical of me for the compromise in his first two weeks in office his approval rating dropped 20 percent.
throughout his presidency however he displayed a remarkable ability to manage crises and rebound from adversity.
the clinton presidency 1463 the economy as a candidate bill clinton had pledged to reduce the federal deficit without damaging the economy or hurting the nations most vulnerable people.
to this end he proposed 241 billion in higher taxes for corporations and for the wealthiest individuals the top income tax rate rising from 33 to 39 6 percent over four years and 255 billion in spending cuts over the same period.
the hotly contested bill passed the democratic nafta protesters protesters going to controlled congress by the slimmest a rally against nafta the controversial of margins 218 to 216 in the house free trade agreement for north america.
and 51 to 50 in the senate with vice president al gore providing the tie breaking vote.
in the end t he deficit reduction effort worked as planned.
it led to lower interest rates which along with low energy prices helped spur dramatic economic growth.
equally difficult was gaining congressional approval of the north american free trade agreement nafta which the bush administration had negotiated with canada and mexico.
clinton urged approval of nafta which would make north america the largest free trade zone in the world.
opponents favored tariffs to discourage the importation of cheaper foreign products especially from mexico.
yet clinton prevailed with solid republican support while losing a sizable minority of democrats mostly labor unionists and southerners who feared that textile mills would lose business and millions of jobs to cheap labor c ountries as they did.
health care reform clintons primary public policy initiative was an ambitious plan to overhaul the nations h ealth care system.
if i dont get health care he declared ill wish i didnt run for president public support for government administered health insurance had spread as annual medical costs skyrocketed and some 37 million americans most of them poor or unemployed went without it.
the clinton administration argued that providing medical insurance to everyone regardless of income would reduce the costs of health care to the nation as a whole but critics questioned the savings as well as the ability of the federal government to manage such a huge program.
the grand plan known as the health security act called for large corporations to pay for most of the 1464 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present medical insurance expenses of their employees and required small businesses to form health alliances so that they too could provide subsidized health insurance to their workers.
by the summer of 1994 clintons 1 364 page h ealth insurance plan developed by a task force headed by the first lady hillary rodham clinton was doomed in part because the president opposed any changes and in part because the report was impossibly complicated.
strenuously opposed by republicans and health care interest groups especially the pharmaceutical and insurance industries clintons prized bill was voted down by congress in august 1994 landslide republican victory the health care bill disaster influenced the 1994 midterm elections.
in the most stunning congressional victory of the twentieth century the republicans captured both houses of congress and won 32 governorships including the largest states of california new york and texas where george w bush the son of the former president and a future president himself won handily.
the republican victory was led by a combative georgia conservative named newton newt leroy gingrich.
in early 1995 he became the first republican speaker of the house in forty two years.
gingrich a former history professor with a lust for controversy and an unruly ego was a superb tactician who had helped mobilize religious and social conservatives associated with the christian coalition.
the christian coalition organized by television evangelist pat robertson in 1989 to replace jerry falwells moral majority which had disbanded that year was pro school prayer a nti abortion a nti feminist and anti gay rights.
in addition to celebrating traditional family values it urged politicians to radically downsize government.
ralph reed a born again christian political activist who would head the christian coalition declared that christians needed to take back this country in many respects the religious right took control of the political and social landscape in the nineties.
in 1994 gingrich and his fellow republicans rallied conservative voters by promising a contract with america a pledge to dismantle the corrupt liberal welfare state created by democrats.
the ten point anti big government contract promised a smaller federal government by reducing the regulation of businesses environmental protections requiring term limits for members of congress slashing social welfare programs and passing a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced annual federal budget.
as texan tom delay a leading house republican explained youve got to understand we are the clinton presidency 1465 i deologues.
we have an agenda.
we have a philosophy yet the m uch trumpeted contract with america quickly fizzled.
the conservatives pushed too hard and too fast realizing too late that their slim majority in congress could not launch a revolution.
they were able to pass only four minor elements of their contract gingrichs heavy handed methods newt gingrich joined by 160 of his fellow house republicans gingrich contributed to the disintegration of promotes the contract with america in the contract with america.
repub april 1995 lican senator bob dole said gingrich was a o ne man band who rarely took advice he was too ambitious too abrasive too divisive.
when clinton refused to go along with republican demands for a balanced budget pledge gingrich twice shut down the federal government during the fall of 1995.
the tactic backfired.
by 1996 republicans abandoned the contract with america in part because gingrich had higher negative r atings in public surveys than the president.
the supreme court and race the conservative mood also revealed itself in supreme court rulings that undermined a ffirmative action programs which gave african american students special consideration in college admissions and financial aid awards.
between 1970 and 1977 african american enrollment in colleges and universities doubled even as white students and their parents complained about reverse discrimination in 1996 two major rulings affected affirmative action in college a dmissions.
in hopwood v texas a federal court ruled that race could not be used as a consideration for admission.
later that year california voters passed proposition 209 also known as the california civil rights initiative or ccri which ruled out preferential treatment affirmative action in government hiring government contracting and public schools based on race sex ethni city or national origin.
similar complaints were directed against affirmative action programs that awarded government contracts to m inority owned businesses.
in 1995 the court in adarand constructors v pea declared that affirmative action programs had to be narrowly tailored to serve a compelling national interest the implication of such vague language was clear the court had come to share the growing public suspicion of the value 1466 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present and legitimacy of programs designed to benefit a particular race gender or ethnic group.
legislative breakthrough after the surprising 1994 republican takeover of congress bill clinton shrewdly resolved to save his presidency by reinforcing his claim that he was a centrist he co opted much of the energy of the conservative movement by announcing that the era of big government is over and by reforming the federal system of welfare payments to the poor created during the 1930s under the new deal.
late in the summer of 1996 the republican congress passed a comprehensive welfare reform measure that clinton signed after some revisions.
the personal responsibility and work opportunity act of 1996 prwoa illustrated clintons efforts to move the democratic party away from the liberalism it had promoted since the 1930s.
prwoa abolished the aid to families with dependent children afdc program which provided poor families with almost 8 000 a year and replaced it with the temporary assistance for needy families program which limited the duration of welfare payments to two years in an effort to encourage unemployed people to get self supporting jobs.
liberal democrats bitterly criticized clintons welfare reform deal.
yet the new approach to supporting the poor was a statistical success.
both the number of welfare recipients and poverty rates declined during the late nineties leading the editors of the l eft leaning new republic to report that the prwoa had worked much as its designers had hoped the 1996 campaign the republican takeover of congress in 1994 gave the party hope that they could prevent president clintons reelection.
after clinching the republican presidential nomination in 1996 senate majority leader bob dole resigned his seat to devote his attention to the campaign.
clinton however maintained a large lead in the polls.
with an improving economy and no major f oreign policy crises cultural and personal issues surged into prominence.
concern about doles age seventy three and his gruff public personality as well as tensions between economic conservatives and social conservatives over volatile issues such as abortion and gun control hampered doles efforts to generate widespread support especially among independent voters.
clinton was able to frame the election as a stark choice between doles desire to build a bridge to the past and clintons promise to build a bridge to the future.
on november 5 1996 clinton won a second term with an electoral vote victory of 379 to 159 and 49 percent of the popular vote.
dole received 41 percent of the popular vote and third party candidate ross perot got 8 percent.
the clinton presidency 1467 the new economy bill clintons presidency benefited from a prolonged period of unprecedented economic prosperity.
during his last three years in office 1998 2000 the federal government generated unheard of budget surpluses.
what came to be called the new economy featured h igh flying electronics computer software telecommunications cellular phones cable tv etc.
and e commerce internet firms called dot com companies.
these dynamic tech enterprises helped the economy set records in every area low inflation low unemployment corporate profits and personal fortunes.
the stock market value of u s companies nearly tripled and people began to claim that the new economy defied the b oom and bust cycles of the previous hundred years.
alan greenspan the federal reserve board chairman suggested that we have moved beyond history into an economy that seemed only to grow.
he would be proven wrong.
globalization another major feature of the new economy was g lobalization.
the end of the cold war and the disintegration of the soviet union opened many new opportunities for u s companies in international trade.
in addition new globe spanning communication technologies and massive new container carrying ships and cargo jets shortened time and distance enabling united states based multinational companies to conduct more business abroad.
bill clinton accelerated the process of globalization.
the global economy he said is giving more of our own people and billions around the world the chance to work and live and raise their families with dignity he especially welcomed the world wide web which opened the internet to everyone and by doing so greatly accelerated u s dominance of the international economy.
by 2000 more than a third of the production of u s multinational companies was occurring abroad compared with only 9 percent in 1980.
in 1970 there were 7 000 american multinational companies by 2000 the number had soared to 63 000.
many u s multinational companies pursued controversial outsourcing strategies by which they moved their production offshore to nations such as mexico and china to take advantage of lower labor costs and fewer workplace and environmental regulations.
at the same time many european and asian companies especially automobile manufacturers built large plants in the united states to reduce the shipping expenses required to get their products to american markets.
the u s economy had become internationalized to such an extent that global concerns exercised an e ver increasing influence on domestic and foreign policies.
1468 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present foreign policy in the nineties unlike george h w bush bill clinton had little interest in global politics.
untrained and inexperienced in international relations he had to focus on creating opportunities around the world for u s business expansion.
yet as international analyst leslie gelb cautioned the new president a foreign economic policy is not a foreign policy and it is not a national security strategy events soon forced clinton to intervene to help nations in crisis.
haiti in 1990 the politically unstable caribbean island nation of haiti the hemispheres poorest country had installed its first democratically elected president a popular catholic priest named jean bertrand aristide.
when haitian army officers ousted aristide the following year he and thousands of his supporters took up exile in america most of them settling in south florida which upset many floridians.
in 1994 president clinton announced his intention to restore aristide to power in part to return the exiled boat people to their homeland.
with drawn out negotiations leading nowhere clinton asked in july for a un resolution authorizing military intervention in haiti.
at that juncture former president jimmy carter volunteered to help negotiate a last minute settlement and he convinced the military leaders to relinquish their control of the government and leave the nation.
clinton sent 20 000 u s troops to ensure a peaceful transfer of power.
aristide returned to haiti on october 15 and on march 31 1995 the u s peacekeeping troops left as a un force commanded by an american general took over.
but neither aristide nor his successors were able to generate prosperity or stability.
the middle east president clinton continued george h w bushs policy of orchestrating patient negotiations between the arabs and the israelis.
a new development was the inclusion of the palestinian liberation organization plo.
in 1993 secret talks between israeli and palestinian representatives resulted in a draft agreement between israel and the plo that provided for the restoration of palestinian self rule in the occupied gaza strip and in jericho on the west bank in a land for peace exchange as outlined in united nations security council resolutions.
a formal signing occurred at the white house on september 13 1993.
with clinton presiding israeli prime minister yitzhak rabin and plo leader yasir arafat exchanged handshakes and their foreign ministers signed the agreement.
the middle east peace process suffered a terrible blow in early november 1995 however when rabin was assassinated by an israeli zealot who the clinton presidency 1469 clinton and the middle east president clinton presides as israeli prime minister yitzhak rabin left and plo leader yasir arafat right agree to a pathbreaking peace accord between israel and the palestinians september 1993 resented the efforts to negotiate with the palestinians.
some observers feared that the assassin had killed the peace process as well when seven months later conservative hard liner benjamin netanyahu narrowly defeated the united states backed shimon peres in the israeli national elections.
yet in october 1998 clinton brought arafat netanyahu and king hussein of jordan together at a conference in maryland where they reached an agreement.
under the wye river accords israel agreed to surrender land in return for security guarantees by the palestinians.
the balkans clinton also felt compelled to address turmoil in the eastern european nations now free from soviet domination.
in 1991 yugoslavia had disintegrated into ethnic warfare as four of its six multiethnic republics declared their independence.
serb minorities backed by the new republic of serbia stirred up civil wars in neighboring croatia and bosnia.
in bosnia the conflict involved systematic efforts to eliminate muslims.
clinton decided that the situation was intolerable because the massacres of tens of thousands of people tore at the very fabric of human decency.
he ordered food and m edical supplies sent to besieged bosnian muslims and dispatched warplanes to stop the massacres.
in 1995 u s negotiators finally persuaded the foreign ministers of croatia bosnia and yugoslavia by then a loose federation of the republics of s erbia and montenegro to agree to a comprehensive peace plan.
bosnia would remain 1470 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present a single nation but would be divided into two states a muslim croat federation controlling 51 percent of the t erritory and a bosnian serb republic controlling the rest.
basic human rights would be restored and free elections would be held.
to enforce the agreement 60 000 nato peacekeeping troops were dispatched to bosnia.
in 1998 the balkan tinderbox flared up again this time in the yugoslav mcrubble pro miloevic residents province of kosovo which had long of belgrade yugoslavia destroy the been considered sacred ground by storefront of a mcdonalds restaurant christian serbs although 90 percent in 1999 to protest nato and the united states airstrikes on their homeland.
of the 2 million kosovars were in fact albanian muslims.
in 1998 yugoslav president slobodan miloevi began a program of ethnic cleansing whereby yugoslav forces burned albanian villages murdered men raped women and displaced hundreds of thousands of muslim kosovars.
on march 24 1999 nato relying heavily upon u s military resources and leadership launched air strikes against yugoslavian military targets.
after seventy two days of bombardment miloevi sued for peace on natos terms in part because his russian allies had finally abandoned him.
an agreement was reached on june 3 1999 and clinton pledged extensive u s aid to help the yugoslavs rebuild.
the scandal machine for a time clintons preoccupation with foreign crises helped deflect attention from a growing number of investigations into his personal conduct.
during his first term he was dogged by old charges about investments he and his wife had made in whitewater a planned resort development in arkansas.
the project turned out to be a fraud and a failure and the clintons were accused of conspiring with the developer although they lost 40 000 in the enterprise.
in 1994 kenneth starr a sanctimonious former judge and a conservative republican was appointed to investigate the whitewater case.
starr did not uncover any evidence that the clintons were directly involved in the whitewater fraud but in the course of another investigation he happened upon evidence of a white house sex scandal.
for years rumors had cir the clinton presidency 1471 culated about the presidents dalliances with women.
james carville clintons political consultant once asked clinton about his sexual risk taking.
well clinton replied they havent caught me he spoke too soon.
monicagate between 1995 and 1997 clinton had engaged in a sexual affair with a t wenty two year old white house intern monica lewinsky.
more disturbing he had pressed her to lie about their relationship even under oath.
the news devastated the first family and staggered the white house staff.
clintons press secretary dee dee myers could not believe that her boss would risk his presidency for something so frivolous so reckless so small clinton initially denied the charges telling the nation in late january 1998 that i did not have sexual relations with that woman miss lewinsky yet the scandal would not disappear.
for the next thirteen months the media circus surrounding the monicagate or zippergate affair captured public attention.
after the watergate affair in 1973 1974 journalists have loved to attach the suffix gate to scandals.
other women stepped forward to claim that clinton had engaged in improper relations with them over the years charges that the president denied.
the first lady hillary clinton grimly stood by her husband amid his self inflicted agony declaring that the sexual rumors were the result of a vast right wing conspiracy to bring him down.
with the economy booming clintons public approval ratings actually rose during 1998.
in august however the scandal revived when lewinsky agreed to provide a federal grand jury with a detailed account of her relationship with the president.
soon thereafter clinton became the first president to testify before a grand jury.
on august 17 the self pitying defiant president admitted having had inappropriate intimate physical contact with lewinsky that was wrong he also acknowledged that he had misled the american people.
in his eagerness to keep himself in office however he insisted that he had done nothing illegal.
public reaction was mixed.
a majority expressed sympathy for the president because of his public humiliation and because the lewinsky affair was a private act of consensual sex.
others however were eager to see the president resign or be impeached.
triumphant republicans were convinced they could impeach the president.
the impeachment of clinton on september 9 1998 enneth starr the special prosecutor submitted to congress t hirty six boxes k of documents that included a disturbingly graphic account of the presidents white house encounters with lewinsky.
the report claimed that there was substantial and creditable evidence of presidential wrongdoing perjury 1472 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present obstructing justice and abusing his presidential powers.
the starr report prompted the republican dominated house of representatives on october 8 to begin a wide ranging impeachment inquiry and led bill clinton to claim that he was the victim of a rogue prosecutor run amok.
starr is evil the president charged.
when this thing is over theres only going to be one of us left standing.
and its going to be me on december 19 1998 william jefferson clinton was impeached charged with high crimes and misdemeanors by the house of representatives.
the house officially approved two articles of impeachment charging clinton with lying under oath to a federal grand jury and obstructing justice.
he was the first elected president to be impeached.
andrew johnson was not elected he became president upon the assassination of abraham lincoln.
house speaker newt gingrich who been had censured officially condemned by his republican colleagues in 1997 for several serious violations of house rules led the effort to impeach the president even though he himself was at the time secretly engaged in a six year long affair with a congressional staff member.
gingrich resigned as speaker in november 1998 and left both the house and his wife escaping with his new wife from politics altogether.
journalists began calling clintons senate trial the soap opera impeachment after gingrichs successor as speaker robert livingston of louisiana suddenly resigned from congress in late december after admitting that he too had engaged in adulterous affairs.
the impeachment trial began on january 7 1999.
five weeks later on february 12 a majority of senators by a 55 45 vote decided that clintons adultery and lies were not the high crimes and misdemeanors required to remove a president from office.
the president was a cquitted much to the regret of many republicans.
the situation called to mind an old texas saying we tried to hang him but the rope broke arthur schlesinger jr the distinguished scholar of the presidency called the clinton lewinsky affair the weirdest episode in our political history though the impeachment effort failed clintons final eighteen months in office were stained and distracted by the scandal and many americans were exhausted by the partisan drama and disenchanted with politics and politicians.
clintons last two years in office were anticlimactic.
assessing the clinton presidency for all of his faults bill clinton was the most compelling figure of his political generation.
both loved and hated he presided over an unprecedented period of prosperity 115 consecutive months of economic growth and the lowest unemployment rate in 30 years generated unheard of federal budget surpluses and passed a a chaotic start to a new century 1473 impeachment representative edward pease a member of the house judiciary committee covers his face during the vote on the third of four articles of impeachment charging president clinton with high crimes and misdemeanors in december 1998.
elfare reform measure with support from both parties.
in the process he w revitalized the democratic party by moving it from the left to the vital center of the political spectrum.
by 1998 it was the democrats not the republicans who were viewed as the party of fiscal responsibility.
clinton also helped bring peace and stability to the balkans one of the most violent regions of europe.
at times however his boundless self confidence led to arrogant recklessness.
he debased the presidency with his sexual escapades and his effort undertaken with his wife hillary rodham clinton to bring health i nsurance to the uninsured was a clumsy failure.
clinton was less a great statesman than a great escape artist.
in 2000 his last year in office he enjoyed a public approval rating of 65 percent the highest e nd of term rating since p resident dwight d eisenhower.
yet his popularity was not enough to ensure the election of his vice president al gore as his successor.
a chaotic start to a new century wild celebrations around the world ushered in the year 2000 and americans led the cheering.
they greeted the new century with a sense of triumphalism.
the cold war was over the united states was the worlds only hyperpower 1474 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present and the high tech american economy dominated global trade.
but the joyous mood did not last.
powerful and unstable new forces were emerging the most dangerous of which were sophisticated global networks of menacing terrorists eager to disrupt and destroy american values and institutions.
a disputed election the presidential election of 2000 proved to be one of the closest and most controversial in history.
the two m ajor party candidates vice president albert gore jr the democrat and texas governor george w bush son of the former republican president offered contrasting views on the role of the federal government tax cuts environmental policies and the best way to preserve social security and medicare.
gore a tennessee native and harvard graduate whose father had been a prominent senator favored an active federal government that would do much the election of 2000 wa or ca mt id nv nd wy ut az co sd ks ok nm ak nh 4 vt 3 wi mi ia ne tx hi mn pa oh il in 21 wv va 22 12 mo 5 13 ky 8 nc tn 11 ar sc ms al ga la fl george w bush republican al gore democrat figure m32 1 first proof ma 12 ri 4 ct 8 nj 15 de 3 md 10 dc 2 electoral vote popular vote 50 500 000 why was the 2000 presidential election so close.
was the conflict over the election results resolved.
wwn64 how ny me 51 000 000 a chaotic start to a new century 1475 more to protect the environment.
bush campaigned on a theme of compassionate conservatism promised to restore honor and dignity to the white house and proposed to transfer power from the federal government to the states.
a born again evangelical christian with degrees from yale university and harvard business school bush urged tax cuts and a more humble foreign policy that would end u s efforts to install democratic governments in undemocratic societies nation building.
the bitter tone of party politics called polarization continued to inspire candidates at the extremes to run as third party candidates.
two independent candidates added zest to the recount in yet another recount the 2000 presidential campaign the col on november 24 2000 judge robert orful conservative commentator patrick rosenberg examines a ballot with buchanan and the liberal consumer a magnifying glass.
that floridas activist ralph nader representing the voting machines were so unreliable introduced doubt about the legitimacy green party.
of the close results.
the november election created high drama.
the television networks i nitially reported that gore had narrowly won the state of florida and its decisive twenty five electoral votes.
later in the evening however they reversed themselves saying that florida was too close to call.
in the chaotic e arly morning hours the networks declared that bush had been elected president.
the final tally showed bush with a r azor thin lead but florida law required a recount.
for the first time in 125 years the results of a presidential election remained in doubt for weeks after the voting.
as a painstaking hand recount proceeded supporters of bush and gore sparred in the courts.
each side accused the other of trying to steal the e lection.
the political drama lasted for five weeks until on d ecember 12 a b itterly divided u s supreme court decided with a 5 4 m ajority ruling that the recount was to be halted.
bush was declared the winner in florida by 537 votes.
gore had amassed a 540 000 vote lead nationwide but l osing florida meant he lost in the electoral college by two votes.
although gore strongly disagreed with the 1476 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present supreme courts decision he asked voters to rally around president elect bush and move forward.
partisan rancor he urged must be put aside the ferocious sparring between the two national parties was not put aside however in part because bush chose as key advisers men known for their brusqueness and strong ideological convictions.
one of them r ichard dick cheney a former wyoming congressman and influential m ember of the nixon ford and bush administrations quickly became the most p owerful vice president in history.
cheney so secretive that he often appeared sinister used his long experience with the government bureaucracy to fill the administration with like minded associates who helped him control the flow of information to the president.
he became a domineering influence on the inexperienced bush.
a change of direction george w bush had promised to cut taxes for the wealthy increase military spending oppose strict environmental regulations and privatize social security by investing workers retirement pension funds in the stock market.
first however he had to deal with a sputtering economy.
by march 2001 the economy was in recession for the first time in more than a decade.
bush decided that cutting taxes was the best way to boost economic growth.
on june 7 2001 he signed the economic growth and tax relief act which cut 1 35 trillion in taxes.
instead of paying for themselves in renewed economic growth however the bush tax cuts led to a sharp drop in federal revenue producing in turn a fast growing budget deficit as the clinton surpluses were quickly used up.
huge increases in the costs of medicare and medicaid resulting from the aging of the baby boom generation contributed to the soaring deficits as did m ilitary expenditures caused by an unexpected war.
bush was also distracted by global crises.
islamic militants around the world bitterly resented what they viewed as the imperial globalization of u s culture and power.
with increasing frequency they used terrorism including suicide bombings to gain notoriety exact vengeance and generate fear and insecurity.
throughout the nineties the united states had fought a losing struggle against global terrorist groups in part because terrorism thrives in nations with weak governments overwhelmed by rapid population growth scarce resources widespread poverty and huge numbers of unemployed young men symptoms many nations were suffering.
the ineffectiveness of u s intelligence agencies in tracking the movements and intentions of militant extremists became tragically evident in the late summer of 2001.
a chaotic start to a new century 1477 9 11 a new day of infamy at 8 45 a m on september 11 2001 the continental united states was attacked for the first time since 1814 when a passenger airliner that had been hijacked by islamist terrorists slammed into the north tower of the world trade center in new york city.
eighteen minutes later a second hijacked jumbo jet crashed into the south tower.
the twin towers 110 stories tall and filled with 50 000 workers burned fiercely the infernos forcing hundreds of desperate people to jump to their deaths as t housands more on the floors below the points of impact struggled to evacuate.
the steel structures quickly collapsed from the intense heat destroying surrounding buildings and killing nearly 3 000 people including more than 400 firefighters police officers and emergency responders.
the southern end of manhattan ground zero became a hellish scene of twisted steel suffocating smoke wailing sirens and panicked people.
while the catastrophic drama in new york city was unfolding a third hijacked plane crashed into the pentagon in washington d c a fourth airliner september 11th smoke pours out of the north tower of the world trade center as the south tower bursts into flames after being struck by a second hijacked airplane.
both iconic buildings would collapse within an hour.
1478 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present probably headed for the white house missed its mark when the passengers who had heard reports of the earlier hijackings via their cell p hones assaulted the hijackers to prevent the plane from being used as a weapon.
during the struggle the plane went out of control and plummeted into the ground near shanksville pennsylvania killing all aboard.
within hours of the hijackings the nineteen dead terrorists were i dentified as members of al qaeda arabic for the base a well financed network of islamic extremists led by a wealthy saudi renegade osama bin laden.
years before bin laden had declared jihad holy war on the united states israel and the saudi monarchy in his effort to create a single islamist caliphate global empire.
he used remote bases in sudan and war torn afghanistan as training centers for jihadist fighters.
collaborating with bin ladens terrorist network was afghanistans ruling taliban a coalition of ultraconservative islamists who provided bin laden a safe haven.
the war on terror the 9 11 assault on the united states like the japanese attack on pearl harbor on december 7 1941 changed the course of modern life.
people were initially paralyzed by grief fear and anger.
the u s economy already in decline went into free fall.
president bush was thrust into the role of commander in chief of a nation eager for vengeance.
bush said that he was going to launch a global war on terror to answer these attacks and rid the world of evil he warned other nations that either you are with us or you are with the terrorists a wave of patriotic fervor rolled across the nation.
people formed long lines to donate blood and many signed up for military service.
bush demanded that afghanistans taliban government surrender the al qaeda terrorists or risk military attack.
the taliban refused and on october 7 2001 the united states and its allies launched operation enduring freedom.
after american and british cruise missiles and bombers destroyed afghan military installations and al qaeda training camps ground troops from the united states and some of its nato allies routed taliban forces.
on december 9 the taliban regime collapsed.
the war in afghanistan then transitioned into a h igh stakes manhunt for the elusive osama bin laden who had escaped into the mountains of pakistan.
fighting terror at home while the military campaign continued in afghanistan officials in washington worried that terrorists might attack the united states with biological chemical or even nuclear weapons.
a chaotic start to a new century 1479 war fever president george w bush addresses members of the special forces in july 2002 as part of an appeal to congress to increase defense spending after the september 11 terrorist attacks.
to address the threat and to help restore public confidence president bush without congressional approval established the office of homeland security and gave it sweeping authority to spy on americans.
another new federal agency the transportation security administration assumed responsibility for screening airline passengers for weapons and bombs.
at the same time bush and a supportive congress created the usa patriot act which gave government agencies the right to eavesdrop on confidential conversations between prison inmates and their lawyers and permitted suspected terrorists to be tried in secret military courts.
civil liberties groups voiced grave concerns that the measures jeopardized constitutional rights and protections but most people supported these extraordinary steps.
what the public did not know was that vice president dick cheney secretary of defense donald rumsfeld and other s o called neoconservatives neocons in the departments of state and defense had convinced the president to authorize the use of torture enhanced interrogation techniques in the cias and fbis treatment of captured terrorist suspects.
such tactics violated international law and compromised the human rights ideals that had always been americas greatest strength.
when asked about such activities the shadowy cheney scoffed that america sometimes had to work the dark side weve got to spend time in the shadows in the intelligence world.
1480 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present the taliban a young woman shows her face in public for the first time in five years after northern alliance troops capture kabul the capital of afghanistan in november 2001.
the strict sharia law enforced by the taliban required that women be covered from head to foot.
the bush doctrine in the fall of 2002 president bush unveiled a dramatic new national security policy.
the bush doctrine said that the growing menace posed by shadowy networks of terrorist groups and unstable rogue nations with weapons of mass destruction wmds required the united states at times to use preemptive military action.
if we wait for threats to fully materialize or wait for allies to join america he explained we will have waited too long.
in the world we have entered the only path to safety is the path of action.
and this nation will act the dangerously sweeping bush doctrine promised to extend the benefits of freedom across the globe.
for all peoples everywhere without reference to the potential human and financial cost of such an open ended commitment.
the second iraq war during 2002 and 2003 iraq emerged as the focus of the bush administrations policy of preemptive military action.
three of the presidents most influential advisers all neocons vice president cheney secretary of defense rumsfeld and deputy defense secretary paul wolfowitz urged the president to use u s power to reshape the world in the american mold.
this included sponsoring regime change in nations lacking political and economic freedom in order to create a new world order friendly to our security our prosperity and our principles they convinced bush that a chaotic start to a new century 1481 the dictatorial regime of saddam hussein and his loyal sunni faction of muslims who lorded over the nations shiite majority and the ethnic kurds in the north represented a grave and gathering danger because of its supposed possession of biological and chemical weapons of mass destruction.
some in congress urged caution.
republican senator chuck hagel of nebraska a vietnam veteran warned that many of those who want to rush this country into war and think it would be so quick and easy dont know anything about war the white house responded trust us on march 17 2003 bush issued hussein an ultimatum he and his sons must leave iraq within f orty eight hours or face a united s tates led invasion.
hussein refused.
two days later on march 19 american and british forces the coalition of the willing attacked.
france and germany refused to participate in what they viewed as unnecessary american aggression.
operation iraqi freedom according to bush and his advisers would quickly topple hussein with overwhelming military force and then usher in a new era of u s style democracy in iraq.
the second iraq war began with a massive bombing campaign followed by a fast moving invasion from bases in kuwait.
some 250 000 american soldiers sailors and marines were joined by 50 000 british troops.
on april 9 after three weeks of intense fighting amid sweltering heat and blinding sandstorms u s forces captured baghdad the capital of iraq.
saddam husseins regime and his inept demoralized army collapsed a week later.
the six week war came at a cost of fewer than 200 combat deaths among the 300 000 allied troops.
more than 2 000 iraqi soldiers were killed civilian casualties numbered in the tens of thousands.
president bush staged a celebration on a u s aircraft carrier at which he announced victory under a massive banner proclaiming mission accomplished but he spoke too soon the initial military triumph carried with it the seeds of deception and disaster for no weapons of mass destruction were to be found in iraq.
secretary of state colin powell later admitted that he had been misled about the issue.
bush said that the absence of wmds in iraq left him with a sickening feeling for he knew that his primary justification for the war had evaporated.
rebuilding iraq it proved far easier to win the brief war than to rebuild iraq in americas image.
unprepared u s officials faced the daunting task of installing a democratic government in a nation fractured by religious feuds and ethnic tensions made worse by the breakdown in law and order caused by the allied invasion.
the successful invasion triggered a vicious civil war in iraq and the disintegration of law and order.
looting and violence engulfed the war torn country large parts of which fell under the control of 1482 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present warlords and criminal gangs.
in the process the entire middle east already volatile was further destabilized.
within weeks vengeful islamic radicals streamed into the crippled nation to wage a merciless campaign of terror sabotage and suicide bombings against the u s forces.
bushs macho reaction to the i nsurgency bring em on revealed how uninformed he was about the f ast deteriorating situation.
the leader of the new iraqi government prime minister n ourial maliki quickly imposed his own authoritarian s hiite dominated regime which discriminated against the sunnis the kurds and other ethnic and religious minorities.
defense secretary rumsfeld greatly underestimated the difficulty and expense of occupying pacifying and reconstructing postwar iraq.
by the fall of 2003 bush admitted that substantial numbers of american troops around 150 000 would have to remain in iraq much longer than anticipated.
he also said that rebuilding iraq would take years and cost almost a trillion dollars.
investigative reporter james fallows concluded that the u s occupation in iraq is a debacle not because the government did no planning but because a vast amount of expert planning was willfully ignored by the people in charge victory on the battlefields of iraq did not bring victory in the war on terrorism militant islamist groups remained a global threat.
americans grew more and more dismayed as the number of casualties and the expense of the military occupation in iraq soared.
the nation became more alienated when journalists revealed graphic pictures of u s soldiers abusing and torturing arab detainees in the abu ghraib prison near baghdad.
when you lose the moral high ground an army general sadly observed you lose it all president bush urged americans to stay the course insisting that a democratic iraq would bring stability to the middle east and thereby blunt the momentum of islamic terrorism.
yet even though saddam hussein was captured in december 2003 and later hanged iraq seemed less secure than ever.
by the beginning of 2004 some 1 000 americans had died in the conflict and more than 10 000 had been wounded.
the ethnic and religious tensions only worsened as violent sunni jihadists allied with al qaeda to undermine the new iraqi government and assault u s forces.
the u s effort in iraq was the wrong war in the wrong place fought in the wrong way.
it forced bush to spend government funds at a rate faster than any president since lyndon johnson and it distracted attention from the revival of the taliban and other terrorist groups in afghanistan.
we thank god for appeasing us with the u s dilemmas in iraq and afghanistan snickered bin ladens deputy ayman a l zawahiri.
journalist roger cohen distilled perhaps the most important lesson from the wars in iraq and afghanistan when a chaotic start to a new century 1483 freedom for whom.
the american torture of iraqis in abu ghraib prison only exacerbated the anger and humiliation that iraqis experienced since the first gulf war.
in response to americas incessant promises of peace and autonomy a baghdad mural fires back that freedom for b u sh he said that the american ideal of democracy can still resonate with people around the world but u s leaders must embody it rather than impose it the election of 2004 growing public concern about iraq complicated george w bushs campaign for a second presidential term in 2004.
the democratic nominee senator john kerry of massachusetts condemned bush for misleading the nation about weapons of mass destruction and for his slipshod handling of the reconstruction of postwar iraq.
kerry also highlighted the bush administrations record budget deficits.
bush countered that the tortuous efforts to create a democratic government in iraq would enhance americas long term security.
on election day november 2 2004 exit polls suggested a kerry victory but in the end the election hinged on the crucial swing state of ohio.
no republican had ever lost ohio and won the presidency.
despite early returns indicating a kerry victory in ohio late returns tipped the balance toward bush even as rumors of electoral irregularities began to circulate.
1484 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present the election of 2004 wa or ca mt id nv nd wy ut az co mn sd ia ne ks ok nm tx hi ak nh 4 vt 3 wi mi ny pa oh 20 wv va mo 5 13 ky 8 nc tn 11 ar sc ms al ga la fl il in me ma 12 ri 4 ct 7 nj 15 de 3 md 10 dc 3 electoral vote popular vote george w bush republican 60 700 000 john kerry democrat 57 400 000 how did the war in iraq polarize american politics.
did the election of 2004 give republicans a mandate for change.
wwn66 figure in what ways m32 2 first proof evertheless kerry conceded the election.
the outcome he stressed n should be decided by voters not a protracted legal battle by narrowly winning ohio bush captured 286 electoral votes to kerrys 251.
yet in some respects the election was not so close.
bush received 3 5 million more votes nationwide than kerry and republicans increased their majorities in both houses of congress.
a reelected bush pledged to bring democracy and stability to iraq trim the federal deficit pass a major energy bill create more jobs and privatize social security funds by investing them in the stock m arket.
i earned capital in the campaign political capital and now i intend to spend it he told reporters.
second term blues george bushs second term was beset by thorny political problems a sluggish economy and continuing turmoil in iraq.
in 2005 he pushed through congress an energy bill and a central american free trade act.
but his effort to second term blues 1485 privatize social security retirement accounts by enabling individuals to invest their accumulated pension dollars themselves went nowhere and soaring budget deficits made many fiscal conservatives feel betrayed by the supposedly conservative bush.
the editors of the economist an influential conservative newsmagazine declared that bush had become the least popular re elected president since richard nixon hurricane katrina in 2005 president bushs eroding public support suffered another blow.
in late august a killer hurricane named katrina slammed into the gulf coast devastating large areas of alabama mississippi and louisiana.
katrina left more than 1 000 dead and millions homeless and hopeless especially in new orleans.
local officials and the federal emergency management agency fema were caught unprepared as the catastrophe unfolded and confusion and incompetence abounded.
in the face of blistering criticism bush accepted responsibility for the balky federal response and accepted the resignation of the fema director.
rebuilding the gulf coast would take a long time and a lot of money.
the backlash over the federal response to katrina contributed to a devastating defeat for republicans in the november 2006 congressional the aftermath of hurricane katrina two men use boards to paddle through high water in flood devastated new orleans.
1486 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present e lections.
the democrats capitalized on widespread public disapproval of the bush administration to win control of the house of representatives the senate and a majority of governorships and state legislatures.
former texas republican congressman dick armey said that the republican revolution of 1994 officially ended with the 2006 election.
the transformational election also included a significant milestone californian nancy pelosi the leader of the democrats in the house of representatives became the highest ranking woman in the history of the u s congress upon her election as house speaker in january 2007.
nancy pelosi the first female speaker of the house at a news conference on capitol hill.
the surge in iraq george w bush bore the brunt of p ublic indignation over the bungled federal response to the katrina d isaster and the costs and casualties of the war in iraq.
senator chuck hagel a nebraska republican declared in 2005 that were losing in iraq throughout the fall of 2006 the violence in iraq spiraled upward.
bush eventually responded to declining public and political support for the iraq war by creating the iraq study group a bipartisan task force appointed by the p resident.
it surprised the president by issuing a report recommending the withdrawal of combat forces from a grave and deteriorating iraq by the spring of 2008.
bush disagreed with those who urged a phased withdrawal.
on january 10 2007 he announced that he was sending a surge of 20 000 eventually 30 000 more troops to iraq bringing the total to almost 170 000.
from a military perspective the surge succeeded.
by the fall of 2008 violence in iraq had declined dramatically and the iraqi government had grown in stature and confidence.
the u s general who masterminded the increase in troops admitted that the gains were fragile and reversible however and as the number of u s combat deaths in iraq passed 4 000 bush acknowledged that the conflict was longer and harder and more costly than we anticipated by 2008 more than 60 percent of americans said that the war had been a mistake.
second term blues 1487 economic shock after the intense but brief 2001 recession the boom bust capitalist economy had begun another period of prolonged expansion.
between 1997 and 2006 home prices in the united states especially in the fast growing sunbelt states rose 85 percent leading to a frenzy of irresponsible mortgage lending and a debt financed consumer spending spree.
tens of millions of people bought houses they could not afford refinanced their mortgages or tapped h ome equity loans to make discretionary purchases.
the irrational confidence in soaring housing prices also led government regulatory agencies and mortgage lenders to ease credit restrictions so that unqualified people could buy homes without making any down payment.
the housing bubble burst in 2007 when home values and sales began a sharp decline.
the loss of trillions of dollars in home values set off a seismic shock across the economy as record numbers of borrowers defaulted on their mortgage payments.
foreclosures and bankruptcies soared and banks lost billions first on the shaky mortgages then on most other categories of overleveraged debt credit cards car loans student loans and commercial m ortgage backed securities.
the sudden contraction of corporate spending and consumer purchases pushed the economy into a recession in 2008.
some of the nations most prestigious banks investment firms and insurance companies went belly up.
the price of food and gasoline spiked and unemployment soared.
what had begun as a sharp decline in home prices became a global economic meltdown.
the crisis demanded decisive action.
on october 3 2008 president bush signed into law the troubled asset relief program tarp which called for the treasury department to spend 700 billion to keep big banks and other large financial institutions afloat.
yet the passage of the bill did little to restore confidence in the economy as a whole.
in early october stock markets around the world began to crash with the onset of what came to be called the great recession which technically lasted from december 2007 to january 2009 and forced almost 9 million people out of work.
its effects would linger however and the economic recovery that began in june 2009 would be the weakest since the end of the second world war.
the great recession had powerful political effects.
bush who as governor of texas had described himself as a uniter not a divider became one of the least popular and most divisive presidents in american history.
just 29 percent of voters approved of his leadership and more than 80 percent said that the nation was headed in the wrong direction kevin phillips a prominent republican strategist deemed bush perhaps the least competent president in modern history bushs failed presidency 1488 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present rio vista california with an 816 000 deficit this northern california city filed for bankruptcy and pulled the plug on its massive 750 home housing development in november 2008.
here model homes stand eerily in a blank landscape of sidewalks and cul de sacs.
had weakened the republican party strained the nations military eroded american prestige and created the largest budget deficits in history by cutting taxes while increasing spending.
i inherited a recession and im ending on a recession bush admitted at one of his last press conferences.
a historic new presidency george bushs unpopularity excited democrats about regaining the white house in 2008.
the early f ront runner for the nomination was new york senator hillary rodham clinton the spouse of ex president bill clinton.
like her husband she displayed an impressive command of policy issues and mobilized a well funded campaign team.
and as the first woman with a serious chance of gaining the presidency she had widespread support among voters eager for female leadership.
in the end however an overconfident clinton was upset in the d emocratic primaries and caucuses by barack obama of illinois a l ittle known first term senator.
young handsome and intelligent a vibrant mixture of i dealism and a historic new presidency 1489 pragmatism coolness and passion obama was an inspiring speaker who attracted huge crowds by promising a politics of hope he mounted an innovative internet based campaign directed at grassroots voters donors and volunteers.
in early june 2008 he gained enough delegates to secure the nomination with senator joseph biden of delaware as his running mate.
obama was the first african amer the clinton campaign democratic ican presidential nominee of either presidential candidate senator hillary rodham clinton speaks at a rally in fort party the gifted biracial son of a white worth texas.
mother from kansas and a black father from kenya who left the household and returned to africa when barack was a toddler.
obama eventually graduated from columbia university before earning a law degree from harvard.
the forty seven year old senator presented himself as a deal maker who could inspire unite and forge bipartisan collaborations.
candidate obama radiated poise confidence and energy.
he told an aide that he didnt need to be president.
it turns out that being barack obama is a pretty good gig in and of itself he and his strategists were able to turn his vitality and political inexperience into strengths at a time when voter disgust with politics was widespread.
by contrast his republican opponent s eventy two year old arizona senator john mccain was the oldest presidential candidate in history.
as a twenty five year veteran of congress and a leading senator mccain had developed a reputation as a bipartisan maverick willing to work with democrats to achieve key legislative goals.
on november 4 2008 barack obama made history by becoming the first person of color to be elected presi barack obama the president elect and his family wave to supporters in dent.
he won the popular vote by 53 per chicagos grant park.
cent to 46 percent and the e lectoral 1490 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present the election of 2008 wa or ca mt id nv nd wy ut az co sd ne 1 dem.
ks ok nm tx hi ak mn ia nh 4 vt 3 wi mi ny pa oh 20 wv va mo 5 13 ky 8 nc tn 11 ar sc ms al ga la fl il in me ma 12 ri 4 ct 7 nj 15 de 3 md 10 dc 3 electoral vote popular vote barack obama democrat 69 500 000 john mccain republican 59 900 000 how did the economic crisis affect the outcome of the election.
similarities and differences between the map of the 2004 election first proof and the map of the 2008 election.
wwn64 figure what are the m32 3 college 365 to 173.
obama also helped the democrats win solid majorities in both houses of congress.
within days of his victory obama adopted a bipartisan approach in s electing his new cabinet members.
he appointed hillary clinton secretary of state retained republican robert gates as secretary of defense selected retired general james jones who had campaigned for mccain as his national s ecurity adviser and appointed eric holder as the nations first african a merican attorney general.
but picking a bipartisan cabinet proved easier than forging a bipartisan presidency.
obamas first term president obama and his administration inherited two unpopular wars and the worst economic situation in eighty years.
his most pressing challenge was to keep the great recession from becoming a prolonged depression.
unemployment in early 2009 had passed 8 percent and was still rising.
the financial sector remained paralyzed and public confidence had plummeted.
a historic new presidency 1491 one visible sign of the great recessions effects was the sharp decline in mexicans emigrating to the united states.
in 2000 some 700 000 mexicans had crossed the rio grande but by 2010 the number had dropped to less than 150 000 as it became easier for people to improve their quality of life in mexico and harder to do so in the united states.
by 2014 some experts believed that more mexicans were leaving the u s than entering it.
to enable banks to start lending again the new administration continued the tarp program that provided massive government bailouts to the largest banks and financial institutions.
the bailouts were attacked by both the left and the right as deeply unfair to most struggling americans.
treasury secretary timothy geithner later explained we had to do whatever we could to help people feel their money was safe in the banking system even if it made us unpopular had they not saved the big banks obama and geithner argued the economy would have crashed.
preserving the banking system did not create many jobs however.
to do so in mid february 2009 congress passed and obama signed an 832 billion economic stimulus bill called the american recovery and reinvestment act.
the bill included cash distributions to states for construction projects to renew the nations infrastructure roads bridges levees government buildings and the electricity grid money for renewable energy systems and 212 billion in tax reductions for individuals and businesses as well as funds for food stamps and unemployment benefits.
it was the largest government infusion of cash into the economy in history.
in the end however it was not enough to generate a robust economic recovery but obamas actions did save the nation and the world economy from a financial meltdown.
health care reform the economic crisis merited barack obamas full attention but he chose as his top legislative priority a controversial federal health insurance program.
from his first day in office obama stressed his intention to reform a health care system that was bankrupting families bankrupting businesses and bankrupting our government at the state and federal level the united states home to the worlds costliest health system was the only rich nation without a national health care program.
since 1970 the proportion of uninsured people had been steadily rising along with health care costs.
in 2010 roughly 50 million americans 16 percent of the population most of them poor young or people of color had no health insurance.
the presidents goal in creating the patient protection and affordable care act aca which republican critics labeled obamacare was to make health insurance more affordable and make health care accessible for everyone.
the 940 billion law proposed in 2009 and debated for a year centered on the 1492 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present s o called individual mandate which required uninsured adults to purchase an approved private insurance policy made available through state run exchanges websites where people could shop for insurance or pay a tax penalty.
l ower income americans could receive federal subsidies to help pay for their coverage and insurance companies could no longer deny coverage to people with preexisting illnesses.
employers who did not offer health insurance would have to pay higher taxes and drug companies and manufacturers of medical devices would have to pay annual government fees.
everyone but especially the wealthy would pay higher medicare payroll taxes to help fund the changes.
the individual mandate was designed to ensure that all americans had health insurance so as to reduce the skyrocketing costs of hospitals providing charity care for the uninsured.
the aca did not change the american tradition of e mployment based health insurance provided by private companies.
but the idea of forcing people to buy health insurance flew in the face of such ideals as individual freedom and personal responsibility.
critics questioned not only the individual mandate but the administrations projections that the program would reduce federal expenditures over the long haul.
republicans mobilized to defeat the aca.
if were able to stop obama on this it will be his waterloo.
it will break him predicted south carolina senator jim demint.
despite heated opposition however the aca passed with narrow party line majorities in both houses of congress.
obama signed it into law on march 23 2010.
its complex provisions to be implemented over a f our year period would bring health insurance to 32 million people half of whom would be covered by expanded medicaid and the other half by the individual mandate.
in its scope and goals the aca was a landmark in the history of health and social w elfare as well as the expansion of the federal government.
obamacare and the courts no sooner had president obama pushed his h ealth care plan through congress than republicans began challenging its constitutionality.
on june 28 2012 in the case of national federation of independent business v sebelius the supreme court surprised observers by ruling 5 4 that most of the new law was constitutional.
even more surprising was that the chief justice john g roberts a philosophical conservative who had never before voted with the four liberal justices on the court cast the deciding vote.
roberts upheld the acas individual mandate that required people to buy private health insurance or pay a tax arguing that it was within congresss power to impose taxes as outlined in article 1 of the constitution.
many conservatives including the four dissenting justices felt betrayed.
the verdict led the new york times to predict that the ruling may secure obamas place in history a historic new presidency 1493 regulating wall street the near collapse of the nations nancial system beginning in 2008 prompted calls for overhauling the financial fi regulatory system.
on july 21 2010 obama signed the wall street reform and consumer protection act also called the dodd frank bill after its two congressional sponsors.
it was the most comprehensive reform of the financial system since the new deal in the thirties.
the 2 319 page law required government agencies to exercise greater oversight over complex new financial transactions and protected consumers from unfair practices in loans and credit cards by establishing a new consumer financial protection agency.
president obama predicted that the bill despite its complexity would lift our economy give certainty to everybody about the technical rules g overning banking and end tax funded bailouts period by 2010 however the economy had not been lifted and many bankers remained confused about the new rules regulating the financial industry.
foreign affairs president obama had more success in dealing with foreign affairs than in reviving the american economy.
what journalists came to call the obama doctrine was very much like the nixon doctrine 1970 stressing that the united states could not continue to be the worlds principal policeman.
yet the fate of americas economy and security was entangled more than ever with the fate of an unstable and often violent world.
the obama doctrine the loosely defined obama doctrine grew out of efforts to end the expensive wars in iraq and afghanistan.
in essence the president wanted to replace confrontation and military intervention with a stance of cooperation and negotiation.
the president told administration officials that his doctrine could be summed up in the phrase dont do stupid stuff on february 27 2009 obama announced that all 142 000 u s troops would be withdrawn from iraq by the end of 2011 as the iraqi government and the bush administration had agreed in 2008.
true to his word the last u s combat troops left iraq in december 2011.
their departure marked the end of a bitterly divisive war that had raged for nearly nine years killed more than 110 000 iraqis and left the nation shattered and unstable despite obamas upbeat claim that the departing u s forces were leaving behind a sovereign stable and self reliant iraq with a representative government the war had cost more than 4 500 american lives 30 000 wounded many grievously so and 2 trillion.
perhaps the greatest embarrassment was that 1494 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present the iraqi government the united states left behind was inept and not even friendly to american interests.
the long and chaotic war was an expensive mistake and a prolonged distraction for the government the military and the nation.
as it turned out there were no weapons of mass destruction nor was there a direct link between the al qaeda terrorists and saddam hussein.
al qaeda in fact did not arrive in iraq until after the american invasion.
the first iraq war in which i led a tank platoon was necessary said john nagel a retired army officer.
this one was not american efforts at nation building had failed.
in june 2014 a j ournalist said that it was time to admit that we cannot force a pluralistic society on a dysfunctional iraq torn by sectarian and ethnic violence into three rival regional states one shiite one sunni governed by jihadists and one kurdish.
even leon panetta who served as cia director and secretary of defense under obama scolded the president for being so eager to withdraw u s forces that he failed to create the circumstances that would preserve our influence and interests in iraq.
obamas hopes that the united states could get out of fighting wars in the middle east and that the iraqis could sustain a home from iraq u s troops returned from iraq to few celebrations.
a historic new presidency 1495 stable and secure government in the face of terrorist incursions and sectarian fighting proved to be fantasies.
iraqs woeful s elf government and the fractious nations constant sectarian strife and disorder required continued infusions of u s military assistance daily bombing raids and massive economic aid.
surge in afghanistan at the same time that president obama was ending u s military involvement in iraq he dispatched 21 000 additional troops to afghanistan in what was called a surge while doing so however he narrowed the focus of the u s mission to suppressing terrorists rather than transforming strife torn afghanistan into a stable capitalist democracy.
the surge worked.
by the summer of 2011 obama announced that the tide of war was receding and that the united states had largely achieved its goals in afghanistan setting in motion a substantial withdrawal of forces that lasted until 2014.
obama stressed that the afghans must determine their countrys future stability.
we will not try to make afghanistan a perfect place he said.
we will not police its streets or patrol its mountains indefinitely.
that is the responsibility of the afghan government as the troops came home americans quickly lost interest in what obama had earlier called the good war in afghanistan.
in april 2014 despite threats by the taliban to kill voters afghans turned out in huge numbers to choose a new president to lead them into the post american era.
but it was an expensive outcome for americas longest war.
in the thirteen years since its 2001 invasion of afghanistan america had spent more than a trillion dollars there and lost 2 300 servicemen.
the death of osama bin laden the crowning achievement of president obamas anti terrorism efforts was the discovery at long last of osama bin ladens hideout.
ever since the attacks of 9 11 bin laden had eluded an intensive manhunt.
in august 2010 however u s intelligence analysts discovered his sanctuary in a walled residential compound outside of abbottabad pakistan.
on may 1 2011 obama authorized a daring night raid by a u s navy seal team transported by helicopters from afghanistan.
after a brief firefight the seals killed bin laden.
his death was a watershed moment but it did not spell the end of islamist terrorism.
the arab awakening in late 2010 and early 2011 spontaneous democratic uprisings erupted throughout much of the arab world as l ong oppressed peoples rose up against authoritarian regimes.
corrupt tyrants were forced out of power by a new generation of young activists inspired by democratic ideals and connected by social media on the internet.
what was soon dubbed 1496 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present arab awakening thousands of protesters converge in cairos tahrir square to call for an end to mubaraks rule.
libya ousts gaddafi the arab awakening sent waves of youthful unrest across tunisia algeria bahrain jordan morocco egypt oman yemen libya saudi arabia and syria during what came to be called the arab spring of 2011.
dictators were toppled while democracy was embraced as the remarkable uprisings heralded a new era in the history of the middle east.
yet the heroic days of revolutionary idealism soon gave way to the harsh reality that the rebels were so busy fighting among each other that they could not forge unified political alternatives.
building new democratic governments proved much harder than expected.
the grassroots revolutionary movements in most arab nations stumbled and stalled by 2014.
egypt reverted to an authoritarianism even harsher than that in place before the arab spring.
libya lapsed into chaos and yemen exploded in civil war.
the p ro democracy turmoil in north africa engulfed oil rich libya long governed by the mercurial dictator colonel muammar gaddafi the arab worlds most violent despot.
anti government demonstrations began on february 15 2011 prompting gaddafi to order l ibyan soldiers and mercenaries paid foreign soldiers to suppress the rebellious rats by the end of february what began as a peaceful p ro democratic uprising had turned into a full scale civil war that provided the first real test of the obama doctrine.
true to his word the president refused to act alone in helping the l ibyan rebels critics called it leading from behind.
instead he encouraged european allies to take the lead.
on march 19 france and great britain with american support launched a bombing campaign against gaddafis military strongholds.
in late august rebel forces captured the capital of tripoli scattering gaddafis government and marking the end of his forty two year dictatorship.
on october 20 rebel fighters captured and killed gaddafi.
but the rebel militias that removed gaddafi soon started shooting at each other and stability remained elusive by the end of 2014.
a historic new presidency 1497 the cuban thaw at the end of 2014 president obama surprised the world by announcing that the united states and cuba were going to restore normal relations after more than fifty years of bitter hostility.
as a first step obama relaxed restrictions on american tourists visiting cuba.
six months later in mid 2015 the two nations took a much more substantial step toward normalization when they reestablished embassies in each others capital cities.
the bold move was controversial however.
the powerful cuban community in south florida fiercely criticized obamas decision and congressional republicans threatened to block the appointment of a u s ambassador to cuba because of its communist government.
but the president persisted in his efforts insisting that isolating cuba had not worked.
americans and cubans alike are ready to move forward he said in july 2015.
i believe its time for congress to do the same polarized politics barack obama had campaigned in 2008 on the promise of bringing dramatic change to the federal government in a way that would reduce the p artisan warfare between the two national parties.
by the end of his first year in office however a gallup poll found that he had become the most polarizing president in modern history.
in part the widening partisan divide resulted from obamas aloof presidential style.
like jimmy carter he does not like to lobby and horse trade his way to legislative approval.
even democrats c riticized his growing aloofness from the messy business of working with legislators.
yet the standoff with congress was not solely his fault.
his republican o pponents had no interest in negotiating with him and american political culture had become so polarized that it resembled two separate nations.
each party had its own cable news station and rabidly partisan commentators its own newspapers its own think tanks and its own billionaire donors.
governing obama quickly discovered is far more difficult than campaigning.
the tea party no sooner was barack obama sworn in than anti government conservatives mobilized against him and the tax and spend liberalism he represented in their eyes.
in january 2009 a new york stock trader named graham makohoniuk sent an e mail message urging people to send tea bags to their congressional representatives to symbolize the boston tea party of 1773 when american colonists protested against british tax policies.
within a year or so the tax revolt had become a national tea party movement with groups in all fifty states.
the tea party is not so much a cohesive political organization as it is a mood an attitude and an i deology 1498 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present the tea party movement tea party supporters gather outside the new hampshire statehouse for a tax day rally.
a diverse collection of self described disaffected angry and very conservative activists mostly white male married middle class republicans over f orty five.
to the anti tax rebels the federal bailouts ordered by presidents bush and obama in the wake of the 2008 economic meltdown were a form of crony capitalism whereby the elite rewarded the big companies that had funded their campaigns.
tea party members demanded a radically smaller f ederal government although most of them supported social security and m edicare the two most expensive federal social programs.
democrats including obama initially dismissed the tea party as a fringe group but the 2010 election results proved them wrong.
democratic house and senate candidates as well as moderate republicans including many long serving leaders were defeated in droves when conservative republicans many of them aligned with the tea party gained sixty three seats to recapture control of the house of representatives.
they won a near majority in the senate as well.
it was the most lopsided midterm election since 1938.
thereafter the bickering between both parties prevented meaningful action on the languishing economy chronic joblessness and the runaway federal budget deficit.
neither party wanted to negotiate or compromise.
a historic new presidency 1499 occupy wall street the emergence of the tea party was mirrored on the left by the occupy wall street ows movement mobilized in the fall of 2011 when a call went out over the internet to occupy wall street.
bring tent dozens then hundreds then thousands of people many of them unemployed young adults converged on zuccotti park in lower manhattan.
they formed tent villages and gathered to occupy wall street protesting the tyrannical power of major banks and investment companies.
the protesters described themselves as the voice of the 99 percent of americans who were being victimized by the 1 percent the wealthiest and most politically connected amer occupy wall street the manhattan born grassroots movement grew icans.
unlike the tea party however rapidly from rallies to massive marches ows did not have staying power.
in financial districts nationwide like within a year its energies and visi this demonstration in downtown los bility had waned in part because of angeles.
mass arrests in part because it was an intentionally leaderless movement more interested in saying what it was against than explaining what it was for.
bold decisions for all of the political sniping however attitudes toward hot button c ultural values were slowly changing.
in december 2010 congress repealed the dont ask dont tell dadt military policy that since 1993 had resulted in some 9 500 gay men and women being discharged from the armed forces.
a year later a report by army officers concluded that the repeal had no o verall negative impact on military readiness or its component dimensions including cohesion recruitment retention assaults harassment ormorale gay marriage in may 2012 president obama became the first s itting president to support the right of gay and lesbian couples to marry.
that his statement came a day after the north carolina legislature voted to 1500 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present ban all rights for gay couples illustrated how incendiary the issue was.
while asserting that it was the right thing to do obama knew that endorsing same sex marriage had powerful political implications.
the gay community would play an energetic role in the 2012 presidential election and the youth v ote the u nder thirty electorate who most supported gay marriage would be crucial.
no sooner had obama made his announcement than polls showed that american voters for the first time were evenly split on the charged issue with democrats and independent voters providing the bulk of support for s ame sex marriage.
the dream act in june 2012 obama again made waves by issuing an executive order soon labeled the dream act that allowed 1 5 million undocumented immigrants who had been brought to the united states as children to remain as citizens.
his unanticipated decision thrilled hispanic supporters who had lost heart over his failure to convince congress to support more comprehensive immigration reform.
congressional republicans steadfastly opposed giving the estimated 12 million undocumented immigrants 80 percent of whom were latinos a pathway to citizenship without first ensuring that the border with mexico was secured.
the dream act however had unexpected consequences.
it excited masses of central americans willing to endure enormous risks to live in america.
panicked parents in el salvador guatemala and honduras worried about widespread drug related gang violence started sending their children through mexico to the united states in hopes of connecting with relatives and being granted citizenship.
during 2014 some 57 000 young migrants were caught along the nearly 2 000 mile long border with mexico and communities across the nation rushed to find families to sponsor the unaccompanied children.
at the same time the obama administration was deporting record numbers of undocumented immigrants more than 2 million by the end of 2014 some of whom had been working in the nation for decades in what was called the great expulsion obama called the deporter in chief by critics claimed that he was only following the laws written by a nti immigration republicans.
others suggested that the harsh deportation policy was part of obamas grand strategy to force congress to pass a comprehensive immigration reform bill.
either way the immigrants were caught in the middle.
the supreme court in the twenty first century the supreme court surprised observers in 2013 by overturning the defense of marriage act doma of 1996 which had denied gay and lesbian couples a historic new presidency 1501 refugees from gangland braving hundreds of miles on foot honduran and salvadorian children are sent off by their parents for a better life in the united states away from the drug dealing violence of central america.
here border guards stop a group of child refugees in granjeno texas.
who married in states allowing such unions the right to federal benefits.
in united states v windsor 2013 the court voted 5 4 that the federal government could not withhold spousal benefits from s ame sex couples who had been legally married.
while restoring federal benefits the court did not rule that same sex marriage was a right guaranteed under the constitution.
that issue would have to be resolved by a future court decision scheduled for the summer of 2015.
in the meantime each state could decide whether to allow such marriages.
during 2014 however federal courts repeatedly overturned state laws banning s ame sex marriages arguing that the right to marry was guaranteed by the constitution.
while the court disappointed social conservatives with its windsor decision its five conservative justices continued to make rulings intended to restrict the powers of the federal government.
in june 2013 in shelby county v holder 2013 the court gutted key provisions of the 1965 voting rights act vra which had outlawed discrimination directed toward voters on account of race or color the majority opinion declared that in five of the six southern states originally covered by the vra black voter turnout now exceeded white turnout.
1502 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present to the judges this seemed to prove that there was no evidence of continuing racial discrimination.
todays laws must be justified by current needs chief justice john roberts wrote.
soon after the courts ruling counties and states in the south pushed through new laws that had the effect of making it more difficult for minorities and poor people to vote by reducing voting hours or requiring that drivers licenses be shown on voting days.
the 2012 election as the november 2012 presidential election approached one thing was certain it would be the most expensive election ever in part because the supreme court ruled in citizens united v federal elections committee 2010 that corporations could spend as much as they wanted in support of candidates.
after a divisive battle in the primaries mitt romney a former corporate executive and massachusetts governor won the republican nomination.
the main question for romney was whether the s till powerful religious right would allow him to sidestep tough social issues the question for president obama was whether he could sidestep his failure to restore prosperity.
two factors injured romneys candidacy toward the end of the most expensive campaign in history 6 billion.
the first was his decision to please right wing voters by opposing immigration reforms that might allow undocumented immigrants a pathway to citizenship.
the second was the disclosure that he had privately told a group of wealthy contributors that he did not care about the 47 percent of americans who failed to take personal responsibility and care for their lives it was not his job to worry about those who did not pay federal income taxes because they were dependent on federal government programs.
the obama campaign seized on the impolitic statement and demonized the wealthy romney as an uncaring elitist.
on election day obama won with 66 million votes to romneys 61 million and 332 electoral votes to 206.
nearly 60 percent of white voters chose romney.
but the nations fastest growing groups hispanics asian americans and african americans voted overwhelmingly for obama as did c ollege educated women.
david frum a prominent republican speechwriter and columnist confessed that his party was becoming increasingly isolated and estranged from modern america obama began his second term on an assertive note.
in january 2013 the defense department lifted its ban on women serving in combat.
the following month obama announced that more u s troops would be withdrawn from afghanistan over the next year leaving 34 000 by early 2014.
it had become americas longest war.
a historic new presidency 1503 obamacare on the defensive president obamas proudest achievement the affordable care act was so massive in its scope and complicated in its implementation that it took four years before it was ready to roll out in the fall of 2013 the federal online health insurance exchange where people without insurance could sign up opened with great fanfare.
obama assured americans that using the online registration system would be real simple it was not.
on october 1 millions tried to sign up only six succeeded.
as it turned out the website had never been properly tested and it was hobbled with technical glitches.
it also became evident that obama had misled the nation about key elements of the plan.
in campaigning for its passage in 2010 he had repeatedly told voters that if they liked their current health insurance plan they could under obamacare keep that insurance.
end of story as it turned out however many with substandard policies saw them canceled by insurers.
congressional republicans as well as many democrats condemned the president for his misleading statements and inept management of his signature program.
during the winter of 2013 2014 the r epublican led house of representatives repeatedly tried and failed to overturn the aca at one point passing a federal budget that would have stripped the new health care program of its funding.
when the president refused to sign the bill the federal government some 800 000 employees shut down after the existing budget expired on september 30.
for sixteen days every nonessential federal agency was closed costing the government 2 billion.
the republicans shutdown strategy failed however as it had in 1995 when citizen outrage was directed not at president clinton but at republican legislators.
in response to widespread criticism and the threat of global economic repercussions house republicans on october 16 passed a revised senate approved budget that removed the a nti aca provision.
the conservative radio commentator rush limbaugh described the republican shutdown as one of the greatest political disasters ive ever seen democrats had little time to celebrate however.
by november 2013 some 57 percent of voters said they opposed obamacare in part because the program benefited only a quarter of the population the uninsured and the underinsured and obamas job approval ratings had plunged.
it had taken the president weeks to acknowledge the botched roll out of obamacare we created this problem we didnt need to create he said to aides.
and its our own doing and its our most important initiative and nobody is madder than me eventually the aca website was fixed and by august 2014 more than 9 million people well above the original target number had signed up for 1504 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present health insurance.
the affordable care act is here to stay obama said.
but even though the s ign up system was fixed public perception of the governments ability to manage the program never recovered.
new global challenges in an age of insecurity in 2013 the united states held its first high level talks with iran since 1979 when iranian militants took u s embassy employees in tehran hostage.
on november 23 secretary of state john kerry reached a multinational agreement with iran to scale back its nuclear development program for six months as a first step toward a more comprehensive agreement not to develop nuclear weapons.
at the same time an increasingly bloody civil war in syria that had claimed 150 000 lives was beginning to have major international repercussions.
in 2013 u s intelligence analysts confirmed that the syrian government ruled with an iron fist by bashar a l assad on august 21 had used chemical weapons to kill 1 400 people many of them children.
president obama had repeatedly warned that such use of weapons of mass destruction was a red line that would trigger international military intervention of enormous consequences in late august he and the french government hesitantly began preparing for a military strike although congress and most americans opposed such action.
it appeared that obama had gotten cold feet about a military intervention.
his former secretary of defense leon panetta argued that obamas failure to follow through on his threat was a blow to american credibility.
when the president as commander in chief draws a red line it is critical that he act if the line is crossed on september 9 secretary of state kerry defused the crisis by signing an agreement with russia to dispose of syrias chemical weapons.
by the end of october all the chemical weapon stockpiles had been destroyed or dismantled but the civil war raged on.
ukraine as the syrian civil war continued a civil uprising occurred in ukraine the former soviet republic of 46 million people that had gained its independence in 1991.
for nearly a quarter of a century russian p resident vladimir putin had viewed the disintegration of the soviet union as the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the century like many russian rulers before him he developed an almost paranoid fear of being invaded from the west either by armies or by democratic ideas.
to restore russian influence over its neighbors and to divide nato and the european union he had exerted economic and political pressure on the republics of the former soviet union.
a historic new presidency 1505 civil war in ukraine a protester in the ukrainian capital of kiev throws a molotov cocktail during violent clashes with police on january 22 2014.
a month later russian president vladimir putin would use the unrest as an excuse to seize control of the crimean region.
on february 27 putin sent troops into the crimea a part of ukraine along the black sea long claimed by russia.
a week later the crimean parliament voted to become part of the russian federation.
putin claiming that crimea had always been an inseparable part of russia quickly made the illegal a nnexation official by positioning russian troops there while denying their presence.
the speed and ruthlessness with which putin seized control of crimea mobilized 40 000 russian troops on the ukrainian border and cut off ukraines crucial access to russian natural gas surprised president obama and e uropean leaders.
it may not have been the start of a new cold war but it put an end to hope that russia would become a cordial partner of the united states and the european democracies.
by 2014 putin had developed a raw and resentful anti americanism fearful that the menacing united states and nato was gaining influence in the former soviet republics at the expense of russia.
in response the united states and the european union hurriedly o rganized diplomatic efforts to de escalate the crisis they refused to recognize the legitimacy of the annexation of crimea and announced economic sanctions against russia while pledging financial assistance to ukraine.
if russia 1506 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present c ontinues to interfere in ukraine we stand ready to impose further sanctions obama said.
by a vote of 100 11 the united nations general assembly also opposed the annexation.
in april 2014 heavily armed pro russian separatists as many as a third of whom were russian soldiers and agents seized control of several cities in eastern ukraine.
they declared a peoples republic and called for secession.
pressure mounted to impose even more sanctions when a malaysian passenger jet flying across eastern ukraine was shot down by a r ussian made rocket in july 2014 killing all 298 on board.
the united states and its allies slammed russia with more economic sanctions but the coldly calculating putin showed no sign of backing away.
in fact his popularity in russia had soared leaving the united states once again in the position of containing russias expansionist ambitions.
the burdens of leadership rarely are presidents more popular than on their first day in office.
to govern is to make decisions and decisions in democratic nations inevitably produce disappointments disagreements and criticism.
during his presidency barack obama has discovered how hard it is to lead the worlds economic and military superpower in the post cold war era.
he has struggled to stabilize a cluster of unstable n ations iraq afghanistan libya ukraine and syria that craved u s resources but resented american meddling.
what unites the crises in ukraine and the middle east is the seeming powerlessness of obama european leaders and the united nations to resolve them easily or quickly in an age of growing insecurity and turmoil.
overall obama adopted a posture of restraint in world affairs.
he was determined to avoid stupid errors wind down the wars in iraq and afghanistan stay aloof from the arab awakening and reduce the use of u s military power abroad so as to concentrate on issues at home.
yet he and others were naive to think that the united states could avoid the burdens of being the only superpower in a p ost cold war world of g rowing anarchy and violence.
there is no diplomatic solution to be found for groups s eeking the total destruction of the american and european d emocracies.
democratic senator diane feinstein of california wondered out loud in september 2014 if obama had become too cautious about the use of force in world affairs.
islamists on the move unexpected events overseas during the summer of 2014 gave obama the opportunity to take decisive action.
in june the volatile middle east took a sudden turn for the worse when sunni jihadists who had been fighting in syria invaded northern iraq and announced the creation of their own nation caliphate called the islamic state isis.
with lightning speed the islamic state emerged as the largest best financed most a historic new presidency 1507 eavily armed and most brutal of the many jihadist terrorist groups financh ing its far flung operations and 40 000 fanatical fighters by selling captured oil and ransoming hostages.
isis was both the culmination of decades of arab islamist rage against europe and the united states and the collapse of effective government and security in syria and iraq.
once american forces left iraq and sunnis grew frustrated with the shia dominated government isis swept in setting off a panic that helped topple the government.
in the areas it captured isis established its own tyrannical form of government based on what it called the management of savagery in the face of the isis advance many iraqi government soldiers that the united states had spent billions of dollars training and equipping fled leaving their valuable weapons and vehicles.
sadistic isis fighters seized huge tracts of territory in syria and iraq while enslaving terrorizing raping massacring crucifying or beheading thousands of men women and children who in some way fell short of their ruthless version of the sunni faith.
in august 2014 after isis terrorists gruesomely beheaded two captured americans president obama ordered systematic airstrikes first in iraq and later in syria to prevent genocide as isis fighters assaulted christians yazidis and kurds in the region.
those airstrikes continue.
obama pulled off a diplomatic coup by building a broad coalition of arab and european partners but u s warplanes bore the brunt of the action.
obama assured americans that he would not get dragged into another ground war but the latest military intervention remained a bitter setback for a president committed to ending u s wars in the middle east.
if george w bush had plunged u s power too deeply into iraq obama seemed to have w ithdrawn u s power too quickly.
one over reached the other under shot.
the stakes were high.
yousef al otaiba the ambassador of the united arab emirates to the united states warned that the radical islamist leaders of the islamic state posed an existential threat to those of us who believe in the true nature of islam as a religion of peace although some criticized obamas actions he characterized the air campaign to slow the mass murder and mayhem by the islamic state as american leadership at its best preventing genocide and deterring the worlds tyrants and terrorists from further mischief is not simply a burden of great power he decided it is a responsibility in an era burdened by constant warfare.
during 2015 however the stability and security in the middle east desired and funded by the united states disintegrated.
civil wars between sectarian factions were engulfing syria iraq libya and yemen.
in 2015 the united states remained the worlds only superpower capable of projecting military power anywhere in the world.
but the i ll considered wars in afghanistan and iraq had left many americans deeply reluctant to support 1508 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present any use of extensive military power that might involve a long term commitment.
the painful lessons of afghanistan and iraq showed that no nation not even a superpower could easily impose its will and its democratic system on people with very different needs beliefs and traditions.
the age of gridlock american politics has always been chaotic and combative its raucous energy is one of its great strengths.
during barack obamas t wo term presidency however the emergence of the tea party and occupy wall street symbolized how savage and unyielding political combat had become.
compromise and moderation had become dirty words.
the scorched earth tactics of republicans in congress were designed to protect the political status quo.
were the party of hell no cried sarah palin the former republican governor of alaska who had run for vice president alongside john mccain in 2008 before becoming the darling of the tea party.
intense partisanship dominated the 2014 congressional elections when republicans gained nine senate seats giving them control of the senate for the first time since 2006.
they also strengthened their hold on the house added governorships and tightened their control of state legislatures.
republicans campaigned on a single theme the failure of president obama and the disaster of obamacare.
kentucky senator rand paul vowed that he and his colleagues would send the president bill after bill until he wearies of it including renewed efforts to repeal obamacare.
political moderates became a dying breed.
by late 2014 the percentage of voters who described themselves as liberals or conservatives had doubled since 1994 and more than twice as many democratic and republican voters as in 1994 had a very unfavorable view of the other party.
congress included mostly republicans on the far right democrats on the far left and hardly anyone in the middle.
that alignment said gerald seib of the wall street journal created a congress that does less and does it less well than any time in memory by 2014 six years after taking office on the promise of hope and change president obama had discovered how difficult it is to preside over a polarized nation much less bring it together.
you know i love this job obama told an adviser early in his presidency.
i love diving into problems.
but dealing with some of the people you have to deal with.
wears you out in the final two years of his presidency obamas greying hair and waning energy revealed a weariness that mirrored his public approval ratings which were well below 50 percent.
james bennet editor of the atlantic monthly a historic new presidency 1509 pointed out that every modern t wo term president had experienced plummeting support.
if we werent sick of the guy to start with we certainly are by now.
what once seemed like roguish charm or bracing surety or nuanced intelligence has curdled into self indulgence or arrogance or passivity voters hoping for a more energetic and engaged obama after his reelection were disappointed by his slow withdrawal from engaged leadership.
he seemed disheartened by the troubling gap between the magnitude of our challenges and the smallness of our politics critics savaged him for playing golf more often than any president since eisenhower.
even prominent democrats joined in the attacks.
a successful presidency former secretary of state hillary clinton said needed organizing principles and dont do stupid stuff is not an organizing principle obama repeatedly blamed republicans for stalemating his second term but the president was not blameless.
cabinet member leon panetta stressed that obamas most conspicuous weakness was a frustrating reticence to engage his opponents and rally support for his cause while acknowledging that the president was supremely intelligent panetta added that obama avoids the battle complains and misses opportunities obama was a talented man drawn to political power but frustrated by horse trading politics a leader eager to have power but increasingly reluctant to e xercise it.
to many americans his naturally cautious and careful approach to foreign policy came across as indecisive and weak and his coolness smacked of aloofness.
george w bush was a leader who didnt like to think said ian bremmer an international consultant.
barack obama is a thinker who doesnt like to lead renewed energy yet during the summer of 2015 in the sunset of his presidency obama regained his energy and momentum.
while restoring normal relations with cuba he benefited from two surprising u s supreme court rulings in late june.
for years republicans had waged all out war on the affordable care act obamacare.
unable to halt the implementation of the new program in congress the critics turned to the courts to challenge the flawed new health care law.
in a surprising 6 3 decision in a case called king v burwell the supreme court saved the controversial health care law that will define obamas presidency for generations to come.
chief justice roberts explained in the majority opinion that some of the sloppy language in the original congressional legislation should not be used to destroy the new program.
congress passed the affordable care act to improve health insurance markets not to destroy them roberts stressed.
if at all possible we must interpret the act in a way that is consistent with the former and avoids the 1510 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present married with pride a california couple pose in front of the united states supreme court building in washington d c while the supreme court justices hear arguments on the constitutional right for gay couples to wed in april 2015.
on june 26 2015 in a landmark 5 4 decision the court ruled in favor of upholding same sex marriage in all fifty states.
latter president obama was overjoyed by the much anticipated ruling.
five years ago after nearly a century of talk decades of trying a year of bipartisan debate we finally declared that in america health care is not a privilege for a few but a right for all obama said from the white house.
the affordable care act is here to stay then just a day later the u s supreme court issued another bombshell ruling when it announced a 5 4 decision in the obergefell v hodges case which banned states from preventing same sex marriages.
the landmark decision that same sex couples had a constitutional right to marry infuriated the religious right.
rick scarborough a baptist minister in texas vowed that he and others would denounce this practice in our religious services we will not teach it in our schools we will refuse to officiate at this type of wedding and we will not accept any encroachments on our first amendment rights yet the supreme courts affirmation of same sex marriage reflected the profound change in public attitudes toward homosexual rights during the early twenty first century.
in 2008 presidential candidate barack obama had felt a historic new presidency 1511 the need to disavow support for marriage equality.
by 2012 he had reversed himself by embracing the right of same sex marriage.
his change of mind reflected a resurgent social transformation in american life.
cultural diversity like obamacare was here to stay.
obama for example the nations first african american president had appointed two women to the u s supreme court including the first latina justice.
he also ended the ban on open homosexuality in the military.
the unexpected momentum of the court decisions in june 2015 bolstered obamas efforts in another controversial arena foreign policy.
in his 2009 inaugural address he had vowed to international enemies that we will extend a hand if you are willing to unclench your fist that effort finally paid off in 2015 not only with the normalizing of relations with cuba but also when the united states and five other major world powers announced a draft treaty with iran intended to thwart its efforts to develop a nuclear weapon.
in exchange for ending the international trade embargo against iran the agreement called for the iranians to dismantle much of their nuclear program and allow for international inspectors to confirm their actions.
obama warned congressional critics that voting against such a treaty would mean a greater chance of war in the middle east a fading american dream.
when barack obama won the democratic nomination for president in 2008 he and his supporters touted him as an uplifting example of the american dream a biracial man who had defied the odds and achieved great success.
his inspiring story echoed one of the most powerful themes in the nations history america as a mythic land of unique opportunities for people from around the world.
in 1811 former president john adams marveled at the growth and prosperity of the young american republic there is no people on earth so ambitious as the people of america.
because the lowest poorest can aspire to wealth as freely as the highest the ideal of equal opportunity has always been the engine of american distinctiveness.
by the early twenty first century though that ideal seemed increasingly out of reach to millions.
the most striking change in modern life since 1980 was the widening inequality of income and wealth.
modern america had become a tale of two very different societies in which the rich get richer and the poor get poorer to quote a famous song.
a rising wealth gap between rich and poor unfairly punishes those who have the bad luck to be born and raised in poverty with little access to quality education health care and learning technologies.
while the wealthy feel financially secure the masses feel 1512 chapter 32 twenty first century a merica 1993 present increasingly insecure against unexpected hardships and a r apidly changing high tech economy that places a premium on higher education.
as nobel prize winning economist joseph stiglitz said in 2012 the united states has less equality of opportunity than almost any other advanced industrial country the american dream of the poor having an equal chance to succeed economically he said was now more of a myth.
most of the economic benefits generated by the slow economic recovery under obama were enjoyed by salaried executives and stockholders rather than the working and middle classes.
although unemployraising the minimum wage ment dropped below 6 percent in 2015 demonstrators rally in albany new york for an increase to the wages had barely risen since 2007.
in minimum wage a movement that gained 1979 the richest 1 percent mostly people national traction in 2014 and reflected engaged in global investment banking the growing attention paid to wealth and business controlled 9 percent of the disparity in the country.
nations total income.
by 2014 they controlled more than 20 percent.
the 46 million americans living below the official poverty line in 2014 11 702 annual income for an individual 23 850 for a family of four were the most in history.
one of every five children lived in poverty.
at the other extreme corporate executives were reaping an e ver higher percentage of national wealth.
in 1993 the disparity in pay between corporate leaders and the average u s worker was 195 to 1 in 2012 it was 360 to 1.
increasingly journalist hedrick smith reported in 2012 america is becoming a society in which privilege sustains privilege poverty begets poverty resulting in the slow poisonous polarization and disintegration of our great democracy whatever its causes what came to be called the great divide between the 1 percent and the 99 percent had profound social and political consequences as well as moral dimensions.
a nation founded on the idea that all men are created equal had become richer but less equal and less socially mobile than other advanced industrial nations.
the true test of a capitalist democracy is not how wealthy the richest citizens are but the quality of life of the average citizen.
a historic new presidency 1513 the unresolved tension created by such inequality emerged as the foremost social issue of the t wenty first century.
in an august 2014 national poll 64 percent of americans no longer believed that the nation offered everyone an equal chance to succeed fewer than 10 percent trusted congress and 76 percent were not confident that the quality of life of their childrens generation would be better than it has been for us billionaire investor bill gross worried in 2014 that the new high tech global economy was producing one world for the rich and an entirely different world for the working class.
it cant go on like this either from the standpoint of the health of the capitalist system itself or the health of individuals and the family as the 2016 presidential campaign began in earnest income inequality emerged as a major issue.
democratic frontrunner hillary clinton claimed she was reaching out to everyday americans by calling for higher wages while criticizing the bloated salaries of corporate executives.
florida senator marco rubio urged his fellow republicans to make their party the champion of the working class the united states has so far survived its growing economic inequalities and social strife without serious upheavals.
for all its diversity and divisions the nation remains united under a common government and political system something that few societies can claim.
for centuries americans have also displayed a distinctively self critical temperament especially noticeable to foreign visitors.
in the early nineteenth century english writer charles dickens said that the american always is depressed and always is stagnated and always is at an alarming crisis and never was otherwise perhaps that is why the nation always overcomes its greatest crises americans eventually summon the will and creativity to address their urgent problems.
the nation has a remarkable genius for s elf renewal and a confident ability to maneuver through the most difficult threats and challenges.
it needs such innovative resilience today for unless the entwined ideals of equal opportunity and fair reward are addressed americans may lose what has always united them and informed their sense of purpose the widely shared hope even expectation of a better future for all based on hard work ingenuity and sacrifice.
chapter review summary changing demographics from 1980 to 2010 the population of the united states grew by 25 percent to 306 million.
the nation was quickly becoming even more racially and ethnically diverse and a wave of immigration from latin america allowed hispanics to surpass african americans as the nations largest minority.
by 2012 the u s population included more foreign born and first generation residents than ever before.
divided government just two years after the election of new democrat bill clinton in 1992 republican speaker of the house newt gingrich crafted his contract with america and achieved a republican landslide in the midterm elections of 1994.
despite the bipartisan success of the 1993 north american free trade act nafta and the personal responsibility and work opportunity act of 1996 and a prosperous high tech new economy that helped balance the federal b udget clintons private life produced a sex scandal that resulted in impeachment proceedings against him.
clinton was ultimately acquitted and went on to intervene in the balkans to stop ethnic cleansing and to broker the l and for peace wye river accords in the middle east.
global terrorism the 9 11 a ttacks led president george w bush to declare a war on terror that commenced with the u s invasion of afghanistan to capture osama bin laden and oust the islamist taliban government.
through the usa patriot act congress authorized the federal government to monitor americans for possible terrorist activities at home.
the bush doctrine declared americas right to initiate preemptive military strikes against terrorists or rogue nations possessing weapons of mass destruction wmds.
in 2003 bush invoked this doctrine against saddam hussein the leader of iraq.
the ensuing second iraq war removed hussein from power but turned up no wmds.
a historic election the 2008 presidential primary campaigns featured democratic senators hillary rodham clinton the first formidable female candidate and barack obama the first truly contending african american candidate as well as republican senator john mccain the oldest candidate in history.
obama won his partys nomination and went on to take the election becoming the nations first african american president.
his victory resulted in large part from public dismay about the great recession as well as voters weariness with president bush.
obamas priorities obamas first priority was to shore up the failing economy which he attempted through controversial wall street bailouts and a huge economic stimulus package.
yet the recovery remained slow and unequal widening the economic divide and spawning the short lived occupy wall street movement.
the affordable care act obamacare incited increasingly bitter opposition from the conservative tea party.
obama was more successful in winning public support to reduce american military deployment abroad removing all combat troops from iraq in 2011 and downsizing their presence in afghanistan.
obama also intervened in the nations culture wars endorsing same sex marriage and a path to citizenship for undocumented residents.
chronology bill clinton elected president 1993 congress passes nafta 1995 the contract with america 1996 congress passes prwoa 1998 president clinton impeached and acquitted 2000 george w bush elected after controversial recount september 11 2001 terrorists attack new york city operation enduring freedom begins in afghanistan march 2003 iraq war begins with operation iraqi freedom august 2005 hurricane katrina devastates gulf coast global financial markets collapse great recession begins 2009 barack obama becomes the nations first black president congress passes the affordable care act obamacare august 2011 al qaeda leader osama bin laden killed 2013 u s.
supreme court overturns the defense of marriage act doma in united states v windsor 2015 u s.
supreme court upholds the affordable care act and decides that same sex couples have a constitutional right to marry october 2001 key terms north american free trade agreement nafta p 1463 usa patriot act 2001 p 1479 contract with america p 1464 weapons of mass destruction wmds p 1480 personal responsibility and work opportunity act of 1996 prwoa p 1466 globalization p 1467 ethnic cleansing p 1470 war on terror p 1478 bush doctrine p 1480 great recession p 1487 affordable care act aca also called obamacare p 1491 tea party p 1497 same sex marriage p 1500 ijk go to inquizitive to see what youve learned and learn what youve missed with personalized feedback along the way.
chapter 16 america in the new millennium 365 i.
under president obamas leadership congress passed the american recovery and reinvestment act pumping more federal money into the economy.
obama also gave financial relief to the leading automobile manufacturers to prevent them from going bankrupt.
president obama pushed health care reform and the reform of banks and credit card lenders through congress.
he also appointed sonia sotomayor as the first hispanic to the u s supreme court.
k president obama began to withdraw forces from iraq and added troops to the war in afghanistan.
in 2011 u s forces apprehended and killed osama bin laden who had been found hiding in pakistan.
in spring 2011 local populations in tunisia egypt and libya overthrew their dictators.
president obama encouraged local arab leaders not to use force against the demonstrators.
l scientific discoveries and technological innovations drive the american economy today.
the free enterprise system with its profit motive and system of copyrights and patents helps drive innovation forward.
often scientists and engineers make innovations to address specific needs.
m the united states is now part of a global economy.
the use of energy and protection of the environment are important aspects of this economy.
n american popular culture spread by music film television and the internet now has global reach.
these media depict the american culture and way of life to other nations around the world.
o demography is the study of population.
since world war ii the size of the u s population has more than doubled.
during this period the center of the nations population has shifted away from the northeast towards the sun belt.
much of the recent population growth in the united states has been due to both legal and illegal immigration.
essomial al questions c in what way were both 2000 and 2008 unique presidential election years.
o how did americans react to the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001.
how did presidents bush and obama respond to the 2008 2009 financial crisis.
what impact has american popular culture had on rest of the world.
chapter 16 america in the new millennium 367 a florida official closely examines a ballot for accuracy.
gore appealed to the florida supreme court which demanded a statewide recount.
bush appealed this decision to the u s supreme court.
the court ruled by a narrow 5 to 4 vote to order an end to the recount.
the florida supreme court had instructed those making the recount to evaluate the voters intent in cases where the ballot was not correctly punched in.
the u s supreme court majority objected to this saying there were no consistent standards for reviewing the ballots.
critics felt that the u s supreme court had voted along partylines 5 conservative justices vs 4 liberal ones.
some thought the court with a majority of justices appointed by presidents nixon ford reagan and bush was acting against the will of the people as expressed in the popular vote to put a minority candidate whom they favored into office.
acting as an amateur.
historian with the election results and balloting practices being debated in the courts the nation faced a constitutional crisis.
the u s supreme court said the following in delivering its majority decision none are more conscious of the vital limits on judicial authority than are the members of this court and none stand more in admiration of the constitutions design to leave the selection of the president to the people through their legislatures and to the political sphere.
when contending parties invoke the process of the courts however it becomes our unsought responsibility to resolve the federal and constitutional issues the judicial system has been forced to confront.
the judgment of the supreme court of florida is reversed do you think the u s supreme court was correct to halt the recount and to declare bush as the winner even though gore had won the popular vote.
explain your answer.
the supreme court decision in brown v board of education was unanimous.
in bush v gore the vote was 5 to 4.
what did this show.
domestic policy under bush as president george w bush pushed through a tax cut in an attempt to revitalize the economy.
the federal reserve board also dropped interest rates to their lowest levels in decades.
the tax cuts revived the economy but also brought a return to high federal budget deficits.
the cuts also mainly favored the wealthy.
bush claimed that the cuts were needed to get the economy growing again.
as governor of texas bush had been active in promoting educational reform.
as president he introduced the no child left behind act requiring states to test all students in english and mathematics each year from the third to the eighth grade.
chapter 16 america in the new millennium 369 president bush also took steps to curb terrorism at home.
a new federal agency the transportation security agency tsa took over security at u s airports and all passengers and luggage were subjected to a thorough screening.
in 2003 president bush created a new cabinet post the department of homeland security.
its mission was to keep the united states secure from all threats.
its activities range from nuclear detection and intelligence coordination to the protection of high level government officials.
bush also sponsored the usa patriot act of 2001 which greatly expanded the governments law enforcement powers.
the september 11th terrorists had been organized into four teams.
some had trained as pilots in america.
they had cell phones and computers to communicate and bank accounts funded by international terrorist groups.
the new act allowed law enforcement officials and intelligence agencies the power to conduct sweeping searches and surveillance detain immigrants and monitor bank accounts.
president bush authorized the national security agency nsa to wiretap suspected callers without first obtaining a warrant.
some felt that the usa patriot act gave the executive branch too much power threatening individual liberties.
its warrantless wiretaps were later held to be unconstitutional.
president bush signs the usa patriot act into law.
president bush also imprisoned suspected terrorists captured in afghanistan at guantanamo bay in cuba where the rights required by the u s constitution did not have to be given to the accused.
prisoners who went on a hunger strike were force fed.
the department of justice believed that limited torture techniques such as water boarding pouring water on the face of a prisoner to create the sensation of drowning were justified to obtain information from the suspects about future attacks which might save thousands of lives.
critics felt torture is rarely successful or necessary for obtaining accurate information.
they claimed prisoners were treated inhumanely even though some of them might be innocent.
they wished to see guantamamo bay closed.
suspects at guantanamo bay.
which of these post 9 11 steps in your opinion were necessary and which were unnecessary.
support your answer with examples and logical reasoning.
name chapter 16 america in the new millennium 371 president bush next turned his attention to iraq.
bush and his top advisors feared that iraqi dictator saddam hussein might provide biological chemical or even nuclear weapons to islamic terrorists like osama bin laden.
a failed ultimatum leads to an invasion hussein had used chemical weapons against the kurds in the 1980s.
although hussein denied that he possessed weapons of mass destruction wmds he at first refused to allow u n inspectors to search in iraq.
later u n inspectors found no wmds but some questioned whether their inspection was thorough enough.
the united states britain and spain warned iraq to surrender its wmds or face invasion.
france germany and russia favored a more cautious approach calling for additional inspections.
american leaders feared hussein would use any delay to hide his weapons.
in march 2003 president bush gave hussein 48 hours to leave iraq or face invasion.
when hussein rejected the ultimatum coalition forces took military action.
some of the 5 000 kurdish victims killed by chemical gas attacks in iraq in 1988.
acting as an amateur historian in march 2003 president bush informed americans that the united states and several of its allies were attacking iraq our nation enters this conflict reluctantly.
the united states and our allies will not live at the mercy of an outlaw regime that threatens the peace with weapons of mass murder.
we will meet that threat now with our military so that we do not have to meet it later with armies of fire fighters and police on the streets of our cities.
now that conflict has come the only way to limit its duration is to apply decisive force.
i assure you this will not be a campaign of half measures.
we will accept no outcome but victory in this speech president bush gave americans his reasoning for the war in iraq.
explain his justification in your own words.
president bush said the united states was going to go to war sooner rather than later so that americans would not face armies of firefighters and police on the streets of our cities compare this viewpoint with the earlier domino theory.
the united states began its campaign with a series of air strikes.
in early april u s forces entered baghdad.
husseins dictatorship quickly collapsed.
later hussein himself was captured tried for crimes against iraqi citizens during his long reign and executed by iraqis in 2006.
name chapter 16 america in the new millennium 373 hurricane katrina was also the costliest hurricane on record.
much of the damage occurred when the levees in new orleans failed to hold back the storm water.
more than 1 800 people lost their lives in the flooding making katrina one the deadliest natural disasters in american history.
it caused devastation as far as 100 miles from the storms center.
rescue efforts were so delayed that many citizens found themselves stranded for days on rooftops and in attics.
almost 20 000 people were trapped in new orleans superdome crammed together in sweltering heat and unsanitary conditions.
immediately following hurricane katrina abc television interviewed people in new orleans affected by the storm.
they asked do you harbor any anger toward president bush because of the slow federal response some americans blamed the bush administration for its slow reaction.
many respondents also claimed the city of new orleans and louisiana state government should have been more active even before the federal government was called in.
who do you think was to blame for the loss of lives.
explain your answer.
you may wish to conduct research on the internet for more information.
the end of bushs second term coincided with the worst financial crisis in the united states since the great depression.
for decades the federal government and federal reserve had followed policies to reduce swings in the economy.
these efforts combined with the growth of globalization now contributed to an unexpected collapse.
roots of the financial crisis when the stock market dropped sharply back in 2000 the federal reserve lowered interest rates to stimulate the economy.
many took advantage of these lower interest rates to buy new homes.
some banks lent money to borrowers who could not really afford their homes.
increasing homeowner ship caused house prices to rise leading to speculation in housing.
later these mortgages were bundled with other investments and sold to other banks or investors.
the housing crisis threatened the economy.
by 2007 overbuilding led to falling house prices.
some people had special mortgages that adjusted to higher interest rates.
when interest rates began to rise some homeowners found they could not afford their mortgages.
this led to a rising number of home foreclosures when a homeowner cannot pay the mortgage and the bank takes back the house to sell it.
meanwhile the federal government gave rebates to taxpayers and businesses in february 2008 to stimulate the economy.
chapter 16 america in the new millennium 375 his election was also significant for a number of other reasons.
obama campaigned on a promise of change that powered him through the longest most costly presidential campaign in u s history.
his election was remarkable for his rapid rise in american politics from a position of obscurity just a few years before.
obama used the internet to gather supporters and to raise campaign contributions.
with a stunning grassroots movement he won the presidency.
obama is sworn in as the first african american president.
acting as an amateur.
historian in january 2009 president obama delivered this inaugural address to the nation for everywhere we look there is work to be done.
the state of our economy calls for action bold and swift.
and we will act not only to create new jobs but to lay a new foundation for growth.
we will build the roads and bridges the electric grids and digital lines that feed our commerce and bind us together.
well restore science to its rightful place and wield technologys wonders to raise health cares quality and lower its cost.
we will harness the sun and the winds and the soil to fuel our cars and run our factories.
and we will transform our schools and colleges and universities to meet the demands of a new age.
all this we can do.
all this we will do based on his inaugural address how did president obama intend to deal with some of the nations economic difficulties.
explain your answer.
obama responds to the crisis president obama sought to prevent a depression like the 1930s.
his objective was to simulate the economy by creating jobs rebuilding roads schools bridges and tunnels.
obama also proposed important changes to the nations health care system and system of education.
in april 2009 obama and congressional leaders agreed to the american recovery and reinvestment act to jumpstart the american economy.
more than 700 billion was to be spent by the federal government in a bailout package designed to create new jobs save existing ones spur economic activity and invest in long term infrastructure development.
part of the money would be spent directly by the federal government.
other funds were to be supplied to state governments.
the obama administration further responded to the financial crisis by passing legislation to regulate credit cards lending and other banking practices.
he also took steps to save the u s auto industry.
after much controversy a health care reform act was passed which sought to make health care available to more americans.
name chapter 16 america in the new millennium 377 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below describing some of the developments of the george w bush and obama presidencies.
name chapter 16 america in the new millennium 379 free enterprise and technological innovation the free enterprise system allows people to use their own economic resources to produce goods and services for sale to others.
copyright and patent laws give writers and inventors exclusive rights to their own creations and inventions.
in a free enterprise system scientists inventors and entrepreneurs have a powerful incentive to pay attention to the needs of consumers.
since they can profit by meeting consumer needs they continually strive to improve established products and to create new ones.
both the producers and the consumers benefit.
by allowing people to pursue their own interests free enterprise can drive technological innovation and achieve extraordinary results.
running shoes personal computers gel toothpaste cellular phones blackberrys iphones and global positioning system products are just some of the products created as a result of innovation by our free enterprise system.
the free enterprise system drives the creation of new businesses.
innovations addressing specific needs attempts to address specific needs often lead to scientific discoveries and technological innovation.
for example in the 1950s dr jonas salk specifically developed a vaccine to cure polio.
in the 1980s a new disease appeared known as aids.
those who contracted the disease had no immunity to other illnesses.
scientists set about discovering what caused aids and finding a cure.
they discovered it was caused by the hiv virus which attacks the human immune system.
the virus can be transmitted during sexual contact or blood transfusions.
scientists were able to develop a number of specific drugs that slow down the reproduction of the hiv virus and help restore the immune system.
scientists are now attempting to find a vaccine to prevent aids.
scientists have also developed new drugs to reduce the levels of cholesterol lowering the risk of heart attacks and they are working on a cure for alzheimers a disease that attacks an older persons memory and mental abilities.
scientists have also developed more insect resistant foods with greater nutritional value making it possible to support the worlds growing population.
both the u s military and space program have used teams of scientists and engineers to design solutions to specific problems.
these solutions often have more general applications the jet engine for example is now used by commercial airlines to power their airplanes and the internet developed for scientists is now used to communicate by everyone.
the computer revolution much of the increased productivity of the american economy in the last few decades has been due to advances in information technology it.
computers are machines that use a binary system to store and manipulate information.
applying wh chapter 16 america in the new millennium 381 med liloibi ivu nnvsc choose one of the fields discussed and research information about it from the internet or library.
then make an oral presentation summarizing your findings.
the global economy multinationals like mcdonalds operate in every corner of the world.
in the 1950s american manufacturers mainly sold to consumers in the u s market.
today our economy is integrated into the global economy.
a multinational corporation is a corporation that has set up local companies or subsidiaries in several countries.
today multinationals make and sell their products in every comer of the world.
at the start of the twenty first century multinationals controlled more than half of the industrial assets of the united states and employed millions of workers for example mcdonalds is a franchise with over 30 000 restaurants in 113 countries.
starbucks sells coffee in 40 overseas markets operating 12 000 stores.
nike has stores on six continents.
wal mart has 2 700 global retail units employing 500 000.
exxon mobil and chevron have subsidiaries in several countries.
globalization.
the emergence of multinational corporations has contributed to globalization.
this has had a serious impact on government policies.
for example when a government bans its factories from dumping toxic waste into rivers and harming the environment a national company must comply by changing its procedures.
however a multinational company can decide to simply move its production abroad to a more friendly country rather than comply.
multinationals can move their production to countries where labor is less expensive environmental regulations are more lax and taxes are lower or non existent.
this freedom of movement penalizes those governments that seek to maintain higher standards of social welfare environmental regulation or tax policies.
competition among multinational corporations is now intensifying.
for example american automobile manufacturers now face stiff competition from multinational corporations originating in japan germany britain and korea.
energy population growth and rising living standards have led to a greater demand for energy at home and abroad.
it was once thought that nuclear power plants might meet most of our energy needs without pollution.
the three mile island accident in 1979 and the earthquake and tsunami in japan in 2011 have raised fears that nuclear power might impose more dangers than first thought.
project without permission chapter 16 america in the new millennium 383 water pollution.
as cities have become more crowded their ability to handle increased sewage and waste is strained.
this can lead to the dumping of raw sewage into surrounding waters contaminating drinking water killing wildlife and threatening the health of everyone in society.
the role of the government there is a growing belief among americans that protection of the environment is a governmental responsibility.
this is based on the realization that we all need to breathe clean air and drink safe water.
only the government is capable of managing these resources and preventing pollution since it has the ability to punish violators.
government decisions however are often linked to the costs involved how much are americans willing to sacrifice to protect their environment.
this question makes protection of the environment especially challenging.
creation of the environmental protection agency and the passage of the endangered species act gave the federal government special powers for protecting the environment.
states also have their own laws and agencies for environmental protection.
both the federal and state governments also directly own some forest desert and mountain areas.
governments are responsible for meeting the costs of floods droughts and other environmental disasters.
governments undertake the construction of dams roads bridges.
both the federal and state governments have their own programs related to environmental protection environmental awareness and pollution control.
lastly private groups and voluntary organizations play an increasing role in promoting public awareness and protecting the environment such as the sierra club founded in california by conservationist john muir in 1892.
acting as an amateur historian contact a federal state or local agency that is engaged in environmental protection and arrange for a speaker to visit your class.
have a debate in your class over this issue does the environment need greater protection or is it already overprotected with too many regulations.
ami since world war ii american popular culture has exercised a great influence both on the lives of americans and on people in the rest of the world.
chapter 16 america in the new millennium 385 first the size of the total u s population has more than doubled since the end of world war ii year population year population 1950 151 325 798 1990 248 709 873 1960 179 323 175 2000 281 421 906 1970 203 211 926 2010 308 745 538 1980 226 545 805 2020 in fact the united states is the third largest nation in terms of population after china and india.
secondly the center of population of the united states has shifted away from the northeast and midwest and towards the sun belt.
the map below shows an ever westward shift of the population.
california had 10 5 million in 1950 and 37 million in 2010.
texas population grew from 7 7 million in 1950 to 25 million in 2010 while florida had only 2 8 million people in 1950 it has grown to 18 8 million today.
mean center of population for thirdly much of the recent population growth of the united states has been due to immigration.
about 13 of the population living in the united states today are immigrants.
the united states has both legal immigrants those who apply for and receive visas for permanent residence known as green cards and millions of illegal immigrants.
illegal immigrants are people who cross americas borders with mexico or canada or who land on american shores without officially entering the country.
some estimate there are as many as 15 million illegal aliens now living in the united states.
these numbers are not part of the official population count of the united states.
part of the border fence built to prevent illegal aliens from entering the united states.
illegal immigrants often work for low wages that others might be unwilling to accept.
their jobs frequently involves agriculture construction landscape maintenance or domestic services.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 wa mt or id nv ca nd wy sd co wi ia ne ut az mn ks ok nm il la tx mi in mo oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 12 ri pa nj ct 4 15 8 ga sc de md dc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote popular vote clinton democrat 68 8 44 908 233 43 0 bush republican 31 2 39 102 282 37 4 0 0 19 741 048 18 9 perot independent map 41 1 presidential election of 1992 with electoral vote by state interactive map opportunity in 1993 to nominate ruth bader ginsburg to the supreme court where she joined sandra day oconnor to make a pair of women justices.
a false start for reform badly overestimating his electoral mandate for liberal reform the young president made a series of costly blunders upon entering the white house.
in one of his rst initiatives on taking ofce he stirred a hornets nest of controversy by advocating an end to the ban on gays and lesbians in the armed ser vices.
confronted with erce opposition the president nally had to settle for a dont ask dont tell policy that quietly accepted gay and lesbian soldiers and sailors without ofcially acknowledging their presence in the military.
even more damaging to clintons political standing and to his hopes for lasting liberal achievement was the asco of his attempt to reform the nations health care system.
in a dramatic but personally and politically risky move the president appointed his wife nationally prominent lawyer and childrens advocate hillary rodham clinton as the director of a task force charged with redesigning the medical ser vice in dustry.
their stupefyingly complicated plan was dead on arrival when it was presented to congress in october 1993.
the first lady was doused with a torrent of abuse although she eventually rehabilitated herself sufciently to win election as a u s senator from new york in 2000 the rst first lady ever to hold elective ofce.
her bid to win the democratic nomination for president in 2008 proved equally as historic if less successful.
clinton had better luck with a decitreduction bill in 1993 which combined with an increasingly buoyant economy by 1996 to shrink the federal decit to its lowest level in more than a decade.
by 1998 clintons policies seemed to have caged the ravenous decit monster as congress argued over the unfamiliar question of how to manage federal budget surpluses.
the new president also induced congress in 1993 to pass a gun control law the brady bill named for presidential aide james brady who had been wounded and disabled by gun re in the assassination attempt on president ronald reagan in 1981.
in july 1994 clinton made further progress against the national plague of rearms when he persuaded congress to pass a 30 billion anticrime bill which contained a ban on several types of assault weapons that continued until the law expired in 2004.
with these mea sures the government struggled to hold the line against an epidemic of violence that rocked american society in the 1990s.
a huge explosion destroyed a federal ofce building in oklahoma city in 1995 taking 168 lives in retribution for a 1993 standoff in waco texas between federal agents and a fundamentalist sect known as the branch davidians.
that showdown had ended in the destruction of the sects compound and the deaths of many branch davidians including women and children.
events like the oklahoma city bombing brought to light a lurid and secretive underground of paramilitary private militias composed of alienated citizens armed to the teeth and ultrasuspicious of all government.
even many law abiding citizens shared to some degree in the antigovernment attitudes that drove the militia members to murderous extremes.
thanks largely to the disillusioning agony of the vietnam war and the naked cynicism of richard nixon in the watergate scandal the condence in government that had come naturally to the generation that had licked the great depression and won the second world war was in short supply by centurys end.
reecting that pervasive disenchantment with politics and politicians violence in america bombing of federal building in oklahoma city 1995 a truck bomb killed 168 people in this federal ofce building in the worst act of terrorism in the united states until september 11 2001.
convicted on eleven counts for the attack antigovernment militant timothy mcveigh became the rst person executed by the federal government in nearly forty years in 2001 several states passed term limit laws for elected ofcials although the supreme court ruled in 1995 that the restrictions did not apply to federal ofceholders.
before the decade was out the logic of clintons emphasis on gun control was tragically con rmed.
on an april morning in 1999 two students at columbine high school in littleton colorado killed twelve fellow students and a teacher.
debate ared over the origins of school violence.
some observers targeted the violence portrayed in movies tv shows and video games others pointed to the failings of parents.
but the culprit that attracted the most sustained political attention was guns their abundance and accessibility especially in suburban and rural communities.
clinton engaged in a pugnacious debate with the progun national rie association over the need to toughen gun laws and lmmaker michael moore agi tated for gun control in his popular 2002 documentary bowling for columbine.
the million mom march in washington d c in may 2002 and the tragic killing of thirty two people by a disturbed student at virginia tech in 2007 further drove calls for new antigun mea sures but reform was slow in coming.
the politics of distrust clintons failed initiatives and widespread antigovernment sentiment afforded republicans a golden opportunity in 1994 and they seized it aggressively.
led by outspoken georgia representative newt gingrich republicans offered voters a contract with america that promised an all out assault on budget decits and radical reductions in welfare programs.
their campaign chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 succeeded fabulously as a right wing tornado roared across the land in the 1994 congressional elections.
every incumbent republican gubernatorial senatorial and congressional candidate was reelected.
republicans also picked up eleven new governorships eight seats in the senate and fty three seats in the house where gingrich became speaker giving them control of both chambers of the federal congress for the rst time in forty years.
but if president clinton had overplayed his mandate for liberal reform in 1993 the congressional republicans now proceeded to overplay their mandate for conser vative retrenchment.
in 1996 the new congress achieved a major conser vative victory when it compelled a reluctant clinton to sign the welfare reform bill which made deep cuts in welfare grants and required able bodied welfare recipients to nd employment.
the new welfare law also tightly restricted welfare benets for legal and illegal immigrants alike reecting a rising tide of anti immigrant sentiment as the numbers of newcomers climbed toward an alltime high.
old line liberal democrats howled with pain at the presidents alleged betrayal of his partys heritage and some prominent administration members resigned in protest against his decision to sign the welfare bill.
but clintons acceptance of the welfare reform package was part of his shrewd political strategy of accommodating the electorates conser vative mood by moving to his right.
president clinton was at rst stunned by the magnitude of the republican congressional victory in 1994.
but many americans gradually came to feel that the gingrich republicans were bending their conser vative bow too far especially when the new speaker advocated provocative ideas like sending the children of welfare families to orphanages.
in a tense confrontation between the democratic president and the republican congress the federal government actually had to shut down for several days at the end of 1995 until a budget package was agreed upon.
these outlandishly partisan antics bred a backlash that helped president clinton rebound from his political neardeath experience.
as the 1996 election approached the republicans chose kansas senator robert dole as their presidential candidate.
a decorated world war ii veteran dole ran a listless campaign.
clinton buoyed by a healthy economy and by his artful trimming to the conser vative wind breezed to an easy victory with 47 401 898 popular votes to doles 39 198 482 see map 41 2.
the reform partys egomaniacal leader ross perot ran a sorry third picking up less than half the votes he had wa mt or id nv ca nd wy sd co wi ia ne ut az mn ks ok nm il la tx mi in mo oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 12 ri pa nj ct 4 15 8 ga sc de md dc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote clinton democrat 70 4 47 401 054 49 2 dole republican 29 6 39 197 350 40 7 0 0 8 085 285 8 4 perot independent popular vote map 41 2 presidential election of 1996 with electoral vote by state the solid south once a safe democratic stronghold had by centurys end largely become republican territory.
interactive map garnered in 1992.
clinton won 379 electoral votes dole only 159.
but republicans remained in control of congress.
clinton again as clinton began his second term the rst democratic president since franklin delano roosevelt to be reelected the heady promises of far reaching reform with which he had entered the white house four years earlier were no longer heard.
still facing republican majorities in both houses of congress he proposed only modest legislative goals even though soaring tax revenues generated by the prosperous economy produced in 1998 a balanced federal budget for the rst time in three decades.
clinton cleverly managed to put republicans on the defensive by claiming the political middle ground.
he now warmly embraced the landmark welfare reform bill of 1996 that he had initially been slow to endorse.
juggling the political hot potato of af rmative action clinton pledged to mend it not end it when voters in cal i fornia in 1996 approved proposition 209 prohibiting af rmative action preferences in government and higher education the number of minority post cold war foreign policies protesting nafta 1993 these members of the teamsters union feared that the adoption of the north american free trade agreement would mean the replacement of high paying american jobs with low wage nonunion mexican labor.
more than a decade later the treaty still rankled.
policymakers disagreed about whether nafta had been damaging to american workers.
in the 2008 election the republicans endorsed it while the democrats attacked it.
students in the states public universities temporarily plummeted.
a federal appeals court decision hopwood v texas had a similar effect in texas.
clinton criticized these broad assaults on af rmative action but stopped short of trying to reverse them aware that public support for afrmative action especially among white americans had diminished since the 1970s.
clintons major political advantage continued to be the roaring economy which by 2000 had sustained the longest period of growth in american history driven by new internet dot com businesses and other high tech and media companies.
while unemployment crept down to 4 percent and businesses scrambled madly for workers inationary pressure remained remarkably low.
prosperity did not make clinton immune to controversy over trade policy.
during his rst term he had displayed political courage by supporting the north american free trade agreement nafta creating in 1993 a free trade zone encompassing mexico canada and the united states.
in doing so he reversed his own stand in the 1992 election campaign and bucked the opposition of protectionists in his own party especially labor leaders fearful of losing jobs to lowwage mexican workers.
clinton took another step in 1994 toward a global free trade system when he vigorously promoted the creation of the world trade organization wto the successor to the general agreement on tariffs and trade gatt and a cherished goal of free trade advocates since the end of the second world war.
simmering discontent over trade policy boiled over in 1999 when clinton hosted the meeting of the wto in seattle.
the citys streets lled with protesters railing against what they viewed as the human and environmental costs of economic globalization trade talks zzled in seattle with clinton taking a hefty share of the blame.
money spurred controversy of another sort in the late 1990s.
campaign nance reform long smoldering as a potential issue suddenly ared up after the 1996 presidential contest.
congressional investigators revealed that the clinton campaign had received funds from many improper sources including contributors who paid to stay overnight in the white house and foreigners who were legally prohibited from giving to american candidates.
but republicans and democrats alike had reason to avoid reform.
both parties had grown dependent on vast sums to nance television ads for their candidates.
clinton did little more than pay lip ser vice to the cause of campaign nance reform.
but within the ranks of both parties a few mavericks proposed to eliminate the corrupting inuence of big donors.
senator john mccain from arizona made campaign nance reform a centerpiece of his failed 2000 campaign for the republican presidential nomination and ultimately succeeded in passing the mccain feingold act of 2002 that more strictly regulated how money owed to candidates.
problems abroad the end of the cold war dismantled the framework within which the united states had conducted foreign policy for nearly half a century.
clinton groped for a diplomatic formula to replace anticommunism as the basic premise of american diplomacy.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 absorbed by domestic issues president clinton at rst seemed uncertain and even amateurish in his conduct of foreign policy.
he followed his predecessors lead in dispatching american troops as part of a peacekeeping mission to somalia and reinforced the u s contingent after somali rebels killed more than a dozen americans in late 1993.
but in march 1994 the president quietly withdrew the american units without having accomplished any clearly de ned goal.
burned in somalia washington stood on the sidelines in 1994 when catastrophic ethnic violence in the central african country of rwanda resulted in the deaths of half a million people.
clinton also struggled to de ne a policy with respect to china which was rapidly emerging as an economic and political powerhouse.
candidate clinton had denounced george bush in 1992 for not imposing economic sanctions on china as punishment for beijings wretched record of human rights abuses.
but president clinton learned what bush had long known chinas economic importance to the united states did not permit washington the luxury of taking the high road on human rights.
clinton soon soft pedaled his criticism of the beijing regime and instead began seeking improved trade relations with that robustly industrializing country and potential market bonanza.
by 2000 clinton was crusading for a controversial china trade bill.
congress passed it in may 2000 making the asian giant a full edged trading partner of the united states.
clintons approach to the tormented balkans in southeastern europe showed a similar initial hesitation followed eventually by rm leadership.
in the former yugoslavia as vicious ethnic con ict raged through bosnia the washington government dithered until nally deciding to commit american troops to a nato peacekeeping contingent in late 1995.
deadlines for removing the troops were postponed and then intifada against israeli control 1994 beginning in 1987 palestinians living in the israeli controlled territories of the west bank and gaza rose up in protest.
as the stalemate dragged on the likelihood of middle east peace receded despite repeated international diplomatic efforts to reach a settlement.
these young palestinians in east jerusalem wave palestine liberation organization plo ags outlawed by israel.
the impeachment of clinton nally abandoned altogether as it became clear that they were the only force capable of preventing new hostilities.
natos expansion to include the new member states of poland hungary and the czech republic in 1997 and its continuing presence in bosnia failed to pacify the balkans completely.
when serbian president slobodan milosevic in 1999 unleashed a new round of ethnic cleansing in the region this time against ethnic albanians in the province of kosovo u s led nato forces launched an air war against serbia.
the bombing campaign initially failed to stop ethnic terror as refugees ooded into neighboring countries but it eventually forced milosevic to accept a nato peacekeeping force on the ground in kosovo.
milosevic was arrested in 2001 and put on trial before the international criminal court in the hague where he died in 2006 before the trial was completed.
the middle east remained a major focus of american diplomacy right up to the end of clintons tenure.
in 1993 clinton presided over a historic meeting at the white house between israeli premier yitzhak rabin and palestine liberation organization plo leader yasir arafat.
they agreed in principle on selfrule for the palestinians within israel.
but hopes ickered two years later when rabin fell to an assassins bullet.
clinton and his second term secretary of state madeleine albright spent the rest of the 1990s struggling in vain to broker the permanent settlement that continued to elude israelis and palestinians.
arafat died in 2004 with his dream of creating a palestinian state still unrealized.
in his nal year as president clinton stepped up his efforts to leave a legacy as an international peacemaker.
along with his work in the middle east he sought to bring peace to northern ireland and the korean peninsula and he traveled to india and pakistan in hopes of reducing the rivalry between the two nuclear powers of southern asia.
but the guiding principles of american foreign policy in the post cold war era remained ill de ned and elusive scandal and impeachment scandal had dogged bill clinton from the beginning of his presidency.
critics brought charges of every thing from philandering to illegal nancial transactions.
allegations of corruption stemming from a real estate deal called whitewater while he was governor of arkansas triggered an investigation by a special prosecutor but no indictment ever materialized.
all the previous scandals were overshadowed by the revelation in january 1998 that clinton had engaged in a sexual affair with a young white house intern monica lewinsky and then blatantly lied about it when testifying under oath in another womans civil suit accusing him of sexual harassment.
caught in his bold lie the president made a humiliating confession but his political opponents smelled blood in the water.
in september 1998 the special prosecutor investigating whitewater who had broad powers to investigate any evidence of presidential malfeasance presented a stinging report including lurid sexual details to the republican controlled house of representatives.
that report presented eleven possible grounds for impeachment all related to lying about the lewinsky affair.
the house quickly cranked up the rusty machinery of impeachment.
as an acrid partisan at mosphere enveloped the capitol house republicans in december 1998 passed two articles of impeachment against the president perjury before a grand jury and obstruction of justice.
crying foul the democratic minority charged that however deplorable clintons personal misconduct sexual transgressions did not rise to the level of high crimes and misdemeanors prescribed in the constitution see art.
iv in the appendix.
the house republican managers prosecutors of impeachment for the senate trial replied that perjury and obstruction were grave public issues and that nothing less than the rule of law was at stake.
as cries of honor the constitution and sexual mccarthyism lled the air the nation debated whether the presidents peccadilloes amounted to high crimes or low follies.
most americans apparently leaned toward the latter view.
in the 1998 midterm elections voters reduced the house republicans majority causing ery house speaker newt gingrich to resign his post.
although americans held a low opinion of clintons slipshod personal morals most liked the presidents political and economic policies and wanted him to stay in ofce.
in early 1999 for the rst time in 130 years the nation witnessed an impeachment proceeding in the u s senate.
dusting off ancient precedents from andrew johnsons trial the one hundred senators solemnly heard arguments and evidence in the case with chief justice william rehnquist presiding.
with the facts widely known and the two parties political positions rmly locked in the trials outcome was a foregone conclusion.
on the key obstruction of justice charge ve northeastern republicans joined all fortyve democratic senators in voting not guilty.
the fty chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 the legacy of impeachment time magazines cartoonist asked how future generations would judge the clinton impeachment episode and how it might be treated in history textbooks.
republican votes for conviction fell far short of the constitutionally required two thirds majority.
the vote on the perjury charge was forty ve guilty fty ve not guilty.
clintons legacy and the 2000 election beyond the obvious stain of impeachment clintons legacy was mixed.
his sound economic policies encouraged growth and trade in a rapidly globalizing post cold war world.
yet as a new democrat and avowed centrist clinton did more to consolidate than to reverse the reagan bush revolution against new deal liberalism that had for half a century provided the compass for the democratic party and the nation.
further by setting such a low standard in his personal conduct he replenished the sad reservoir of public cynicism about politics that vietnam and watergate had created a generation before.
nonetheless as the end of the clinton term and the beginning of the new millennium approached the democrats stayed on their political course and nom the controversial election of 2000 counting chads with bush and gore neckand neck in floridas presidential vote count election ofcials in broward county examined by eye paper ballots disqualied by machine because the punched chads had not fully separated from the ballots.
they hoped that close scrutiny would reveal the voters intentions.
inated loyal vice president albert gore for president.
gore faced the tricky challenge of linking himself to clinton era peace and prosperity while at the same time distancing himself from his bosss personal foibles.
he chose as his running mate connecticut senator joseph lieberman an outspoken clinton critic and the rst jew nominated to a major national ticket.
their republican challenger george w bush won the nomination on the strength of his fathers name and his years as governor of texas.
bush surrounded himself with washington insiders including vice presidential nominee richard cheney and in a clear jab at clinton promised to restore dignity to the white house rosy estimates that the federal budget would produce a surplus of some 2 trillion in the coming decade set the stage for the presidential contest.
echoing the republican creed of smaller government bush argued for returning the budget surplus to the people through massive tax cuts and for promoting privatesector programs such as school vouchers and a reliance on faith based institutions to help the poor.
gore proposed smaller tax cuts targeted at middleand lower class people and strengthening social security.
in an era of peace foreign policy gured hardly at all in the campaign although bush struck a moderate note when he urged that america should act like a humble nation pollsters predicted a close election but none foresaw the epochal cliffhanger that the election would become.
on election day the country split nearly evenly between the two candidates and it was soon clear that floridas electoral votes would determine the winner.
television news programs announced that bush had won the sunshine state and al gore called the texas governor to concede defeat.
yet just an hour later gores camp decided that florida was too close to call and the vice president in perhaps the most awkward phone call in modern politics retracted his concession.
what ensued was a ve week political standoff over how to count the votes in florida.
democrats argued that some ballots were confusing or had been misread by machines and asked for recounts by hand in several counties.
republicans claimed that such recounts would amount to changing the rules in the middle of the game and thus thwart the rule of law.
after weeks of legal bickering with the presidency in the balance the supreme court nally intervened.
by a ve to four vote along partisan lines the court reasoned that since neither floridas legislature nor its courts had established a uniform standard for evaluating disputed ballots the hand counts amounted to an unconstitutional breach of the fourteenth amendments equal protection clause.
that ruling gave bush the white house but cast a dark shadow of illegitimacy over his presidency.
bush ofcially won florida by 537 votes out of 6 million cast and he squeaked by in the electoral college 271 to 266 see maps 41 3 and 41 4.
the national popular vote went decisively to gore 50 999 897 to 50 456 002.
for the rst time since 1888 a candidate won the white house with fewer popular votes than his opponent.
calls to abolish the electoral college however were few and muted see art.
v of the constitution.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 map 41 3 presidential election of 2000 with electoral vote by state although democrat albert gore won the popular election by half a million votes george w bushs contested 537 vote advantage in florida gave him a slight lead in the electoral college.
the 2 7 million popular votes won by green party candidate and consumer activist ralph nader almost surely deprived gore of victory casting nader in the role of spoiler.
bushs failure to win the popular vote inspired critics to protest at his inauguration with placards reading hail to the thief wa mt or id nv mn sd wy co az wi ia ne ut ca map 41 4 america in red and blue this map showing the vote by county in the hotly contested 2000 presidential election vividly illustrates the geography of modern americas political divisions.
democratic candidate albert gore won a popular majority by carrying just 676 mostly urban counties heavily populated by union members minorities and prosperous educated white collar workers.
republican george w bush won the election by taking 2 477 mostly rural counties where feelings about social issues such as abortion and gun control ran high and shaped solid conservative constituencies.
source adapted from vns graphic by stanford kay newsweek.
nd il ks nm mi in mo ok oh wv ky ms la al va nc tn ar tx me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 12 ri pa nj ct 4 15 8 ga sc de md dc 2 fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote bush republican 50 4 50 456 169 47 88 gore democrat 49 4 50 996 116 48 39 0 0 2 783 728 2 72 nader green popular vote one elector from the district of columbia abstained.
interactive map wash me.
ore vt n h minn idaho n y wisc.
conn mich wyo.
nev ohio ill utah colo calif md.
w va kansas r i pa mo.
va n j del.
d c ky n c tenn okla ariz n mex.
s c ala miss.
texas ga la.
fla alaska gore democrat bush republican hawai i tie results not available alaska does not have county boundaries.
the boundaries shown are election areas.
interactive map george w bush as president bush begins as the son of the forty rst president george w bush 43 became the rst presidential offspring since john quincy adams to reach the white house.
raised largely in texas the younger bush publicly distanced himself from his familys privileged new eng land heritage and affected the chummy manner of a selfmade good ol boy though he held degrees from yale and harvard.
his adversaries sniped that he had been born on third base and claimed to have hit a triple.
he promised to bring to washington the conciliatory skills he had honed as the republican governor of texas where he had worked well with the democratic majority in the states legislature.
but as president bush soon proved to be more of a divider than a uniter less a compassionate conservative than a crusading ideologue.
religious traditionalists cheered but liberals jeered when he withdrew american support from international health programs that sanctioned abortion advocated federally nanced faith based social welfare initiatives and sharply limited government sponsored research on embryonic stem cells which many scientists believed held the key to conquering diseases such as parkinsons and alzheimers.
he pleased corporate chief tains but angered environmentalists by challenging scientic ndings on groundwater contamination and global warming repudiating the kyoto treaty limiting greenhouse gas emissions negotiated by the clinton administration but never ratied by the senate advocating new oil exploration in the arctic national wildlife refuge on alaskas ecologically fragile north coast and allowing vice president cheney to hammer out his administrations energy policy in behindclosed doors meetings with representatives of several giant oil companies.
even many scal conser vatives thought him reckless when he pressed ahead with a whopping 1 3 trillion tax cut.
together with a softening economy and the increasing costs of war in iraq the tax cut turned the federal budget surpluses of the late 1990s into yawning decits reaching more than 400 billion in 2004 see figure 41 1.
terrorism comes to america on september 11 2001 the long era of americas impregnable national security violently ended.
on a balmy late summer morning suicidal terrorists slammed two hijacked airliners loaded with passengers and jet fuel into the twin towers of new york citys world trade center.
they ew a third plane into the military billions of dollars surpluses 100 200 162 deficits 300 248 290 318 400 375 413 500 1993 1994 1995 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 figure 41 1 decits into surpluses and back again in 1998 the u s budget decit became a surplus for the rst time in decades.
but by 2002 the government was back in decit due to president bushs tax cuts a weak economy and mushrooming defense spending on the iraq war.
source ofce of management and budget historical table budget of the united states government fiscal year 2008.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 the toll of terror grief overcame this exhausted reghter during the search for survivors in the wreckage of new york citys world trade center.
nerve center of the pentagon near washington d c kill ing 189 people.
heroic passengers forced another hijacked aircraft to crash in rural pennsylvania killing all 44 aboard but depriving the terrorists of a fourth weapon of mass destruction.
as the two giant new york skyscrapers thunderously collapsed some three thousand innocent victims perished including people of many races and faiths from more than sixty countries as well as hundreds of new yorks policeand re department rescue workers.
a stunned nation blossomed with ags as grieving and outraged americans struggled to express their sorrow and solidarity in the face of the catastrophic terrorism of 9 11.
president bush responded with a sober and stirring address to congress nine days later.
his solemn demeanor and the gravity of the situation helped to dissipate the cloud of illegitimacy that had shadowed his presidency since the disputed election of 2000.
while emphasizing his respect for the islamic religion and muslim people he identied the principal enemy as osama bin laden head of a shadowy terrorist network known as al qaeda the base in arabic.
a wealthy extremist exiled from his native saudi arabia bin laden was associated with earlier attacks on american embassies in east africa and on the uss cole in yemen.
he had taken refuge in landlocked afghanistan ruled by islamic fundamentalists called the taliban.
ironically the united states had indirectly helped bring the taliban to power by supporting religious rebels resisting the soviet invasion of afghanistan in the 1980s.
bin laden was known to harbor venomous resentment toward the united states for its growing military presence in the middle east especially on the sacred soil of the arabian peninsula and its unyielding support for israel in the face of intensifying palestinian nationalism.
bin laden also fed on worldwide resentment of americas enormous economic military and cultural power.
ironically americas most conspicuous strengths had made it a conspicuous target.
when the taliban refused to hand over bin laden bush ordered a massive military campaign against afghanistan.
within three months american and afghan rebel forces had overthrown the taliban but failed to nd bin laden and americans continued to live in fear of future attacks.
confronted with this unconventional diffuse menace antiterrorism experts called for new tactics of asymmetrical warfare employing not just traditional military muscle but also innovative intelligence gathering economic reprisals in ltration of suspected orga ni zations and even assassinations.
the terrorists blows diabolically coincided with the onset of a recession.
the already gathering economic downturn worsened as edgy americans shunned air travel and the tourist industry withered.
then while the rubble in new york was still smoldering a handful of americans died after receiving letters contaminated with the deadly respiratory disease anthrax.
the perpetrators of the anthrax attacks remained unknown but the gnawing fear spread that biological warfare might be the next threat facing the american people.
in this anxious at mosphere congress in october 2001 rammed through the usa patriot act.
the act the acts ofcial name is uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism.
fighting back against terrorism the attacks seen around the world the attacks of september 11 2001 became events of international not just american signicance as revealed in the newspapers on display in soa bulgaria.
permitted extensive telephone and e mail surveillance and authorized the detention and deportation of immigrants suspected of terrorism.
just over a year later congress created the new cabinet level department of homeland security to protect the nations borders and ferret out potential attackers.
the justice department meanwhile rounded up hundreds of immigrants and held them without habeas corpus formal charges in an open court.
the bush administration further called for trying suspected terrorists before military tribunals where the usual rules of evidence and procedure did not apply.
as hundreds of taliban ghters captured in afghanistan languished in legal limbo and demoralizing isolation in the guantnamo detention camp on the american military base at guantnamo cuba public opinion polls showed americans sharply divided on whether the terrorist threat fully warranted such drastic encroachments on americas venerable tradition of protecting civil liberties.
catastrophic terrorism posed an unprecedented challenge to the united states.
the events of that murderous september morning reanimated american patriotism but they also brought a long chapter in american history to a dramatic climax.
all but unique among modern peoples americans for nearly two centuries had been spared from foreign attack on their homeland.
that unusual degree of virtually cost free liberty or death critics of the usa patriot act feared the extinction of cherished civil liberties including the right to protest against the governments policies.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 national security had undergirded the values of openness and individual freedom that de ned the distinctive character of american society.
now american security and american liberty alike were dangerously imperiled.
bush takes the offensive against iraq on only its second day in ofce the bush administration warned that it would not tolerate iraqs continued deance of united nations weapons inspections mandated after iraqs defeat in the 1991 persian gulf war.
iraqi dictator saddam hussein had played hideand seek with the inspectors for years.
in 1998 he had expelled both the u n.
monitoring verication and inspection commission unmovic and the international atomic energy agency iaea inducing president clinton with congressional approval to declare that saddams removal regime change was an ofcial goal of u s policy.
but no sustained military action against iraq had followed.
now in the context of the new terrorist threat the bush administration focused on iraq with a vengeance.
in january 2002 just weeks after the september 11 attacks bush claimed that iraq along with iran and north korea constituted an axis of evil that gravely menaced american security.
iran and north korea were both known to be pursuing nuclear weapons programs and iran had long supported terrorist operations in the middle east.
but iraqi tyrant saddam hussein defeated but not destroyed by bushs father in 1991 became the principal object of the new presidents wrath.
the elder bush had carefully assembled a broad international coalition to ght the 1991 persian gulf war.
he had also spoken so often of prudence that late night television comedians had mocked him for it.
in contrast his son was brashly determined to break with long standing american traditions and wage a preemptive war against iraq and to go it alone if necessary.
the younger bush thus cast off his appeal for america to be a humble nation and stood revealed as a plunger a daring risk taker willing to embrace bold dramatic policies foreign as well as scal.
in that spirit bush began laying plans for a war against iraq while somewhat halfheartedly pursuing diplomatic initiatives to avoid war.
itching for a ght and egged on by hawkish vice president cheney and other neoconser vative advis ers bush accused the iraqi regime of all manner of wrongdoing oppressing its own people frustrating the weapons inspectors developing nuclear chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction referred to as wmd and supporting terrorist orga ni zations like al qaeda.
perhaps most controversially he also suggested that a liberated democratized iraq might provide a beacon of hope to the islamic world and thereby begin to improve the political equation in the volatile middle east.
to skeptical observers including americas usually reliable european allies the very multiplicity of bushs reasons for war cast doubt on his case and his ambition to create a democracy in long suffering iraq seemed hopelessly utopian.
secretary of state colin powell urged caution warning about the long term consequences for the united states of invading and occupying an unstable religiously and culturally divided nation of 25 million people.
you break it you own it he told the president.
in his 2002 state of the union address president george w bush b.
1946 declared iraq continues to aunt its hostility toward america and to support terror.
the iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax and nerve gas and nuclear weapons for over a decade.
this is a regime that has already used poison gas to murder thousands of its own citizens leaving the bodies of mothers huddled over their dead children.
this is a regime that agreed to international inspections then kicked out the inspectors.
this is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world.
states like these and their terrorist allies constitute an axis of evil arming to threaten the peace of the world.
by seeking weapons of mass destruction these regimes pose a grave and growing danger.
they could provide these arms to terrorists giving them the means to match their hatred.
they could attack our allies or attempt to blackmail the united states.
in any of these cases the price of indifference would be catastrophic.
the war in iraq 40e 45e turkey shia arab shia arab sunni arab sunni arab sunni arab sunni kurd mosul sunni kurd kirkuk 35n tikrit syria iran samarra haditha baquba ramadi fallujah baghdad igr is r.
t map 41 5 iraq in transition carved out of the old ottoman empire after world war i iraq has long been a combustible compound of rivalrous ethnic and religious groups.
saddam husseins dictatorial regime imposed a brutal peace on the country for twenty four years following his ascent to power in 1979 but after the american invasion in 2003 old feuds resumed exacerbated by stinging resentment against the occupying forces.
iraq kut karbala jordan n najaf eup saudi arabia hrates nasiriya r basra path of u s coalition forces march april 2003 sunni triangle oil field site of major clash with iraqi insurgents 30n 100 km.
kuwait 100 mi.
persian gulf interactive map heavy majorities in both houses of congress nevertheless passed a resolution in october 2002 authorizing the president to employ armed force to defend against iraqi threats to americas national security and to enforce united nations resolutions regarding iraq.
a month later the u n security council voted unanimously to give iraq a nal opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations there followed a months long cat and mouse game.
u n weapons inspectors returned to iraq.
saddam once again harassed and blocked them.
no weapons of mass destruction were found.
the inspectors asked for more time.
the united nations declined to authorize the use of force to compel compliance.
in this tense and confusing at mosphere bush with britain his only major ally launched the longanticipated invasion of iraq on march 19 2003.
saddam husseins vaunted military machine collapsed almost immediately.
in less than a month baghdad had fallen and saddam had been driven from power and hounded into hiding.
he was found and arrested ethnic and religious groups by percent of total population c 25 000 000 other 3 sunni kurd 17 sunni arab 20 shia arab 60 some nine months later and executed in 2006.
from the deck of a u s aircraft carrier off the cal i fornia coast speaking beneath a banner declaring mission accomplished bush triumphantly announced on may 1 2003 that major combat operations in iraq have ended see map 41 5.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 owning iraq president bushs words quickly came back to haunt him and americas forces in iraq.
neoconser vative pundits in washington had predicted that american soldiers would be greeted as liberators and that saddams ouster would lead to owering democracy across the middle east.
in reality post saddam iraq quickly devolved into a seething cauldron of violence.
the countrys largest ethnic groups sunni and shia muslims clashed violently especially in the capital city of baghdad.
both groups attacked american forces who after their leaders disbanded the iraqi army were left to secure the country single handedly.
a locally grown insurgency quickly spread and occupying iraq be came ever more perilous for american troops.
hatred for americans only worsened with revelations in april 2004 that iraqi prisoners in baghdads abu ghraib prison had been tortured and humiliated by their american captors.
amid this chaos jihadist terrorists from around the region ooded into iraq and established strong positions there often fueling the intrairaqi con icts to further their own radical islamist vision.
although al qaeda had had no link to iraq under saddam as bush had falsely alleged the organization certainly moved in afterward.
these three battles shia sunni ethnic violence counter occupation insurgency and jihadist terrorism created a ceaseless cycle of bloodshed in which american soldiers found themselves increasingly bogged down.
by the end of 2006 more americans had died in iraq than in the at on the fiery ground in basra iraq 2004 these british soldiers are running from a gasoline bomb detonated during a protest by iraqi job seekers who claimed that they had been promised employment in the security services.
the british who had invaded iraq alongside the united states oversaw the southern iraq city of basra a role that proved so unpopular with british voters that prime minister tony blair was eventually forced to resign.
a divided nation in his 1998 book a world transformed former president george h w bush b.
1924 explained his rationale for not driving saddam hussein from power during the 1991 persian gulf war.
his words made sobering reading in the context of his sons subsequent invasion of iraq trying to eliminate saddam.
would have incurred incalculable human and political costs.
the coalition would instantly have collapsed the arabs deserting it in anger and other allies pulling out as well.
under the circumstances there was no viable exit strategy we could see violating another of our principles.
furthermore we had been self consciously trying to set a pattern for handling aggression in the post cold war world.
going in and occupying iraq thus unilaterally exceeding the united nations mandate would have destroyed the precedent of international response to aggression that we hoped to establish.
tacks of september 11.
see thinking globally america through foreign eyes hyperpower or hapless power pp.
the political situation in the war torn country took shape unevenly on shaky ground.
in the summer of 2004 the american military ceded political power and limited sovereignty to an interim iraqi government.
national elections followed in early 2005 and millions of iraqis voted for a national assembly to draft a constitution.
after a referendum vote on the constitution in october 2005 another round of elections chose parliamentary representatives a prime minister and a president.
but under the seeming stability of iraqs new democratic government lay deep violent tensions.
sunni muslims the minority that had held power under saddam hussein one of their own feared reprisals and repressions under a majority shia government.
sunnis largely boycotted the rst election and tried unsuccessfully to block the ratication of the constitution.
unsuccessful at the ballot box many sunnis turned to bombings and political assassinations.
reelecting george w bush americans had rarely been as divided as they were in the rst years of the twenty rst century.
civil libertarians worried that the government was trampling on personal freedoms in the name of ghting terrorism.
revelations in 2002 about agrant corporate fraud at energy giant enron telecommunications titan worldcom and other prominent rms fed rampant popular disillusion with the business community.
cultural tensions brewed over the rights of gay and lesbian americans when leaders in san francisco and massachusetts permitted same sex couples to marry in 2004.
af rmative action continued to spark sharp debate as the supreme court permitted some preferential treatment in admitting minority undergraduate and law students to the university of michigan in 2003.
amid this division george w bush positioned himself to run for reelection.
he proclaimed that his tax cuts had spurred economic growth by giving citizens more control.
targeting what he called the soft bigotry of low expectations he championed the no child left behind act of 2002 which mandated sanctions against schools that failed to meet federal performance standards.
he played to cultural conser vatives in opposing stem cell research see page 1067 and called for a constitutional amendment to ban gay marriage.
but most of all he promoted himself as a stalwart leader in wartime warning the country not to change horses midstream after a bruising round of primary elections the embattled democrats chose lanky and long jawed massachusetts senator john kerry to represent their ticket.
a more old fashioned liberal than clinton kerry pushed progressive visions of government and counted on his vietnam war record to counter charges that he would be weak in the face of terrorism.
but that plan back red as kerry fell under attack for his very public opposition to vietnam once he had returned from battle in the early 1970s.
the republicans also had success painting the senator as a ip opper changing his policy positions to t opinion polls.
in spite of increased public misgivings about the war in iraq bush nailed down a decisive victory in november 2004.
he received the rst popular vote majority in more than a decade 60 639 281 to 57 355 978 and won clearly if by only one state this time ohio in the electoral college 286 to 252 see map 41 6.
this time his mandate was clear constitutional and uncontested.
thinking globally america through foreign eyes hyperpower or hapless power.
w hen the soviet union disintegrated in 1991 the cold war concluded at last.
so did an era in the history of american foreign policy and in the history of the international order.
for nearly half a century following world war ii the confrontation with the soviets had deeply shaped americans conception of themselves their national identity as well as their role and reputation in the wider world.
in the long twilight struggle against soviet communism they had accumulated unprecedented economic military and cultural might and had taken virtuous pride in themselves as the global champions of democracy justice and human rights.
now as the sole surviving superpower they faced no counterbalancing regime and apparently no check on their national ambitions.
the united states seemed to wield all but limitless power to mold the international environment as it wished.
not since the days of ancient rome did any people bestride the world so unopposed.
not everyone welcomed the emergence of this international colossus.
australians grumbled that the united states was a tall poppy that needed to be cut down to size.
french foreign minister hubert vdrine coined a new term when he described the united states in 1999 not merely as a superpower but as a hyperpower one that is dominant or predominant in all categories including not only the traditional domains of politics economics and the military but even including attitudes concepts languages and modes of life he called upon europeans to create an alternative to the american steamroller to work in favor of real multilateralism against unilateralism for balanced multipolarism against unipolarism for cultural diversity against uniformity in the parlance of international relations vdrine was promoting a balancing strategy to cope with u s power rather than the bandwagon strategy of simply submitting to american hegemony and making the most of it.
notably he was not proposing outright opposition.
as the last days of the twentieth century slipped through the hourglass american power surely looked formidable.
the united states was the worlds third most populous nation after china and india enjoyed the worlds largest economy more than three times larger than second ranked japan was the acknowledged global leader in high tech information and biomedical innovations and spent more on its armed forces than the rest of the world combined.
yet the realities of american power were somewhat less imposing.
uncle sam struggled to nd solid footing in the post cold war international arena.
torture at abu ghraib prison baghdad 2003 revelations that american soldiers had brutally tortured iraqi prisoners contributed to condemnation of the nations disregard for human rights and growing disquiet about americas unilateral policing of the world.
washington in the 1990s badly botched a peacekeeping mission in lawless somalia stood by helplessly as genocidal militias murdered about a million rwandans dithered over how to stabilize chaotic haiti fumbled indecisively as nationalist and sectarian violence convulsed the former balkan nation of yugoslavia found no effective response to terrorist attacks on new york citys world trade center the destroyer uss cole and american embassies in kenya and tanzania and notoriously failed to bring any conclusion to the decades old confrontation between israelis and palestinians who erupted in a bloody intifada rebellion against the jewish state in 2000.
the barbarous al qaeda assault that nally toppled the twin towers of the world trade center on september 11 2001 momentarily brought an outpouring of sympathy from an astonished and outraged world and also brought a dramatic shift in american foreign policy.
even le monde frances leading newspaper declared that in this dangerous hour nous sommes tous amricains we are all americans.
for the rst time in history the north atlantic treaty organization nato invoked the treatys article five conrming that an attack on one member was an attack on all members.
but such sentiments proved short lived.
when president george w bush in 2002 asserted a new right of preemptive war and then proceeded to invade iraq for what looked to many observers like the most dubious of reasons table 41 1 anti american sentiment swelled the world over.
in february 2002 some 10 million people in sixty countries demonstrated against the impending u s invasion of iraq.
exacerbated by washingtons rejection of the kyoto treaty dealing with global warming and by several american states continuing embrace of the death penalty which had largely disappeared in europe and elsewhere americas standing deteriorated even among its traditional allies and sank to rock bottom lows in islamic countries.
simmering resentment over the detention of hundreds of captured afghans at the u s military base in guantnamo cuba revelations about human rights abuses inicted by american troops on iraqi prisoners at baghdads abu ghraib prison and rendition by american agents of suspected terrorists to the notoriously cruel security ser vices of other countries further drained the depleted reservoirs of americas moral and political capital.
once a moral beacon and political inspiration to a suffering world the united states in the early twenty rst century had come to be regarded by millions of people the world over as a moral scourge and a political and military danger see table 41 1.
recapturing its stature as a legitimate world leader rebuilding its alliances restructuring the myriad multilateral institutions it had worked so hard to build in the cold war era and recapturing a sense of itself as a just and humane society were tasks that urgently confronted the republic as the century advanced.
world public opinion of the united states question do you have a very favorable somewhat favorable somewhat unfavorable or very unfavorable opinion of the united states.
percent favorable great britain france germany spain russia indonesia pakistan jordan turkey nigeria japan india china 83 75 58 55 56 source from pew global attitudes project no global warming alarm in the u s china americas image slips but allies share u s.
concerns over iran hamas 2006.
reprinted by permission of pew research center.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 image not available due to copyright restrictions vt 3 n h me.
12 idaho mont.
3 nev utah calif pa 21 ariz ill 21 n d 3 s d.
5 colo 9 ind.
11 ohio md.
10 d c 3 ky 8 okla w va 5 ark.
3 ore remove keyline before placing 1053641 m 41 06b iowa r i mich minn wash conn n y wisc.
va 13 tenn 11 n c 15 n m miss.
texas ala s c 8 ga 15 la.
9 bush republican kerry democrat fla 27 hawai i alaska each box represents one electoral vote in the 2004 election.
the election of 2004 bushs second term reelection george w bush announced gave him political capital which he intended to spend on an aggressive domestic agenda.
the appointment of two new conser vative supreme court justices upon the retirement of sandra day oconnor and the death of chief justice william rehnquist seemed to bode well for his ambitions.
but bush overplayed his hand.
attacking the core of new deal liberalism bush proposed a radical program to privatize much of social security providing incentives for younger americans to fund their own retirements through personal accounts.
a massive outcry led by the american association of retired persons aarp and other liberal groups reminded americans how much they loved social security warts and all.
bushs proposal faded away within six months of his reelection.
the same fate befell a proposed constitutional amendment to ban same sex marriage which had been a major values issue in the 2004 campaign.
the president also took aim at the contentious issue of immigration reform where he parted company with the conser vative wing of his party.
bush opposed arresting and deporting the nearly 12 million undocumented people in the united states as some nativists proposed.
at the same time he felt that simply nor malizing their status would reward them for entering the country illegally.
his compromise plan to establish a guest worker program and a path to citizenship for the undocumented ended up pleasing no one.
congress rejected it in the summer of 2007 and the issue was dead for the rest of bushs term see p 1095.
very second term president since the 1960s had seen scandal mar his later years in ofce.
nixon had watergate reagan had iran contra and clinton had lewinsky.
the bush white house was no exception but this time the accusations were political not personal.
bushs critics claimed that the presidents erce loyalty to his staff prevented him from recognizing incompetence and that he had unlawfully expanded the power of the presidency under the guise of protecting america in the war on terror in the fall of 2005 vice president dick cheneys chief of staff was convicted of perjury in an investigation into the source of a leak that had exposed the identity of an undercover cia agent as political retaliation against her antiwar husband.
in december of that year journalists discovered that the government was conducting illegal wiretap surveillance on american citizens inside the united states in violation of federal law.
in 2007 scandal engulfed the justice department over the ring for political reasons of eight u s attorneys.
perhaps the most tragic and avoidable of bushs missteps came in the botched response to the deadly hurricane katrina after the levees broke in new orleans august 2005 when ferocious hurricane katrina hammered the gulf coast it overtaxed a decient levee system and unleashed oodwaters into new orleans submerging 80 percent of the city and destroying more than a quartermillion of its homes.
many families unable or unwilling to ee the city sought refuge in the superdome where water food and other supplies were soon in very short supply.
experts predicted that it would be years before the city fully recovered if ever.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 the democrats win back control of congress 2006 house majority whip james clyburn of south carolina left speaker of the house nancy pelosi of california center and majority leader steny hoyer of maryland right raise their hands in victory after being selected to lead the democratic party in the house of representatives.
their party also won a majority in the senate in the 2006 midterm elections the rst time since 1994 that the democrats controlled both houses.
which devastated new orleans and much of the gulf coast in late august 2005 ooding 80 percent of the historic city and causing over 1 300 deaths and 150 billion in damages.
midterm elections of 2006 as charges of dictatorial power grabbing cronyism and incompetence mounted during bushs second term democrats campaigned hard against the president and his party in the midterm elections of 2006.
republicans fell victim to the same anti incumbency sentiment they had ridden to power twelve years earlier as democrats charged that a culture of corruption had taken hold in washington.
a series of highpro le arrests and resignations over lobbying graft illegal campaign nancing and sexual misconduct among republican legislators added fuel to the democrats re.
democrats narrowly regained control of both houses of congress for the rst time since the gingrich revolution of 1994 see p 1059.
new speaker of the house nancy pelosi the rst woman to hold that post promised a new era of reform openness and a check on the bush administration.
the biggest factor in the democratic sweep was the perceived mishandling of the war in iraq.
public approval of the presidents management of the war had declined steadily since early 2005 as the american death toll continued to rise.
prewar claims about wmd and iraqs connections to al qaeda and 9 11 had all proved false.
by late 2005 a majority of americans believed that the war had been a mistake.
even more felt that the bush administration particularly the defense department under secretary donald rumsfeld had badly mismanaged events on the ground.
rumsfeld resigned after the republicans thumping in the 2006 midterm elections.
but the quagmire continued.
the bush administration attempted to bridge it in early 2007 by sending a surge of twenty thousand new troops to iraq to battle insurgents.
though the surge appeared to bring a modest measure of stability to iraq as the 2008 election cycle got under way public opinion solidied against the war.
the major question was how the united states could extract itself while at the same time avoid leaving in its wake a genocidal civil war.
election of 2008 the election of 2008 was historic from the beginning.
george w bush had twice selected dick cheney as his running mate for his experience and lack of political ambition after leaving the vice presidency.
in his late sixties and with a history of heart problems cheney never had any intention of running for president himself.
with neither the sitting president nor vice president running the 2008 election was truly open for the rst time in 80 years.
the surge in iraq european disapproval of the iraq war 2007 the presidential election of 2008 with president bushs popularity ratings dropping to historic lows a large eld of democratic candidates dove into the primary campaign of 2008 smelling republican blood in the electoral waters.
the democratic race soon tightened into a ercely fought contest between the 46 year old rst term illinois senator barack obama and the pre campaign favorite former first lady and new york senator hillary rodham clinton.
the ensuing battle destined to catapult either a black man or a woman into the general election as a major party nominee for the rst time split the party but drew millions of new voters into the democratic primaries.
obama narrowly prevailed surviving clintons attacks on his inexperience.
son of a black kenyan father and a white mother from kansas obama appealed to both the crusading spirit of the civil rights era of old and the newer ethos of tolerance that came more easily to the young in twentieth rst century america.
he also capitalized on an army of smartly managed volunteers a record of early opposition to the war in iraq and an astonishing gift for eloquence that he used to advocate a post partisan politics appealing to voters weary of the divisive partisanship of the bush years.
to strengthen his national security credentials he picked foreign policy savvy delaware senator joseph biden as his running mate.
in keeping with the countrys anti bush mood republicans nominated longtime arizona senator john mccain aged 72 a self styled maverick with a record of supporting bipartisan legislation on such issues as normalizing relations with north vietnam campaign nance and immigration reform.
he had launched his political career as a vietnam war hero who had endured years of torture as a pow.
to rally the conservative and christian evangelical wing of his party quite and then there were two february 2008 eight candidates competed for the democratic nomination in primaries and caucuses beginning in january 2008.
by the time of this debate at the university of texas at austin in february only illinois senator barack obama and new york senator hillary clinton remained in the race.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 barack obama riding the publics discontent with president bushs republican administration illinois senator barack obama beat arizona senator john mccain in 2008 to become the rst african american to reach the white house.
cool to his candidacy mccain picked sarah palin as his running mate.
the former beauty queen small town mayor self proclaimed hockey mom and staunch abortion rights opponent had served only twenty one months as alaskas governor.
as mccain hoped she galvanized the right wing republican base.
but when interview gaffes exposed her weak grasp of the issues palin became fodder for late night television comedians and polls showed at least as much a liability as an asset to the republican ticket.
armed with an unprecedented war chest of nearly 700 million dollars mostly raised from small donors via the internet obama seized the advantage in both the air war television and the ground war his legions of volunteers.
his strong performance in televised debates also lent him an aura of gravitas some voters had doubted he had.
what appeared to bolster his chances most however was the worldwide economic meltdown in the nal six weeks of the campaign.
the american housing price bubble had begun to burst in 2006 which in turn led to a huge wave of mortgage defaults housing foreclosures and declines in a vast array of mortgage backed securities held by banks around the globe.
financial institutions from tokyo to new york to london found themselves with too much debt and too little capital to provide the everyday credit banks worldwide need to function.
by early october the credit markets froze stock values plummeted and householders watched helplessly as their savings shrunk.
economists of every stripe spoke of the gravest nancial crisis since the great depression.
in contrast to the 1929 crash it took days not years for a terried bush administration to intervene on a gi gantic scale.
the treasury department and federal reserve system nationalized the countries two biggest mortgage companies fannie mae and freddie mac and took over the worlds biggest insurance company aig.
wa mt or id nv ca nd wy co wi ia ne ut az mn sd il ks in mo ok nm mi ky la ms al pa wv va nc tn ar tx oh ga me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 12 ri nj ct 4 15 7 de md sc dc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote popular vote obama democrat 68 65 980 131 52 6 mccain republican 32 57 779 170 46 1 note preliminary results as of nov 11 2008 map 41 7 presidential election of 2008 a record voter turnout swelled by millions of young new voters african americans and latinos gave senator barack obama an electoral college landslide and the democratic party solid control of both houses of congress.
obama redrew the electoral map by taking nine states won by george w bush in 2004.
interactive map the surge in iraq treasury secretary henry paulson then persuaded congress to authorize a whopping 700 billion dollars to buy toxic mortgages and inject cash directly into the nations biggest banks.
suddenly even small government republicans spoke of the need to regulate the nancial sector.
this crisis presented the presidential candidates with a challenge and an opportunity.
obama criticized mccains plan to extend and even deepen the bush tax cuts as evidence that the mccain presidency would be a third bush term mccain countered that obamas proposed tax hikes on the wealthiest 5 percent of households and plans for big public investments in alternative energy and infrastructure repair were tantamount to socialism huge voter turnouts delivered a historic victory to barack obama who won 53 percent of the national popular vote.
by overtaking his rival in such traditional republican strongholds such as virginia nevada and colorado obama prevailed in the electoral college 364 to 175 see map 41 7.
democrats gained seats in the house and senate to enlarge the congressional majority they had won in 2006.
obamas election opened a new chapter in the history of countrys race relations.
it also presented the nations rst african american president the daunting challenge of governing a country struggling with wars in iraq and afghanistan and entering its roughest economic waters since the 1930s.
chronology clinton defeats bush and perot for presidency nafta signed republicans win majorities in both houses of congress welfare reform bill becomes law clinton defeats dole for presidency clinton lewinsky scandal u s and britain launch military strikes against iraq house of representatives impeaches clinton senate acquits clinton on impeachment charges kosovo crisis nato warfare with serbia protest in seattle against world trade organization million mom march against guns in washington d c u s normalizes trade relations with china george w bush wins presidency in electoral college albert gore takes popular vote terrorists attack new york city and washington d c on september 11 u s invades afghanistan congress passes usa patriot act energy trader enron collapses amid accounting scandals congress passes no child left behind act bush labels iraq iran and north korea axis of evil telecommunications giant worldcom declares bankruptcy congress authorizes use of force against iraq u n security council demands that iraq comply with weapons inspections republicans regain senate north korea withdraws from nuclear non proliferation treaty u s invades iraq bush signs drug prescription bill for seniors saddam hussein captured in iraq supreme court narrowly approves af rmative action gay marriage controversy erupts iraqi interim government installed bush defeats kerry for presidency iraq elects permanent government but quickly descends into sectarian con ict saddam hussein executed u s troop surge in iraq barack obama elected 44th president of the united states chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 key terms weapons of mass destruction wmd 1056 democratic leadership council 1057 oklahoma city bombing 1058 contract with america 1059 welfare reform bill 1060 north american free trade agreement nafta 1061 world trade organization wto 1061 mccain feingold act 1061 people to know whitewater 1063 lewinsky affair 1063 kyoto treaty 1067 9 11 1068 al qaeda 1068 usa patriot act 1068 department of homeland security 1069 guantnamo detention camp 1069 abu ghraib prison 1072 no child left behind act 1073 hurricane katrina 1077 william jefferson bill clinton h ross perot hillary rodham clinton newt gingrich robert dole john mccain sara palin monica lewinsky george w bush richard cheney john kerry nancy pelosi barack obama joseph r joe biden for further reference alan dershowitz supreme injustice how the high court hijacked election 2000 2001 elizabeth drew showdown the struggle between the gingrich congress and the clinton white house 1997 joe klein the natural 2002 richard posner an affair of state the investigation impeachment and trial of president clinton 1999 jack rakove the unnished election of 2000 2001 thomas ricks fiasco the american military adventure in iraq 2006 james stewart blood sport 1996 bob woodward bush at war 2002 plan of attack 2004 state of denial bush at war part iii 2006 the choice 1996 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the american people face a new century as our case is new so we must think anew and act anew.
we must disenthrall ourselves and then we shall save our country.
w ell beyond its two hundredth birthday as the twenty rst century began the united states was both an old and a new nation.
it boasted one of the longest uninterrupted traditions of democratic government of any country on earth.
indeed it had pioneered the techniques of mass democracy and was in that sense the oldest modern polity.
as one of the earliest countries to industrialize america had also dwelt in the modern economic era longer than most nations.
but the republic was in many ways still youthful as well.
innovation entrepreneurship and risk taking all characteristics of youth were honored national values.
the twenty rst century began much like the twentieth with american society continuing to be rejuvenated by fresh waves of immigrants full of energy and ambition.
the u s economy despite problems pulsated as a driv ing engine of world economic growth.
american inventions especially computer and communications technologies were transforming the face of global society.
consumers from lisbon to tokyo seemed to worship the icons of american culture downing soft drinks and donning blue jeans watching hollywood lms listening to rock or country music even adopting indigenous american sports like baseball and basketball.
in the realm of consumerism american products appeared to have coca colonized the globe.
the history of american society also seemed to have increased global signicance as the third millennium of the christian era opened.
americans were a pluralistic people who had struggled for centuries to provide opportunity and to achieve tolerance and justice for many different religious ethnic and racial groups.
their historical experience could offer valuable lessons to the rapidly internationalizing planetary society that was emerging at the dawn of the twenty rst century.
much history remained to be made as the country entered its third century of nationhood.
the great social experiment of american democracy was far from completed as the united states faced its future.
astonishing breakthroughs in science and technology this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 this will not stand foreign policy in the post cold war era on the evening of august 1 1990 george h w bush sat in a t shirt in the medical office in the basement of the white house.
bush was an avid golfer but his duties as president kept him from playing as much as he would have liked and when he did find time to squeeze in a round or some practice he tended to overdo things.
this summer day he had strained a shoulder muscle hitting practice balls and now he rested on the exam table while a therapist applied deep heat.
he planned a quiet evening and hoped the soreness would be gone by morning.
two unexpected visitors altered his plans.
brent scowcroft bushs national security adviser and richard haass the middle east expert of the national security council appeared at the door of the exam room.
bush had known scowcroft for years and the look on his face told him something was seriously amiss.
scowcrofts words confirmed the impression.
president it looks very bad scowcroft said.
iraq may be about to invade kuwait for months the bush administration had been monitoring a territorial and financial dispute between iraq and kuwait.
iraqi dictator saddam hussein was rattling the saber against the much smaller kuwait but saddam had rattled sabers before without actually using them.
the previous week saddam had spoken with the american ambassador in iraq april glaspie who came away from the meeting with the belief that his bellicose talk was chiefly for political effect.
the united states had indicated its displeasure with saddams threats and glaspie judged that he had gotten the message.
he does not want to further antagonize us she wrote to washington.
for this reason saddams decision to invade kuwait at the beginning of august caught the bush administration by surprise.
american intelligence agencies detected iraqs mobilization this was what brought scowcroft and haass to the white house on the evening of august 1.
haass suggested that the president call saddam and warn him not to go through with the attack.
but even as bush considered this suggestion scowcroft received a message from the state department that the american embassy in kuwait had reported shooting in downtown kuwait city.
so much for calling saddam bush said.
within hours the iraqi forces crushed all resistance in kuwait.
bush scowcroft and other american officials recognized that the iraqi takeover of kuwait constituted the first crisis of the post cold war era.
as lawrence eagleburger the deputy secretary of state asserted in president george bush confers with national security council adviser brent scowcroft left white house chief of staff john sununu center and vice president dan quayle right at the oval office on august 1 1990 following the iraqi invasion of kuwait.
source getty images time life pictures.
an emergency meeting of the national security council this is the first test of the postwar system.
as the bipolar world is relaxed it permits this giving people more flexibility because they are not worried about the involvement of the superpowers during the cold war a de facto division of labor had developed with the united states and the soviet union each generally keeping its clients and allies in line typically by threatening to withhold weapons or other assistance.
had the soviet union still been a superpower saddam a longtime recipient of soviet aid likely would have heeded moscows warnings to settle his dispute with kuwait peacefully.
but in 1990 the soviet system was disintegrating and the kremlins clients were on their own.
saddam hussein now has greater flexibility because the soviets are tangled up in domestic issues eagleburger explained.
the world was watching.
if he succeeds others may try the same thing it was this belief that shaped the bush administrations response to the crisis.
the president and his advisers understood that they were entering uncharted territory after the cold war.
as the sole remaining superpower the united states had the opportunity to employ its military and economic resources more freely than at any time in history.
but with that freedom came unprecedented responsibility.
during the cold war the united states could cite the threat of soviet retaliation as reason to avoid intervening in the affairs of other countries with that threat gone american leaders would have to weigh each prospective intervention on its own merits.
if one country attacked another should the united states defend the victim.
if the government of a country oppressed its own people should the united states move to stop the oppression.
these questions and the answers american presidents gave to them would define american foreign policy in the era after the cold war.
chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 ush sensed the importance of the united states responses and he responded accordingly.
he convened his principal deputies for a series of white house meetings.
the particular stakes with iraq and in the surrounding persian gulf were discussed at length.
the rest of the world badly needs oil defense secretary dick cheney observed restating the obvious.
saddams seizure of kuwait gave him control of a large part of the worlds oil supply but the real prize was saudi arabia.
saudi arabia and others will cut and run if we are weak cheney predicted.
bush consulted americas oldest allies.
britains margaret thatcher urged the president to oppose saddam most vigorously.
if iraq wins no small state is safe the prime minister declared.
she offered to help.
we must win this.
we cannot give in to dictators bush asked his generals what his military options were.
iraq is not ten feet tall but it is formidable norman schwarzkopf the u s commander for the middle east replied.
american air power could punish saddam and perhaps soften him up but ground forces in large numbers would be required to guarantee victory.
by august 5 bush had made up his mind.
as he exited the helicopter that brought him back from camp david to the white house from another high level meeting reporters crowded the south lawn.
what was he planning to do.
they asked.
im not going to discuss what were doing in terms of moving forces anything of that nature bush answered.
but i view it very seriously not just that but any threat to any other countries bush was no orator and these remarks were unscripted.
but one sentence summarized the policy that soon began to unfold this will not stand this aggression against kuwait b the first president bush what were the important issues in george h w bushs presidency and how were they handled.
elected on the strength of his association with ronald reagan george h w bush appeared poised to confirm the ascendancy of the conservative values reagan forced to the center stage of american life.
but events especially abroad distracted bush whose principal contribution proved to be in the area of foreign affairs.
bush brought the cold war to a peaceful and triumphant conclusion and he launched america toward the twenty first century an era when the united states faced new opportunities and new challenges.
republicans at home democrats approached the 1988 presidential election with high hopes having regained control of the senate in 1986 and not having to face the popular reagan.
but vice president george h w bush proved a stronger candidate than almost anyone had expected and in a contest that confirmed the republicans hold on the sunbelt he defeated massachusetts governor michael dukakis.
many people expected the policies of the bush administration to reflect the reputation of the new president bland and cautious lacking in vision but safely predictable.
at home he lived up or down to his reputation sponsoring few initiatives in education health care or environmental protection while continuing the reagan theme of limiting federal interference in the everyday lives of american citizens.
he vetoed family leave legislation declined to endorse meaningful health care reform and watered down civil rights proposals in congress.
the one exception was the americans with disabilities act ada passed by congress in 1991 which prohibited discrimination against the disabled in hiring transportation and public accommodations.
beginning in july 1992 ada called for all public buildings restaurants and stores to be made accessible to those with physical handicaps and required that businesses with twenty five or more workers hire new employees without regard to disability.
the election of 1988 candidate bush dukakis party republican democratic popular vote 48 886 097 41 809 074 electoral vote most of bushs time on domestic affairs was taken up with two pressing issues the possible meltdown of the savings and loan industry and the soaring federal budget deficit.
the thrift industry based on u s government insured deposits had fallen into deep trouble as a result of lax regulation and unwise and in some cases fraudulent loan policies.
after record losses of 13 4 billion in 1988 more than 250 savings and loan companies had been forced to close.
bush sought to stanch the bleeding by merging the weakest of the remaining thrifts with the stronger and by regulating the survivors more carefully.
congress consented and in august 1989 passed a bill to close or merge more than seven hundred ailing savings and loans and to restructure the federal regulatory system.
a new agency the resolution trust corporation took over properties on which developers had secured loans many times their actual value and it gradually sold them off at discount prices.
by the time the resolution trust corporation expired in 1992 the cost to the government had passed 150 billion the eventual bill for the savings and loan cleanup including interest was estimated between 500 and 700 billion.
the federal budget deficit posed an even greater challenge.
the deficits bush inherited from reagan topped 150 billion per year and conventional financial wisdom dictated that something be done to bring them down.
in campaigning for president bush had promised no new taxes but in the fall of 1990 he broke the pledge.
in a package deal negotiated with the leaders of congress he agreed to a budget that included new taxes along with substantial spending cuts especially on the military.
the resulting agreement projected a savings of 500 billion over five years half from reduced spending and half from new revenue generated mainly by increasing the top tax rate from 28 percent to 31 percent and raising the gasoline tax by 5 1 cents a gallon.
unfortunately for the president the budget deal coincided with the beginning of a slow but painful recession that ended the republican prosperity of the 1980s.
not only did bush face recriminations from voters for breaking a campaign pledge not to raise taxes but the economic decline led to greatly reduced government revenues.
as a result the deficit continued to soar rising from the first president bush 150 billion in fiscal year 1989 to just under 300 billion in 1992.
despite the 1990 budget agreement the national debt increased by more than 1 trillion during bushs presidency.
ending the cold war bush might have accomplished more in domestic affairs had not the international developments begun during the reagan years accelerated dramatically.
bush had been in office only months when the communist system of the cold war began falling apart.
in country after country communism gave way to democracy as the old order collapsed more quickly than anyone had expected.
an early attempt at anticommunist liberation proved tragically abortive.
in may 1989 students in china began a month long demonstration for democracy in beijings tiananmen square that attracted worldwide attention.
watching american television coverage of gorbachevs visit to china in mid may americans were fascinated to see the chinese students call for democracy with a hunger strike and a handcrafted replica of the statue of liberty.
but on the evening of june 4 the chinese leaders sent tanks and troops to tiananmen square to crush the student demonstration.
by the next day full scale repression swept over china several hundred view the closer look protesters were killed and thousands were injured.
chinese leaders imposed martial law to quell the dissent and shatter american hopes for a democratic china.
bush responded cautiously.
he wanted to preserve american influence with the chinese government.
hence despite official statements denouncing the crackdown bush sent national security adviser brent scowcroft on a secret mission to beijing to maintain a working relationship with the chinese leaders.
a far more promising trend toward freedom began in europe in mid 1989.
in june lech walesa and his solidarity movement came to power in free elections in poland.
soon the winds of change were sweeping over the former iron curtain countries.
a new regime in hungary opened its borders to the west in september allowing thousands of east german tourists in hungary to flee to freedom.
one by one the repressive governments of east germany czechoslovakia bulgaria and romania fell.
the most heartening scene of all took place in east germany in early november when the new communist leaders suddenly announced the opening of the berlin wall.
workers quickly demolished a 12 foot high section of this despised physical symbol of the cold war joyously singing a german version of for hes a jolly good fellow opening the wall berlin germans celebrate the destruction and fall of the berlin wall on november 9 1989.
the berlin wall had been a hated symbol of the cold war since its construction by the communist east german authorities in august of 1961.
chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 500 miles finland soviet union.
dissolved dec 1991 russia and 10 former soviet republics form commonwealth of independent states.
norway 500 kilometers sweden ltic denmark germany.
berlin wall breached nov 1989 east and west germany reunited oct 1990.
lithuania declares independence mar.
belarus poland.
solidarity party sweeps elections june 1989.
poland cze c rep h.
france au s t r switz.
moldova romania cro.
b h italy al.
vk sl hung.
corsica fr.
s pa i n czechoslovakia.
communist leadership ousted nov 1989 country divided into czech republic and slovakia jan 1 1993.
free election sweeps noncommunists into power apr.
russia ukraine germany belg.
por tug lith.
russia neth.
atlantic ocean latvia and estonia begin process of separation from soviet union apr.
latvia north sea ireland estonia sea united kingdom ba northern ireland yugo.
yugoslavia.
country disintegrates 1991 92 civil war begins in bosnia and herzegovina 1992.
sardinia it.
communist dictator ceausescu overthrown and executed dec 1989 salvation front led by dissident former communists wins elections may 1990.
bulgaria black sea bulgaria.
government pledges free elections and new constitution in 1990 free elections sweep non communists into power.
greece turkey albania.
free elections sweep non communists into power.
sicily medite rranean crete sea cyprus the end of the cold war free elections in poland in june 1989 triggered the domino effect in the fall of communism in eastern europe and the former soviet union.
changes in policy came quickly but the restructuring of social and economic institutions continues to take time.
most people realized it was mikhail gorbachev who was responsible for the liberation of eastern europe.
in late 1988 the soviet leader signaled the spread of his reforms to the soviet satellites by announcing that the brezhnev doctrine which called for soviet control of eastern europe was now replaced with the sinatra doctrine which meant that the people of this region could now do things their way it was gorbachevs refusal to use armed force to keep repressive regimes in power that permitted the long delayed liberation of the captive peoples of central and eastern europe.
yet by the end of 1991 both gorbachev and the soviet union had become victims of the demise of communism.
on august 19 1991 right wing plotters placed gorbachev under arrest.
boris yeltsin the newly elected president of the russian republic broke up the coup by mounting a tank in moscow and demanding gorbachevs release.
the red army rallied to yeltsins side.
the coup failed and gorbachev was released only to resign in december 1991 after the fifteen republics dissolved the soviet union.
russia by far the largest and most powerful of the former soviet republics took the lead in joining with ten others to form a loose alignment called the commonwealth of independent states cis.
yeltsin then disbanded the communist party and continued the reforms begun by gorbachev to establish democracy and a free market system in russia.
the bush administration although criticized for its cautious approach welcomed the demise of communism.
bush facilitated the reunification of germany and offered economic assistance to russia and the other members of the new cis.
on the critical issue of nuclear weapons bush and gorbachev in 1991 signed start i agreeing to reduce nuclear warheads to less than ten thousand apiece.
in late 1992 bush and yeltsin agreed on the terms of start ii which would eliminate land missiles with multiple warheads and reduce the number of nuclear weapons on each side to just over three thousand a level not seen since the mid 1960s.
the gulf war amid the disintegration of the soviet system iraq in august 1990 invaded kuwait.
although bush quickly concluded that saddam husseins aggression must be reversed actually removing iraq from kuwait took time and great effort.
the president started by persuading saudi arabia to accept a huge american troop buildup dubbed desert shield.
this american presence would prevent saddam from advancing beyond kuwait into saudi arabia it would also allow the united states to launch a ground attack against iraqi forces if and when the president determined such an attack was necessary.
while the american buildup took place bush arranged an international coalition to condemn the iraqi invasion and endorse economic sanctions against iraq.
not every member of the coalition subscribed to the new world order that bush said the liberation of kuwait would help establish but all concurred in the general principle of deterring international aggression.
essential to the success of bushs diplomatic offensive was the support of the the first president bush read the document george bush address to the nation on the persian gulf 1991 on the evening of january 16 1991 president george h w.
bush addresses the nation to discuss the launch of operation desert storm.
soviet union which during the cold war had regularly blocked american initiatives in the united nations.
soviet leaders may have been sincere in wishing to see saddam punished but they also hoped to receive american aid in restructuring their economy.
congress required somewhat more convincing.
many democrats supported economic sanctions against iraq but opposed the use of force.
yet as the troop buildup in the persian gulf proceeded as operation desert shield evolved into what would be called operation desert storm and as the sanctions failed to dislodge iraq from kuwait some of the skeptics gradually came around.
after securing un support for military action bush persuaded congress with just five votes to spare in the senate to approve the use of force to liberate kuwait.
on january 17 1991 the president unleashed a devastating aerial assault on iraq.
after knocking out the iraqi air defense network in a few hours f 117a stealth fighters and tomahawk cruise missiles hit key targets in baghdad.
the air attack virtually unchallenged by the iraqis wiped out command and control centers and enabled the bombers of the united states and its coalition partners chiefly britain to demoralize the beleaguered enemy troops.
after five weeks of this bush gave the order for the ground assault.
led by general schwarzkopf american and allied armored units swept across the desert in a great flanking operation while a combined force of u s marines and saudi troops drove directly into kuwait city.
in just one hundred hours the american led offensive liberated kuwait and sent saddam husseins vaunted republican guard fleeing back into iraq.
in a controversial decision president bush acting on the advice of general colin powell chairman of the joint chiefs halted the advance and agreed to an armistice with iraq.
critics claimed that with just a few more days of fighting perhaps even just a few more hours american forces could have encircled the republican guard and ended saddams cruel regime.
but the president fearful of disrupting the allied coalition and of having american troops mired down in a guerrilla war stopped when he had achieved his announced goal of liberating kuwait.
moreover he hoped that a chastened saddam would help balance the threat of iran in the volatile persian gulf region.
desert storm brought mixed blessings.
it was a great personal victory for george bush who saw his approval rating climb to chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 an unprecedented level nearly 90 percent higher than for even eisenhower and kennedy at the height of the cold war.
american military leaders believed they had finally atoned for vietnam a sentiment widely shared by a euphoric public.
the united states had deployed more than five hundred thousand troops as many as were in vietnam in 1968 and had lost just 146 lives in inflicting a stinging defeat on a dangerous bully.
moreover the price of oil which had climbed to nearly 40 a barrel in october fell back to less than 20 allowing americans to fill the gas tanks of their cars for just over 1 a gallon.
at the same time however saddam hussein continued to rule in baghdad persecuting kurds in northern iraq and shiite muslims in the south.
he survived several attempts on his life and tightened his grip on iraq frustrating u s efforts to uncover and destroy his suspected chemical biological and nuclear weapons facilities.
during the next dozen years many americans would conclude that if bush had completed the ouster of saddam in 1991 he would have spared the united states and the world a great deal of trouble.
the changing faces of america how did the american population shift and grow between 1990 and 2010.
from the mayflower to the covered wagon movement has always characterized the american people.
the final years of the twentieth century and the early years of the twenty first witnessed two significant shifts in the american population continued movement internally to the sunbelt region of the south and west and a remarkable influx of immigrants from developing nations.
these changes led to increased urbanization greater ethnic diversity and growing social unrest.
the increasing urbanization of america had positive and negative aspects.
people living in the large metropolitan areas were both more affluent and better educated than their rural counterparts.
family income among people living in the bigger cities and their suburbs ran 9 000 a year more and three fourths of the urban population had graduated from high school compared to two thirds of other americans.
a metropolitan american was twice as likely to be a college graduate as a rural resident.
yet these advantages were offset by higher urban crime rates longer commuting time in heavy traffic and higher living costs.
nevertheless the big cities and their suburbs continued to thrive accounting for 80 percent of all americans by 2000.
another striking population trend was the nationwide rise in the number of the elderly.
at the beginning of the twentieth century only 4 1 percent of the population was aged 65 or older by 2000 those over 65 made up more than 12 percent of the population with the nearly four million over 85 the fastest growing group of all.
census bureau projections suggest that by the year 2030 one out of every five americans will be over age 65.
six of every ten older americans were women and they tended to have a higher rate of chronic disease and to be worse off economically than men the same age.
many of the oldest old those over 85 lived in nursing homes and accounted for one third of all medicaid payments.
yet only 10 percent of the elderly lived below the poverty line and three fourths owned their own homes.
the annual cost of living increases in social security payments spared them the worst ravages of inflation.
most impressive of all was their political power two thirds of those over 65 voted regularly compared to just under half of the entire population.
with more than 30 million members the aarp formerly known as the american association of retired people proved very effective in washington in representing the interests of the elderly particularly in regard to medicare.
a people on the move by the 1990s a majority of americans lived in the sunbelt of the south and west.
best defined as a broad band running across the country below the 37th parallel from the carolinas to southern california the sunbelt had begun to flourish with the buildup of military bases and defense plants during world war ii.
rapid population growth continued with the stimulus of heavy cold war defense spending and accelerated in the 1970s when both new hightechnology firms and more established industries were attracted by lower labor costs and the favorable climate of the sunbelt states.
florida texas and california led the way each gaining more than two million new residents in the 1970s.
the flow continued at a slightly lower rate over the next two decades.
the northeast and the middle west continued losing people to the south and west and in 1994 texas surpassed new york as the nations second most populous state.
the 2000 census revealed that while all regions had gained population in the 1990s the south and west had expanded by nearly 20 percent compared to around 6 percent for the northeast and middle west.
phoenix was typical of the phenomenal growth of sunbelt cities adding a million residents in the 1990s to grow at a 45 percent rate.
phoenix is flat and its easy explained a geographer who saw no end in sight.
you stick a shovel in the ground and pour a slab and you have a house the revival of immigration the flow of immigrants into the united states reached record proportions in the 1990s as a result of the new policies adopted in 1965.
see the feature essay in chapter 30 unintended consequences the second great migration pp.
the number of arrivals continued to grow during the first decade of the new century with nearly 8 million immigrants reaching america between the beginning of 2000 and early 2005.
by 2005 a record high of 35 million foreign born persons lived in the united states constituting 12 percent of the total population.
the new wave of immigrants came mainly from latin america and asia.
by 2005 over half the foreign born population of the united states came from latin america about one quarter from asia and about one out of seven from europe.
the new immigrants tended to settle in urban areas in six states california texas new york florida illinois and new jersey.
in california the influx of immigrants from asia and mexico created growing pressure on public services especially during the recessions of the early 1990s and the early 2000s.
the arrival of so many immigrants was bound to lead to controversy over whether immigrants were a benefit or a liability to american society.
a study by the national academy of sciences in the changing faces of america 1997 reported that while government services used by immigrants schools welfare health clinics cost more initially than was collected from them in taxes in the long run immigrants and their families more than paid their way.
in regard to employment immigrants tended to help consumers and employers by working for relatively low wages in restaurants the textile industry and farming but they hurt low skilled u s workers notably high school dropouts and many african americans by keeping wages low.
economist george j borjas a refugee from cuba claimed that immigrants from developing countries lacked the education and job skills needed to achieve the level of prosperity attained by newcomers in the past instead of entering the mainstream of american life they were likely to remain a permanent underclass.
emerging hispanics people of hispanic origin became the nations largest ethnic group in 2002 surpassing african americans for the first time.
the rapidly growing hispanic population climbed to over 41 million by 2005 accounting for 14 percent of the nations population.
it doesnt surprise me commented the leader of the league of latin american citizens.
anybody that travels around.
can see latinos everywhere working everywhere trying to reach the american dream the census bureau identified four major hispanic groups mexican americans puerto ricans cuban americans and other hispanics including many from central america.
even though read the document most of the hispanic population was concentrated in cities such as new york los angeles san antonio and miami the 2000 census showed a surprising geographical spread.
hispanics made up 20 percent of the population in individual counties in states such as georgia iowa and minnesota.
the latinization of the country is not just happening in new york miami or l a observed a puerto rican leader.
its greatest impact is in the heartland in places like reading pennsylvania lorain ohio and lowell massachusetts the hispanic groups had several features in common.
all were relatively youthful with a median age of 22 and a high fertility rate.
they tended to be relatively poor with one fourth falling below the poverty line and to be employed in low paying positions as manual laborers domestic servants and migrant workers.
although the position of hispanics had improved considerably in the boom years of the 1980s and 1990s they still lagged behind mainstream america.
the poverty rate among hispanics was twice the national average and family median income in 2005 was 34 000 or roughly two thirds the level for whites.
lack of education was a key factor in preventing economic progress for hispanics.
fewer hispanics graduated from high school than other minorities and their school dropout rate was the nations highest at more than 50 percent.
hispanic leaders warned that these figures boded ill not just for their own group but for society as a whole.
you either educate us claimed a san antonio activist or you pay for building more jails or for more welfare illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 newly sworn in citizens of the united states wave u s flags during a naturalization ceremony in miami on april 28 2006.
days later more than one million immigrants participated in a nationwide boycott called a day without immigrants to protest the proposed tightening of u s immigration laws.
chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 the entry of several million illegal immigrants from mexico once derisively called wetbacks and now known as undocumented aliens created a substantial social problem for the nation and especially for the southwest.
critics charged that the flagrant violation of the nations border with mexico had led to a subculture beyond the boundaries of law and ordinary custom.
they argued that the aliens took jobs from u s citizens kept wages artificially low and received extensive welfare and medical benefits that strained budgets in states such as texas and california.
defenders of the undocumented aliens contended that the nation gained from the abundant supply of workers who were willing to work in fields and factories at backbreaking jobs shunned by most americans.
moreover defenders stated illegal entrants usually paid sales and withholding taxes but rarely used government services for fear of being deported.
whichever view was correct an exploited class of illegal aliens was living on the edge of poverty.
the wall street journal summed it up best by observing the people who benefit the most from this situation are certainly the employers who have access to an underground market of cheap productive labor unencumbered by minimum wage laws union restrictions or pension requirements concern over economic competition from mexican illegals led congress to pass legislation in 1986 that penalized employers who hired undocumented workers.
congress permitted those aliens who could show that they were living in the united states before 1982 to become legal residents nearly three million accepted this offer of amnesty to become legal residents.
the reform effort however failed to stem the continued flow of undocumented workers northward from mexico in the 1990s and early 2000s more than five hundred thousand in some years.
while experts debated the exact number the most widely accepted estimates indicated that more than ten million foreigners mainly from mexico and central america were living illegally in the united states in 2005.
despite stepped up border enforcement efforts after the september 11 2001 terrorist attacks illegal immigrants continued to move northward from mexico and central america.
the trip could be dangerous even lethal.
human rights advocates estimated that more than three thousand migrants lost their lives attempting to enter the united states illegally between 1997 and 2006.
nineteen mexican and central american workers died from suffocation in south texas in may 2003 nearly one hundred illegal aliens had been jammed into a truck trailer without access to water or fresh air.
yet the movement continued.
as one rural mexican official commented there are great problems in the countryside.
and that famous american dream keeps calling advance and retreat for african americans african americans formed the second largest of the nations ethnic minorities.
in 2004 there were just over 39 million blacks in the united states 13 4 percent of the population.
although the heaviest concentration of african americans was in northern cities notably new york and chicago there was a significant movement back to the south.
this shift which began in the 1970s and accelerated during the 1990s meant that by 2000 nearly 54 percent of those identifying themselves as black for the census lived in the sixteen states of the sunbelt.
family ties and a search for ancestral roots explained much of this movement but it also reflected the same economic incentives that drew so many americans to the sunbelt in the last three decades of the twentieth century.
african americans made substantial gains in certain areas of life.
in 2004 some 81 percent of blacks aged 25 and older had earned a high school diploma an increase of 8 percent during the previous decade.
eighteen percent of african americans possessed a college degree 5 percent more than a decade earlier.
the number of black owned businesses topped 1 2 million up more than 45 percent since 1997.
yet in other respects african americans did less well.
the black poverty rate was nearly 25 percent and the median income for black families was less than two thirds of that for whites.
blacks remained clustered in entry level jobs where they faced increasing competition from immigrants.
the african american incarceration rate was much higher than the national average in 2002 more than 10 percent of black males aged 25 to 29 were in prison and more than one out of four black men could expect to spend time in a state or federal prison during their lives.
blacks were also more likely to be victims of crime especially violent crime.
homicide was the leading cause of death among black males between the ages of 15 and 34.
two events one from 1991 and the other from 2005 summarized much of the frustration african americans felt.
in march 1991 a bystander videotaped four los angeles policemen brutally beating rodney king an african american who had been stopped for a traffic violation.
the pictures of the rain of blows on king shocked the nation.
nearly a year later when an all white jury acquitted the four officers of charges of police brutality rioting erupted in south central los angeles that for a time threatened the entire city when the police failed to respond promptly.
in the aftermath of the riot which took fifty three lives compared to thirty four deaths in the 1965 riot in the nearby watts area and did more than 1 billion in damage government and state agencies promised new efforts to help the inner city dwellers.
but the efforts produced little effect and life for many urban blacks remained difficult and dangerous.
a tragedy of a different sort occurred fourteen years later.
in august 2005 hurricane katrina ravaged the gulf coast and broke levees in new orleans.
the high winds and water killed more than a thousand persons destroyed hundreds of thousands of homes and forced the evacuation of millions of men women and children.
television cameras captured the plight of the several thousand who took refuge in the new orleans superdome only to be stranded when state and federal relief efforts failed.
most conspicuous in the footage was the fact that the vast majority of those suffering the worst in new orleans were black.
their neighborhoods were the lowestlying in the city and hence the worst flooded.
many lacked the cars necessary to flee the city in advance of the hurricane others lacked the means to pay for hotels or apartments had they been able to get out.
though the relief efforts were largely color blind despite early allegations to the contrary the entire experience demonstrated that poverty in america most certainly was not.
americans from asia and the middle east asian americans were the fasting growing minority group at the beginning of the twenty first century.
according to the 2000 census there were more than 12 million americans of asian the changing faces of america or pacific island descent.
although they represented only 4 percent of the total population they were increasing at seven times the national rate and future projections indicated that by 2050 one in ten americans would be of asian ancestry.
the chinese formed the largest single group of asian americans followed by filipinos japanese indians koreans and vietnamese.
immigration was the primary reason for the rapid growth of all these groups except the japanese during the 1980s asia had provided nearly half of all immigrants to the united states.
though the influx subsequently slowed the children of the immigrants added to the asian numbers.
compared to other minorities asian americans were welleducated and affluent.
three out of four asian youths graduated from high school compared to less than one out of two for blacks and hispanics.
asian americans also had the highest percentage of college graduates and recipients of doctoral degrees of any minority group in fact they were better represented in colleges and universities than the white majority.
many asians entered professional fields and in part as a result the median income for asian american families in 2004 was nearly 20 percent higher than the national average.
not all asian americans fared so well however.
refugees from southeast asia experienced both economic hardship and persecution.
the median family income for vietnamese americans fell substantially below the national average.
nearly half the laotian refugees living in minnesota were unemployed because they had great difficulty learning to read and write english.
vietnamese fishermen who settled on the gulf coast of texas and louisiana experienced repeated attacks on their livelihood and their homes.
in the los angeles riots in 1992 korean stores and shops became a main target for looting and firebombing.
but the overall experience of asian americans was a positive one.
they came to america seeking economic opportunity or as many put it to climb the mountain of gold people are looking for a better life a chinese spokeswoman explained.
its as simple as that and we will continue to come here especially if the situations over there in asia stay tight or get worse the number of americans from the middle east grew almost as fast as the number of those from asia in the 1990s.
the 2000 census counted 1 5 million americans of middle eastern ancestry up from 200 000 thirty years earlier.
most came from arab countries as well as israel and iran.
concentrated in california new york and michigan middle eastern americans were well educated with nearly half having college degrees.
many arab americans felt nervous after the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 committed by arab extremists some experienced actual violence at the hands of persons who wanted to blame anyone of arab descent for the shocking mass murders.
yet most arab americans carried on as before pursuing their interpretation of the american dream.
assimilation or diversity.
the influx of people from all around the world not just from europe had profound implications for american culture.
traditionally the favorite american self image was the melting pot the title of israel zangwills play written in 1908 at the height of european immigration into the nation.
america is gods crucible the great melting pot where all the races of europe are melting and reforming one of his characters proclaimed.
germans and frenchmen irishmen and englishmen jews and russians into the crucible with you all.
god is making the american the melting pot image carried with it the concept of stripping newcomers of their culture and national traits and casting them into an anglo saxon mold.
dubious for european immigration in view of the way each ethnic group retained its separate identity this analogy seemed increasingly irrelevant to the latin american asian and middle eastern migration to america in the late twentieth and early twenty first centuries.
instead of recasting immigrants into an american type immigration could better be seen as broadening the diversity that had always characterized the united states.
sociologist amitai etzioni suggested replacing the melting pot image with a mosaic portraying a nation in which ethnic groups retained their own identities while recognizing that they are integral parts of a more encompassing whole the new awareness of ethnic diversity manifested itself in many ways.
in public education blacks led a crusade against eurocentric curriculums and demanded a new emphasis on the influence of african culture on college campuses the call for multicultural courses and separate departments for african american asian american and hispanic studies created controversy.
citing the forecasts of a declining anglo dominance and the rise of minority groups in the twenty first century ethnic leaders advocated cultural pluralism.
raul yzaguirre president of the national council of la raza an hispanic advocacy group argued that america had never had a real melting pot in which all races contributed to the mix.
what weve had is a pressure cooker where everybody has had to come in and become anglophiles yzaguirre claimed that the new demographics ask america to live up to its own conception of itself as a pluralistic society many americans found themselves perplexed and uncertain of their cultural identity.
a census bureau survey asking people to state their ancestry revealed that fully one fourth of americans listed germany first with ireland and england a distant second and third.
some hispanics found the census racial classifications black asian pacific islander white or american indian meaningless.
i dont really consider myself caucasian objected jose arroyo of san jose california.
my roots go down into the indians of mexico people of arab descent felt equally confused.
maha el sheikh a californian of mixed egyptian and jordanian parentage resented the fact that on tests and things like that i either have to put that im caucasian or im asian which im not.
i say i am arabic or i leave it blank in the 1990s people of mixed racial parentage demanded that the census for 2000 include a box labeled multiracial rather than just the meaningless other a group called project race reclassify all children equally argued that the four million children of more than a million interracial marriages deserved their own census category.
the professional golf champion tiger woods whose ancestry is part black part thai part chinese part native american and part caucasian agreed saying that as a child he called himself cablinasian civil rights groups however objected fearing cuts in government benefits to minorities based on the census figures.
the census bureau compromised in 2000 by adding four new dual race categories american indian white american indian black asian white and black white.
chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 in addition individuals of mixed ancestry could mark several racial categories not just one as in the past.
the results were startling.
nearly seven million americans claimed to be multiracial with most choosing either black white or asian white.
levonne gaddy president of the association of multiethnic americans was ecstatic.
this is the beginning of our having to redefine this social myth that we call race she declared.
a more neutral census bureau official observed the nation is much more diverse in the year 2000 than it was in 1990 that diversity he added is much more complex than weve ever measured before horace kallen one of the early critics of zangwills melting pot analogy offered the most appealing image of the nations diverse heritage.
he likened the united states to a symphony orchestra in which each nationality and ethnic group contributed its own specific timbre and tonality to create a multiplicity in a unity an orchestration of mankind as americans wrestled with the continuing dilemma embodied in the national motto e pluribus watch the video unum the image of a great symphony in which all groups blended harmoniously offered a way to balance the pride individuals find in ethnic identity with the need for national unity.
the new democrats what were the accomplishments and failures of the clinton administration.
the democrats victims of the runaway inflation of the 1970s became the beneficiaries of the lingering recession of the early 1990s.
moving away from its traditional liberal reliance on big government the party regained strength by choosing moderate candidates and tailoring its programs to appeal to the hard pressed middle class.
these tactics enabled the democrats to regain the white house in 1992 and retain it in 1996 despite a republican sweep of congress in 1994.
the key figure in this political shift was bill clinton who overcame some early setbacks to reap the rewards of a sustained economic boom.
bill clinton sells himself to america twelve years of republican administrations and economic turmoil left voters ready to make a change.
enter bill clinton democratic governor of arkansas who would best george bush in the election of 1992 and go on to serve two full terms.
the new democrats the election of 1992 the persistence of the recession that had begun two years earlier became a major political issue in 1992.
although mild by postwar standards the economic downturn that began in july 1990 proved unusually stubborn especially in states such as california that relied heavily on the defense industry which was hurt by the end of the cold war.
the recovery which started just after the end of the persian gulf war in the spring of 1991 proved slow and uneven.
unemployment remained high for eighteen months and the gross domestic product rose only an anemic 2 9 percent in the same period.
the political impact was devastating for the bush administration.
three million americans joined the ranks of the unemployed and many were white collar employees rather than factory workers typically hit by hard times.
although the economy began to advance more briskly in 1992 unemployment persisted as businesses still hesitated to hire new workers.
as a result the average american worker was ready to look beyond the republican party for relief.
as bushs popularity plummeted two men sought to capitalize on the dismal state of the u s economy.
first arkansas governor bill clinton defeated a field of five other challengers for the democratic nomination by becoming the champion of economic renewal.
forgoing traditional liberal appeals to interest groups clinton stressed the need for investment in the nations future rebuilding roads and bridges training workers for high tech jobs and solving the growing national health care crisis.
despite his victories in the democratic primaries however clinton faced a new rival in h ross perot.
an eccentric texas billionaire perot singled out the deficit as the nations gravest election of 1992 electoral vote by state popular vote democratic bill clinton 44 908 254 republican george bush 39 102 343 independent h ross perot 19 741 065 minor parties 773 161 104 524 823 alaska hawaii wash d c problem and agreed to run as an independent candidate in response to a grassroots movement which he financed to place his name on the november ballot.
when clinton and his running mate senator albert gore jr of tennessee succeeded in unifying the democratic party and gaining agreement on a moderate platform promising economic change perot stunned his supporters by suddenly dropping out of the race in july.
clinton immediately became the front runner rising from 30 percent to more than 50 percent in the polls leaving bush far behind.
a relentless democratic attack on the administrations lackluster economic performance overcame all the presidents efforts to remind the nation of reagan prosperity and bush triumphs abroad.
even gop assaults on clintons character notably his evasion of the draft during the vietnam war failed to halt the democratic momentum.
the message that clintons political advisers tacked up at the democratic candidates headquarters in little rock the economy stupid provided the key to victory in november.
clinton wound up with 43 percent of the popular vote but with a commanding lead in the electoral college 370 to 168 for bush.
perot who had reentered the race won 19 percent of the popular vote but failed to carry a single state.
clinton and congress in the white house bill clinton proved to be the most adept politician since franklin roosevelt.
born in hope arkansas in 1946 clinton weathered a difficult childhood with an alcoholic stepfather by developing skills at dealing with people and using personal charm to achieve his goals.
intelligent and ambitious he completed his undergraduate work at georgetown university studied law at yale and spent two years as a rhodes scholar at oxford university in england.
entering politics after teaching law briefly at the university of arkansas he won election first as arkansas attorney general and then as governor.
defeated after his first term in 1980 clinton won the nickname comeback kid by regaining the governors office in 1982.
he was elected three more times earning a reputation as one of the nations most successful young political leaders.
in keeping with the theme of his campaign clinton concentrated at first on the economy.
the federal budget he proposed to congress in february 1993 called for tax increases and spending cuts to achieve a balanced budget.
congress was skeptical of such unpopular measures but clinton cajoled shamed and threatened sufficient members to win approval of 241 billion in new taxes and 255 billion in spending cuts for a total deficit reduction of 496 billion over four years.
this major achievement earned clinton the confidence of financial markets and helped fuel the economic boom of the 1990s.
clinton scored another victory when congress approved the north american free trade agreement nafta in the fall of 1993.
nafta initiated and nearly completed by bush was a free trade plan that united the united states mexico and canada into a common market without tariff barriers.
clinton endorsed the treaty as a way of securing american prosperity and spreading american values.
critics complained that free trade would cost american workers their jobs as american companies moved production overseas ross perot the defeated 1992 third party candidate predicted a giant sucking sound as american jobs went south to mexico.
but clinton carried the day winning a bruising fight in the house and an easier contest in the senate.
chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 although clintons nafta coalition included many congressional republicans on other issues the gop staunchly opposed the president.
republicans decried his budget as entailing the biggest tax increase in the history of the world and they scuttled an ambitious attempt to revamp the nations health care system.
leading the opposition was a young congressman from georgia newton leroy newt gingrich who asked all gop candidates in the 1994 congressional races to sign a ten point contract with america.
the contract consisted of familiar conservative goals including a balanced budget amendment to the constitution term limits for members of congress a line item veto for the president and a middle class tax cut.
for the first time in recent political history a party sought to win congress on ideological issues rather than relying on individual personalities.
a series of embarrassing disclosures involving bill clintons character made this tactic particularly effective in 1994.
during the 1992 campaign the new york times had raised questions about a bankrupt arkansas land development called whitewater in which the clintons had lost a modest investment.
additional scandals cropped up over activities that had taken place after clinton was elected president.
travelgate was the name given to the firing apparently at the urging of first lady hillary clinton of several white house employees who arranged travel for the press covering the president.
then in early 1994 paula jones a former arkansas state employee filed a sexual harassment suit against clinton charging that in 1991 then governor clinton had made sexual advances to her.
the outcome of the november 1994 vote stunned political observers.
the republicans gained 9 seats in the senate and an election of 1996 electoral vote by state popular vote democratic bill clinton 45 590 703 republican robert dole 37 816 307 independent h ross perot 7 866 284 91 273 294 alaska hawaii wash d c astonishing 53 in the house to take control of both houses.
newt gingrich who had worked so hard to ensure the change in leadership in the congress became speaker of the house.
the gop also captured 32 governorships including those of new york california and texas where george w bush the son of the man clinton beat in 1992 won handily.
the republicans claimed a mandate to resume the reagan revolution to cut taxes diminish the scope of government and empower the private sector.
clinton and the democrats managed to keep the republicans in check on matters of substance but the republicans in turn contrived to hobble clinton.
the administration and the republicans collaborated on welfare reform and a modest increase in the minimum wage but otherwise deadlock descended on washington.
clinton turned the deadlock to his benefit in 1996 after the republicans having failed to force him to accept cuts in medicare college loans and other social services refused to pass a budget bill and thereby shut down the federal government.
clinton proved more deft at finger pointing than gingrich and the republicans did and he succeeded in persuading voters that they were to blame.
he carried this theme into his 1996 reelection campaign.
the republican nominee robert dole of kansas lacked clintons charisma and failed to shake the impression that the republicans were flint hearts who wanted to cut the pet programs of the american people.
clinton won decisively holding the presidency for the democrats even while the republicans continued to control congress.
scandal in the white house despite clintons reelection rumors of wrongdoing still clung to his presidency.
the special prosecutor appointed to probe the whitewater transactions kenneth starr turned over stone after stone in search of evidence of malfeasance until he came across rumors that clinton had conducted a clandestine affair with a white house intern monica lewinsky.
clinton initially denied the affair.
i did not have sexual relations with that woman miss lewinsky he said in january 1998.
but starr subpoenaed lewinsky who eventually gave a detailed account of her sexual encounters with the president and provided crucial physical evidence implicating clinton.
realizing that he could no longer deny the affair the president sought to limit the damage.
on august 17 1998 he appeared before starrs grand jury and admitted to having inappropriate intimate contact with lewinsky.
that evening clinton spoke briefly to the nation.
claiming that he had given the grand jury legally accurate answers the president for the first time admitted to a relationship with lewinsky that was not appropriate and wrong he said he regretted misleading the people and especially his wife but he refused to apologize for his behavior or his false denials.
clintons fate hung in the balance.
for the first time some democrats began to speak out most notably senator joseph lieberman of connecticut who called the presidents behavior disgraceful and immoral but just when clinton seemed most vulnerable the special prosecutor inadvertently rescued him.
in early september starr sent a 452 page report to congress outlining clinton and the world read the document bill clinton answers to the articles of impeachment members of the house judiciary committee listen to clintons testimony during the hearings on the presidents impeachment in december 1998.
the committee sent four articles of impeachment to the full house and the house adopted two one count of perjury and one of obstruction of justice.
the senate could not muster the two thirds majority required for conviction and so clinton was acquitted of both articles.
eleven possible impeachment charges against clinton.
the key charge was perjury and starr provided painstakingly graphic detail on all of the sexual encounters between clinton and lewinsky to prove that the president had lied when he denied engaging in sexual relations with the intern.
many americans responded by condemning starr rather than the president.
shocked by the sordid details they blamed the prosecutor for exposing families to distasteful sexual practices on the evening news.
when hillary clinton stood staunchly by her husband a majority of the public seemed to conclude that however bad the presidents conduct it was a private matter one to be settled between a husband and a wife not in the public arena.
republican leaders ignored the public sentiment and pressed ahead with impeachment proceedings.
in december the house where the 1998 midterm elections had narrowed the gop advantage to six voted on four articles of impeachment rejecting two but approving two others perjury and obstruction of justice by small margins in nearly straight party line votes.
the final showdown in the senate was anticlimactic.
with a two thirds vote required to find the president guilty and remove him from office there was no chance of conviction in the highly charged partisan mood that prevailed.
on february 12 1999 the gop was unable to muster even a majority on the perjury charge with 45 in favor and 55 opposed.
after a second closer vote 50 to 50 on obstruction of justice the presiding officer chief justice william rehnquist declared acquitted of the charges clinton had survived the monica lewinsky affair but he emerged from the ordeal with his presidency badly damaged.
his final two years in office would be devoted to a concerted effort to restore his damaged reputation.
desperate for a legacy to mark his white house years clinton failed to realize that he had already created an enduring one he would always be remembered as the president who dishonored his office by his affair with a young intern.
clinton and the world how did clinton respond to the balkan wars.
neither clintons scandals nor his struggle with congress allowed americans to forget about the rest of the world although many would have liked to do so.
the cold war had ended and with it americas forty year struggle with communism.
but the post cold chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 war world was plenty threatening and while the united states was the only superpower still standing americas power could not preserve americans from having to make difficult decisions about how to use that power.
old rivals in new light inheriting the chaos left by the breakup of the soviet union clinton concentrated on two issues in dealing with russia and its neighbors.
first as bush had done he strongly supported russian president boris yeltsin.
in 1993 clinton persuaded congress to provide a 2 5 billion aid package to help yeltsin carry out his free market reforms of the devastated russian economy.
the clinton administration backed yeltsin and his successor vladimir v putin despite russias continuing brutal war with chechnya.
although the expansion of nato to include poland hungary and the czech republic and plans for a missile defense system created some tension the clinton administration succeeded in maintaining good relations with russia.
clinton was even more successful on the second big issue left over from the cold war against the soviets preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons among the former republics of the soviet union.
with patient diplomacy secretary of state warren christopher won agreements from belarus and kazakhstan to scrap their deadly icbms.
ukraine proved more difficult but in 1994 clinton persuaded the president of ukraine to surrender his countrys entire nuclear stockpile.
clintons effort on behalf of nuclear nonproliferation in the former soviet union was perhaps his most important if least heralded achievement.
the presidents policy toward china was more questionable.
clinton ignored chinas dismal human rights record and continued bushs policy of annually extending most favored nation status to beijing.
the growing importance of trade with china whose economic output in 1993 exceeded britains led clinton to overlook the memory of the tiananmen square massacre and the continued persecution of dissidents in china.
as trade with china began to rival that with japan the president announced a policy of constructive engagement it was better he contended to keep talking and trading with china than to harden chinese resentment against the west by harping on moral issues.
in 2000 clinton won a notable victory for free trade when the house voted to give china permanent most favored nation status.
the chinese however proved to be less than fully cooperative.
china ignored u s protests of its export of missiles to iran and nuclear technology to pakistan and it continued to stifle dissent at home.
china conducted provocative missile tests near taiwan which beijing still claimed for china.
when the clinton administration sent aircraft carriers to patrol the waters off taiwan a chinese official talked casually about raining nuclear bombs upon los angeles.
constructive engagement clearly had its limits.
to intervene or not the most difficult foreign policy decisions for the clinton administration came over the use of american troops abroad.
the absence of the cold war threat with its implicit need to counter communist rivals made it much more difficult for the president and his advisers to decide when the national interest required sending american servicemen and servicewomen into harms way.
between 1993 and 1999 clinton opted for foreign intervention in four areas somalia haiti bosnia and kosovo with decidedly mixed results.
clinton inherited the somalian venture from bush who in december 1992 had sent twenty five thousand american troops to that starving country on a humanitarian mission.
under clinton however the original aim of using troops to protect the flow of food supplies and relief workers gradually shifted to supporting a un effort at nation building.
tragedy struck in october 1993 when eighteen american soldiers died in a botched attempt to capture a local warlord in mogadishu.
after television cameras recorded the naked corpse of a u s helicopter pilot being dragged through the streets of somalias capital an angry congress demanded a quick end to the intervention.
american forces left somalia by the end of march 1994 in what was unquestionably the low point of clinton foreign policy.
the lack of clear criteria governing intervention that had brought on the disaster in somalia almost led to another fiasco in haiti.
seeking to halt the flow into florida of thousands of haitians fleeing both poverty and tyranny clinton worked to compel the military rulers of haiti to abdicate in favor of the man they had overthrown in 1991 jean bertrand aristide.
after nearly a year of trade sanctions and increasing diplomatic pressure the president prepared to use force to remove the military regime.
at the last minute a three member peace mission led by former president jimmy carter worked out a compromise that allowed u s troops to land unopposed in late september 1994.
aristide returned to haiti but he could do little either to restore democracy or achieve economic progress in view of his countrys bankrupt treasury ruined economy and deep political divisions.
by the time aristide turned over the presidency to his elected successor in 1996 haiti remained mired in hopeless poverty.
the reality of haitis plight had frustrated clintons effort to use american power righteously.
the balkan wars two other u s interventions in bosnia and kosovo in the balkan peninsula were more difficult but more successful.
the breakup of yugoslavia in 1991 led the muslim president of bosnia to ask the european community to recognize the independence of bosniaherzegovina.
but bosnias ethnic and religious makeup 44 percent muslim 31 percent serb and 17 percent croat contributed to a civil war in which the bosnian serbs used the weapons of the former yugoslavian army to seize more than 70 percent of bosnian territory.
the muslim and croatian forces were unable to prevent the serb bombardment of the capital sarajevo or the serb policy of ethnic cleansing driving muslims and croats from their ancestral homes.
clinton initially backed a plan to divide bosnia into ten ethnic provinces.
when the serbs rejected the proposal in the spring of 1993 the president fell back on using american air power to patrol no fly zones over bosnia designed to protect un peacekeeping efforts.
meanwhile serb artillery continued to pour a withering fire on the civilian population of sarajevo and journalists reported a series of brutal atrocities in which serb troops slaughtered thousands of muslim men and raped thousands of muslim women.
republicans triumphant these reports forced clintons hand.
in the summer of 1995 american planes under nato auspices began a series of air strikes on the serb forces that were shelling sarajevo from the surrounding mountains.
the air campaign which lasted two weeks along with a major counteroffensive by better equipped croatian and muslim forces led to a cease fire in october 1995.
the three warring factions sent delegations to dayton ohio to discuss a settlement.
after three weeks of talks u s mediator richard holbrooke secured agreement to create a weak central government for all bosnia at sarajevo and to divide the rest of the country into two parts a muslim croatian federation with 51 percent of the territory and a serbian enclave with 49 percent.
the dayton plan called for free elections the return of refugees to their former homes and a nato force to oversee the peace process.
the u s intervention in kosovo was similarly rooted in the breakup of yugoslavia.
serbian leader slobodan milosevic had ended kosovos autonomy within yugoslavia and imposed serbian read the document the balkan proximity peace talks agreement 1995 austria hungary ljubljana slovenia 1991 romania zagreb n io eg ar jin kra croatia 1991 eastern slavonia vojvodina bosnia and herzegovina 1992 belgrade serbia sarajevo rule even though 90 percent of the provinces population was ethnic albanian.
when these kosovars launched a guerrilla war against the serbian police milosevic responded with a campaign of repression that outraged world opinion.
diplomatic efforts failed to achieve a ceasefire prompting clinton and the heads of government of other nato countries in march 1999 to order an aerial assault on serbia in an effort to end the persecution of the kosovars.
at first it appeared that clinton had miscalculated.
the initial air attacks directed at empty barracks and remote military bases failed to persuade milosevic to seek peace.
instead he stepped up the ethnic cleansing in kosovo forcing hundreds of thousands of kosovars to leave their homes and flee to neighboring albania and macedonia.
clinton and the nato governments shifted the focus of the air assault to serbias infrastructure targeting bridges oil refineries and most important of all power stations.
by the end of may 1999 serbia had lost 60 percent of its electrical capacity and domestic pressure on milosevic began to mount.
with russian diplomats acting as go betweens milosevic finally agreed to halt his attempts to purge kosovo of its albanian inhabitants.
an agreement signed on june 10 1999 called for the withdrawal of all serb forces and placed kosovo under un supervision with nato troops acting as peacekeepers.
the conflict over kosovo revealed both the strengths and weaknesses of the united states in the turbulent post cold war world.
american military power while great was limited by a strong desire to avoid risking american lives.
clinton could boast of an amazing result nato had waged a 12 week air campaign without the loss of a single pilot.
yet the united states had been unable to prevent milosevic from uprooting and terrorizing nearly one million kosovars.
when the fighting ended the kosovars returned to their devastated homeland and soon nato troops had the thankless task of preventing the albanians from seeking revenge against the serbian minority in kosovo.
yugoslavia 1991 civil war in bosnia 1992 1995 montenegro tic r ia ad italy se a kosovo bulgaria skopje war in kosovo 1999 macedonia 1992 republicans triumphant how did george w bush become president and what did he do in the white house.
albania 100 miles greece 100 kilometers slovenes hungarians croatians romanians serbians albanians macedonians turks germans greeks bosnian muslims slavs converted to islam after the ottoman conquest boundary of dayton accord 1995 italians the breakup of yugoslavia civil war in bosnia with the end of the communist regime in yugoslavia in the early 1990s the country broke apart into ethnically distinct regions.
in bosnia muslims croatians and serbians fought a bloody civil war rife with atrocities on all sides over the issue of ethnic cleansing.
clintons eight years in the white house gave democrats hope that the conservative gains of the 1980s had been only temporary.
they pointed to the booming economy of the 1990s and the absence of any serious threat to american security as reasons for voters to leave the presidency in democratic hands.
the election of 2000 proved a bitter disappointment all the more bitter by reason of the way in which it made republican george w bush president.
the disputed election of 2000 if history had been the guide the prosperity of the 1990s should have guaranteed victory to clintons protg vice president al gore.
the state of the economy generally determines the outcome of presidential elections and entering 2000 the american economy had never appeared stronger.
the stock market soared spreading wealth among tens of millions of americans the federal deficit of the reagan years had given way to large and growing surpluses.
chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 but clintons personal problems muddled the issue.
clinton had survived his impeachment trial yet the experience tainted his record and left many voters unwilling to reward the democrats by promoting his vice president.
certain other domestic problems unnerved voters as well.
the 1995 bombing of a federal building in oklahoma city by two domestic terrorists killed 168 people and suggested that irrational violence threatened the daily lives of ordinary americans.
this feeling was reinforced by a 1999 shooting rampage at columbine high school near denver which left twelve students and a teacher dead besides the two shooters who killed themselves.
the apparent conflict between material abundance and eroding personal values resulted in the closest election in more than a century.
the two candidates vice president gore of tennessee and governor bush of texas had little in common beyond being the sons of successful political fathers.
gore had spent eighteen years in washington as a congressman senator and vice president.
somewhat stiff and aloof in manner he had mastered the intricacies of all the major policy issues and had the experience and knowledge to lead the nation.
bush by contrast had pursued a business career before winning the governorship of texas in 1994.
personable and outgoing bush had the temperament for leadership but lacked not only experience but a full grasp of national issues.
journalists were quick to seize on the weaknesses of both men accusing gore of frequent and misleading exaggeration and bush of mangling words and speaking only in generalities.
the candidacy of consumer advocate ralph nader who ran on the green party ticket complicated the political reckoning.
nader never seemed likely to win more than a small percentage of the votes but in a close election a few points could make all the difference.
naders mere presence pushed gore to the left leaving room for bush among independent minded swing voters.
the race appeared close until election day and even closer on election night.
gore seemed the likely winner when the major television networks predicted a democratic victory in florida.
they reconsidered as bush swept the south including the clinton gore home states of arkansas and tennessee.
after midnight the networks again called florida but this time for bush and the vice president telephoned the governor to concede only to recant an hour later when it became clear that the bush margin in florida was paper thin.
there things stuck and for the next month all eyes were on florida.
gore had two hundred thousand more popular votes nationwide than bush and 267 electoral votes to bushs 246.
yet with floridas 25 electoral votes bush could win the presidency.
both sides sent teams of lawyers to florida.
bushs team working with floridas republican secretary of state sought to certify the results that showed the gop candidate with a lead of 930 votes out of nearly six million cast.
citing many voting problems disclosed by the media gore asked for a recount in three heavily democratic counties in south florida.
all three used antiquated punch card machines that resulted in some ballots not being clearly marked for any presidential candidate when the chads the bits of paper removed when a card is punched were not completely detached from the cards.
for weeks the results in florida and hence of the entire election appeared to depend on how one divined the intent of a voter based on hanging dimpled or bulging chads.
election of 2000 electoral vote by state republican george w bush democratic al gore popular vote 50 456 167 266 50 996 064 green ralph nader 2 864 810 other 834 774 105 151 815 one district of columbia gore elector abstained.
hawaii wash d c alaska the decision finally came in the courts.
democrats appealed the initial attempt to certify bush as the victor to the florida supreme court.
the florida court twice ordered recounts the second time for all counties in the state but bushs lawyers appealed to the united states supreme court.
on december 12 five weeks after the election the court overruled the state courts call for a recount in a five to four decision that reflected a long standing ideological divide among the nine justices.
the next day gore gracefully conceded and bush finally became president elect.
bushs narrow victory revealed deep divisions in american life at the beginning of the twenty first century.
the rural west and south went for bush along with a few key midwest and border states while gore won the urban states along both coasts.
there was an equally strong divide along economic lines with the poor voting for gore the rich for bush and the middle class dividing evenly between the two candidates.
gore benefited from the gender gap winning 54 percent of the womens vote and he won an even larger share of the black vote 90 percent than clinton in 1996.
bush did manage to narrow the democratic margin among hispanic voters taking 35 percent compared to only 28 percent for dole four years earlier.
the two candidates split the suburban vote evenly while bush reclaimed the catholic vote for republicans.
george w bush at home bushs first order of business was a large tax cut which required intense lobbying from the white house.
the president had to win over enough conservative southern democrats to compensate for republicans triumphant losing republican moderates who insisted on reducing the federal debt before cutting taxes.
bush managed the feat and in june 2005 congress passed legislation that slashed taxes by a staggering 1 35 trillion over a ten year period.
many of the cuts would take effect only in future years but congress offered an immediate stimulus to the economy by authorizing rebate payments to taxpayers 600 for couples and 300 for individuals earning more than 6 000 a year.
while critics saw this measure as a betrayal of the long effort to balance the budget bush contended that future budget surpluses would more than offset the loss of tax revenue.
a slowdown in the american economy triggered by the bursting of the 1990s high tech bubble soon turned the projected budget surplus into annual deficits.
but it failed to halt the bush administrations tax cut momentum.
in 2003 arguing that a further reduction in taxes would stimulate the stalled economy bush prevailed upon congress to adopt another 350 billion in cuts.
like the 2001 cuts the new reductions were temporary in order to preserve the possibility of a balanced budget by 2010.
opponents charged that if a future congress made these tax cuts permanent as seemed likely the total cost would rise to nearly 1 trillion.
while clinton had favored a policy of eliminating the deficit bush made tax reduction the centerpiece of his economic policy.
although it took a bit longer the president also succeeded in persuading congress to enact a program of education reform.
borrowing the label no child left behind from liberal democrats the administration pushed hard for a new policy requiring states to give annual performance tests to all elementary school students.
democrats countered with demands for increased federal funding of public education to assist states and local school boards in raising their standards.
bush shrewdly cultivated the support of senator edward kennedy a leading liberal democrat to forge a bipartisan consensus.
the final measure increased federal aid to education by 4 billion to a total of 22 billion annually and mandated state tests in reading and math for all students in grades three through eight and at least once during grades ten to twelve.
by this time the economic slowdown had become a full blown recession the first in ten years.
a glut of unsold goods forced manufacturers to curtail production and lay off workers.
unemployment rose eventually to 6 percent despite the efforts of the federal reserve to stem the economic decline by cutting interest rates.
the tax rebates authorized by congress had boosted the economy slightly during the summer of 2001 but then the september 11 terrorist attacks on new york and the pentagon led to a further decline.
in 2002 the economy once again began to recover only to relapse late in the year amid concern over the threat of war with iraq.
one of the most troubling aspects of the economic downturn was the implosion of several major corporations and the subsequent revelation of shocking financial practices.
worldcom inc a major telecommunications company became the largest corporation in american history to declare bankruptcy while a new york grand jury charged executives of tyco international a large electronics company with stealing more than 600 million from shareholders through stock fraud false expense reports and unauthorized bonuses.
these scandals however paled before the misdeeds of enron a houston energy company that failed in late 2001 as the result of astonishingly corrupt business practices including fraudulent accounting and private partnerships designed to inflate profits and hide losses.
when investors began to sell their overvalued enron stock shares that were once worth nearly 100 fell to less than 1.
enron declared bankruptcy and the remaining shareholders lost over 50 billion while rank and file employees lost not only their jobs but much of their retirement savings invested largely in now worthless enron stock.
the war on terror on the morning of september 11 2001 nineteen islamic militant terrorists hijacked four u s airliners and turned them to attack targets in new york city and washington d c.
the hijackers took over two planes flying out of bostons logan airport en route to california and flew them into the world trade center wtc in new york.
one plane slammed into the north tower just before 9 a m and the second hit the south tower only twenty minutes later.
within two hours both towers had collapsed taking the lives of nearly three thousand victims trapped in the buildings or crushed by the debris and more than three hundred firefighters and other rescue workers who had attempted to save them.
in washington an american airlines flight that left dulles airport bound for los angeles met a similar fate.
taken over by five terrorists the boeing 757 plowed into the pentagon destroying one wing of the building and killing 189 military personnel and civilian workers.
the terrorists had seized a fourth plane united airlines flight 93 scheduled to fly from newark new jersey to san francisco.
over pennsylvania as the hijackers attempted to turn the plane toward the nations capital the passengers fought to regain control of the plane.
they failed to do so but prevented the plane from hitting another target in washington perhaps the white house or the capitol building.
flight 93 crashed in southern pennsylvania killing all forty four passengers and crew as well as the hijackers.
none of us will forget this day president bush told the american people in a televised speech that evening.
bush vowed to find and punish those responsible for the attacks as well as any who assisted them.
we will make no distinction between those who planned these acts and those who harbor them bush didnt have to look long to discover the master mind behind the september 11 attacks.
osama bin laden a wealthy saudi released videotapes claiming responsibility on behalf of his terrorist organization al qaeda the base in arabic.
bin laden had originally been part of the international muslim resistance to the soviet invasion of afghanistan that had received support and weapons from the cia in the 1980s.
he turned against the united states at the time of the persian gulf war outraged by the presence of large numbers of american troops in his native saudi arabia.
evidence linked bin laden and al qaeda to the bombing of two american embassies in east africa in 1998 and an attack on the american destroyer uss cole in yemen in 2000.
the united states had been trying to neutralize al qaeda for a decade without success.
ordered out of saudi arabia in 1991 bin laden had sought refuge in the sudan and later in afghanistan after the taliban another extremist muslim group took over that country.
in afghanistan bin laden set up camps to train hundreds of would be terrorists mainly from arab countries but including complete the assignment an inconvenient truth.
the controversy surrounding global warming on myhistorylab feature essay an inconvenient truth.
the controversy surrounding global warming al gore in a still from an inconvenient truth his oscar winning documentary about climate change.
w hen al gore lost the disputed 2000 presidential election he gave such a gracious concession speech that pundits wondered just how badly he wanted to be president.
did he know something they didnt know.
was there life after politics.
for gore it turned out there was.
but if he had expected that the next phase of his career might be less bruising than the slugfest he had just experienced with george w bush he was quickly proven wrong.
gores new cause was environmentalism and he discovered that nothing posed greater danger to ones reputation or peace of mind than trying to save the earth.
gore had become interested in environmental affairs while he was in congress during the 1970s and 1980s.
in 1992 he published earth in the balance an environmentalist call to arms.
we must make the rescue of the environment the central organizing principle for civilization he wrote.
as vice president under bill clinton he pushed hard for american approval of the 1997 kyoto protocol which would have committed the united states to substantially reduce greenhouse gases carbon dioxide and other gases that trap heat in the atmosphere and are responsible in the opinion of most scientists for rising global temperatures.
gore lost the kyoto fight badly.
the senate which has the responsibility to ratify treaties rejected the kyoto pact by a vote of 95 to 0.
the negative republican votes were no surprise but that democrat gore a former senator and the senates presiding officer by virtue of his office as vice president couldnt muster even one democratic vote was an embarrassment that would have daunted most politicians.
but gore wasnt an ordinary politician and he didnt embarrass easily.
following his defeat by bush in 2000 he threw himself into the environmental cause becoming what some of his many critics derided as a one man traveling band in favor of all things green.
he wrote a new book an inconvenient truth that described the threat to civilization from global warming as dire and imminent.
the book became the basis for a documentary also called an inconvenient truth that in 2007 won an academy award further irking gores critics.
president bush gave the movie the back of his hand asked whether he would watch it bush replied doubt it the republican chairman of the senate environment and public works committee jim inhofe who was disparaged in the film compared it to hitlers mein kampf if you say the same lie over and over again and particularly if you have the medias support people will believe it spoofs of an inconvenient truth on youtube mocked the film as boring and selfrighteous.
gores critics grew even more incensed when he was awarded the 2007 nobel peace prize for his environmental efforts.
at the heart of the controversy were the substantive questions of global warming was the earths climate really getting hotter and were human actions responsible.
mountains of data gathered over decades by thousands of scientists suggested that the planet was indeed warming and that human production of greenhouse gases was responsible.
but the data and the models the scientists employed werent definitive or irrefutable.
persons determined not to be persuaded could find plausible grounds for skepticism.
had the debate involved scientists only it would have been bitter enough.
but the consequences of global warming predicted by most of the scientists floods droughts famine pestilence appeared to require a political response.
humans must stop producing so much carbon dioxide and their governments must make them stop.
this would be inconvenient hence the title of gores book and film and almost certainly expensive.
but it had to be done.
so said the convinced.
skeptics disagreed.
many were political conservatives who didnt like government telling them what to do.
most complained at the expense and trouble.
and nearly all bridled at what they deemed the holier than thou attitude of gore and the global warming believers.
the emotions surrounding the issue made reasoned debate difficult at times impossible.
liberals often treated the skeptics as ignorant and venal many conservatives made denial of global warming a litmus test of true conservatism.
many liberals made changes in their own lives switching to gas electric hybrid cars which squeezed more mileage out of each gallon of gas and recycling household items to save the energy cost of producing new ones.
cities adopted ordinances to encourage recycling and diminish the carbon footprint the amount of carbon dioxide emitted of urban activities.
but conservatives often derided such measures as liberal hypocrisy they noted that gores globe spanning travels on behalf of carbon reduction generated huge amounts of carbon and an affront to the american way of life.
meanwhile the evidence mounted.
the national aeronautics and space administration nasa reported in 2012 that the surface temperature of the earth had been rising since 1880 and that the warming was accelerating with the ten warmest years of the last century occurring within the last twelve years.
the oceans were also warming which caused sea levels to rise and threaten low lying areas along the shores.
glaciers and the ice sheets that covered most of greenland and antarctica were shrinking.
the ice cap over the north pole retreated farther and faster during the summer.
instances of extreme weather droughts torrential rains record high temperatures appeared to be increasing although climate scientists were careful not to claim that any one of these events was a direct consequence of global warming.
despite the evidence the controversy persisted.
among conservatives especially social and religious conservatives rejection of humancaused global warming seemed to be part of the broader rejection of science that included disbelief in evolution.
during the republican campaign for the 2012 nomination for president most of the candidates either dodged the issue or denied it.
rick santorum former pennsylvania senator called the assertion that humans were warming the planet patently absurd its just an excuse for more government control of your life when mitt romney the front runner expressed tepid support for the idea rush limbaugh the conservative radio host jibed bye bye nomination romneys stance on global warming did not kill his hopes of getting the nomination but the controversy guaranteed that the government would take no serious action to curtail emissions of greenhouse gases.
even environmentalists acknowledged that there was comparatively little the united states could do given that the greatest growth in carbon dioxide emissions would almost certainly come from china india and other developing countries.
those countries werent likely to agree to emissions caps until their inhabitants standards of living more closely approximated those of the developed nations.
the economic recession in the united states also raised the political cost of new environmental regulations on business that might cause firms to hire fewer workers.
in consequence the issue of global warming joined such others as health care and social security in generating enormous debate but no resolution.
one of the strengths of the american political system had always been its checks and balances with each branch and interest group countering the others until a consensus was achieved.
as the earth heated up many americans wondered if the old system could meet this new challenge.
questions for discussion 1.
why has the issue of global warming become so controversial in the united states.
what does the controversy say about the intersection of politics and science in american democracy.
is democracy the best way to resolve debates that turn on technical issues.
chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 political coalition resisting the taliban.
using a variety of methods ranging from bribes of local warlords to air strikes american forces quickly routed the taliban and by december had installed a u s friendly regime in kabul.
most of afghanistan however remained in chaos and despite extensive efforts and several near misses bin laden avoided capture.
while waging the war on terror abroad the bush administration also focused on the problem of securing the united states from any further terrorist assaults.
at the presidents urging congress approved a new department of homeland security combining the customs bureau the coast guard the immigration and naturalization service ins and other government bureaus.
a primary focus of homeland security was ensuring the safety of airline travel in the wake of the september 11 hijackings.
in november 2001 bush signed legislation replacing private companies with government employees at all airport screening stations.
the airlines were required to replace cockpit doors with secure barriers and to permit armed air marshals to ride among the passengers.
the understandable public fear of flying after september 11 nevertheless had a devastating effect on the airline industry forcing the cancellation of many flights and the laying off of thousands of pilots and other workers.
despite a 15 billion government bailout approved in late september 2001 the airlines continued to experience heavy losses.
several including united airlines filed for bankruptcy.
although air travel began to revive slowly in 2002 the industry along with other forms of tourism continued to be a drag on an already sluggish economy.
the war on terror raised an even more fundamental question than economic stagnation.
attorney general john ashcroft using this photo depicts the unprecedented deaths and destruction caused by the al qaeda terrorist new powers granted by congress under the attacks on the world trade center in new york on september 11 2011.
nearly 3 000 victims were patriot act conducted a broad crackdown on trapped in the buildings or crushed by the debris and more than three hundred first responders died possible terrorists detaining many muslim in their heroic efforts to save the victims.
americans on flimsy evidence and insisting recruits from the philippines indonesia and central asia.
after the that concern for national security outweighed traditional civil 1998 embassy bombings president clinton ordered cruise missile liberties.
opponents quickly challenged ashcroft arguing that the attacks on several of these camps in the hope of killing bin laden.
terrorists would win their greatest victory if the united states viothe al qaeda leader survived though leaving one of the targets only lated its own historic principles of individual freedom in the name a few hours before the strike.
of fighting terrorism.
it was a debate that troubled many americans bushs determination to go after those harboring terrorists who had difficulty reconciling the need for security with respect made afghanistan the prime target for the american counfor civil liberties.
the president ordered the pentagon and the cia which already had agents on the scene to launch an invasion widening the battlefield of afghanistan to destroy the taliban wipe out al qaeda and the terrorist attacks on the united states were the catalyst for a capture or kill osama bin laden.
major change in direction for american foreign policy.
not only in early october 2001 the cia and army special forces did the bush administration wage an intensive effort to avenge began the operation relying on the northern alliance an afghan view the closer look world trade center sept 11 2001 republicans triumphant accept fully the role the nation had been playing since the end of the cold war read the document george w bush address to congress global policeman.
the united states would september 20 2001 not shrink from defending freedom anywhere in the world with allies if possible by itself if necessary.
to implement this policy nss asserted that the bush administration would maintain military strength beyond challenge our forces the nss declared will be strong enough to dissuade potential adversaries from pursuing a military buildup in hopes of surpassing or equaling the power of the united states in playing the role of world cop bush and his advisers asserted the right to the preventive use of force.
reacting to september 11 the nss continued we cannot let our enemies strike first although promising to seek the support of the international community before using force the nss stated we will not hesitate to act alone if necessary to exercise our right of self defense in other words the bush administration aware that the united states was far stronger militarily and economically than any other nation accepted its new role as final arbiter of all international disputes.
iraq quickly became the test case for this new shift in american foreign policy.
after as rescue efforts continued in the rubble of the world trade center president bush toured the site his axis of evil speech in january president on september 14 2001.
in cnns televised coverage of the visit bush is shown here addressing bush focused on what he and his pentagon rescue workers through a bullhorn.
firefighter bob beckwith stands beside him.
advisers called weapons of mass destruction wmd that they claimed saddam hussein had been secretly the september 11 attacks and prevent further assaults it initiated amassing in large quantities.
the united states demanded that a new global policy of american preeminence.
for the first time iraq permit un inspectors forced out of the country in 1998 since the end of the cold war the united states had a clear if to search for such weapons.
meanwhile the bush administration controversial blueprint for international affairs.
formulated plans for a unilateral american military solution to the new administration rejected traditional forms of the iraq question.
international cooperation.
president bush withdrew u s parslowly but inevitably the united states moved toward war ticipation in the kyoto protocol to control global warming and with iraq in late 2002 and early 2003.
congress approved a resoannounced plans to terminate the 1972 antiballistic missile lution in october authorizing the president to use force against abm treaty with russia.
and he was outspoken in refusing to saddam husseins regime.
a month later the un security council expose american military personnel to the jurisdiction of the voted unanimously to send its team of inspectors back into iraq international criminal court for possible crimes committed in warning saddam of severe consequences if he failed to comply.
worldwide peacekeeping efforts.
despite the failure of the international inspectors to find any evithe new direction of american foreign policy became clear dence of chemical biological or nuclear weapons in iraq the bush on january 29 2002 when bush delivered his second state of the administration kept pressing for a security council resolution union address to congress and the nation.
he repeated his vow authorizing the use of force to compel saddam to disarm.
when to punish all nations sponsoring terrorism and he specified three france and russia vowed to veto any such measure bush and his countries in particular.
iraq iran and north korea he declared advisers decided to ignore the world body and proceed on their in a memorable phrase constituted an axis of evil nine months own.
preemption would have its first real test.
later in september 2002 the bush administration released a fully the ensuing war with iraq surprised both the backers and developed statement of its new world policy national security the critics of unilateralism.
in march 2003 three columns of strategy nss of the united states the goal of american policy american troops a total of sixty five thousand began to execute bushs nss declared was to extend the peace by encouraging free a two pronged invasion of iraq from bases in kuwait.
britain and open societies on every continent the only major power to join the united states in the fi ghtthere were two main components of the new strategy ing helped by besieging the city of basra and taking control of which critics quickly called unilateralism.
the first was to chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 in a memorable image from the war in iraq iraqi civilians and u s soldiers pull down a statue of saddam hussein in baghdad on april 9 2003.
eight months later u s soldiers captured the former iraqi president near tikrit.
southern iraq.
within two weeks the u s army had captured the baghdad international airport and on april 8 just three weeks after the fighting had begun marines marched virtually unopposed into the heart of the city.
the american people watched the televised scene of joyous iraqis toppling a statue of saddam in fardos square.
an iraqi major summed up the magnitude of his countrys defeat losing a war is one thing but losing baghdad is another he explained.
it was like losing the dearest thing in life the rapid success of the anti saddam offensive seemed to confirm the wisdom of bushs decision for war.
but the subsequent failure to find any weapons of mass destruction led critics to question the validity of the war.
in response the presidents defenders emphasized the importance of deposing saddam by pointing to his brutal prisons and to the killing fields south of baghdad where thousands of shiite rebels had been slaughtered in 1991.
the problems of restoring order and rebuilding the shattered iraqi economy quickly overshadowed the debate over the wars legitimacy.
daily attacks on american troops in the sunni triangle north of baghdad began in the summer of 2003 and increased in intensity during the fall killing an average of three american soldiers each week.
by october more troops had died from these attacks than had been killed during the combat phase in march and april.
widespread looting sabotage of oil pipelines and difficulties in repairing and operating outdated power plants and oil facilities made economic recovery very slow and halting.
u s efforts to involve occupation forces from other un members yielded only a few troops.
the december 2003 arrest of saddam who had eluded capture until then despite determined efforts to find him revived american optimism.
yet the overall situation remained troubling.
despite slow but steady progress in restoring public services such as electric power and the gradual recovery of the iraq oil industry the armed insurrection continued.
mortar attacks on baghdad hotels roadside bombs aimed at american armored convoys and handheld missile attacks on american helicopters made iraq a very dangerous place.
equally disturbing conflicts of interest between shiite and sunni muslims as well as the kurdish demand for autonomy threatened the american goal of creating a stable iraqi government.
bush reelected not surprisingly the war in iraq became the central issue in the 2004 presidential race.
bush cast himself as the resolute commander in the war on terror he and his supporters contended that it would be reckless to change commanders midconflict.
democrats initially favored former vermont governor howard dean who had opposed the invasion of iraq and still strongly criticized bushs conduct of the war.
but the nomination ultimately barack obamas triumph and trials a divide and conquer policy toward the insurgents diminished the violence and made credible bushs claim that iraq had turned a corner toward democratic self government.
election of 2004 electoral vote by state popular vote republican george w bush 60 934 251 democratic john f kerry 57 765 291 barack obamas triumph and trials 405 933 independent ralph nader hawaii wash d c alaska what challenges faced barack obama and the american people during the first decade of the twentyfirst century.
119 105 475 went to senator john kerry of massachusetts a decorated vietnam war veteran who voted for the war but later criticized bush for misleading the country regarding the causes of the conflict and who contended that the war in iraq rather than contributing to the war on terror actually distracted from it.
the campaign was the most vitriolic in years.
democrats accused bush of having stolen the election of 2000 with the help of the supreme court and of lying about saddams weapons.
republicans called kerrys belated opposition to the war in vietnam an insult to those americans who had died there and they cited certain of his votes in the senate as evidence of a fatal inconsistency.
both sides following the example of howard dean in the primaries employed the internet to rally the faithful raise money and spread rumors.
the strong emotions produced a record turnout 12 million more than in 2000.
bush won the popular vote by 2 5 percent becoming the first victor since his father in 1988 to gain an absolute popular majority.
the electoral race was comparably close with 286 for bush and 252 for kerry.
taken together with the congressional elections which increased the republican majorities in both the senate and the house of representatives the 2004 race confirmed a red state blue state split in america with the republicans dominating the south the plains and the rockies while the democrats carried the northeast the great lakes and the west coast.
despite his modest margin of victory bush claimed a mandate.
he proposed to privatize part of the social security system and promised to stay the course in iraq.
his social security plan went nowhere but the situation in iraq eventually improved.
following a new round of insurgent attacks bush in 2007 ordered an increase in american troop strength this surge combined with by then however americans faced a new problem one that looked much like an old problem.
a booming real estate market in the early 2000s tempted banks and other investors to borrow and lend more than was prudent when the real estate bubble burst in 2007 the financial markets reeled.
wall streets panic evoked grim memories of the great depression of the 1930s and produced a comparable result at the ballot box the replacement of a republican president by a democratic one.
that this new president was the first african american to occupy the white house made his accession even more historic.
but it didnt make the problems he inherited less daunting.
the great recession wall streets troubles reached the crisis stage in the summer and autumn of 2008.
major lenders including the governmentbacked twins the federal national mortgage association and the federal home mortgage corporation nicknamed fannie mae and freddie mac teetered on the brink of bankruptcy.
the bush administration fearful of the consequences that might follow their collapse threw the two a life preserver of federal loans.
the panic nonetheless spread bringing down wall street giants bear stearns and lehman brothers and frightening the administration and congress into crafting a broader rescue package for the financial sector totaling hundreds of billions of dollars.
the bailout package averted chaos but left voters shaken.
until this point the republican nominee for president senator john mccain of arizona appeared the favorite in the 2008 contest.
his war hero background from the vietnam era reassured americans worried about the ongoing wars in afghanistan and iraq.
but the floundering economy neutralized mccains advantage and made voters take a second look at the democratic candidate senator barack obama of illinois.
obama ran a brilliant campaign summarized in the catchword hope and the promise yes we can more important was the fact that he was from the opposite party to that which had held the white house during the boom and bust.
obama garnered 53 percent of the popular vote and defeated mccain handily see map the election of 2008.
obamas supporters hoped for great things from the new president.
and indeed his inauguration was historic and moving.
god calls on us to shape an uncertain destiny obama said.
this is the meaning of our liberty and our creed why men and women and children of every race and every faith can join in celebration across this magnificent mall and why a man whose father less than 60 years ago might not have been served at a local restaurant can now stand before you to take a most sacred oath chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 election of 2008 electoral vote by state popular vote democratic barack obama 69 456 897 republican john mccain 59 934 814 129 391 711 hawaii wash d c alaska but the warm feeling soon wore off in the cold wind of the bleak economy.
the rescue package helped stabilize the financial sector but unemployment rose inexorably peaking at 10 percent in 2009 and remaining near there for the next year.
obama and the democratic majority in congress pushed through an economic stimulus package which may have kept unemployment from going even higher but did little to bring it down.
obama and the democrats also achieved something democratic presidents since harry truman had been attempting passage of a comprehensive program of medical insurance for nearly all americans.
but the measure passed in the face of bitter resistance from republicans in congress prompted a backlash among voters.
together with the lengthening recession it contributed to the rebuke the democrats received in the 2010 midterm elections in which the republicans reclaimed control of the house of representatives gained six seats in the senate and carried most of the governors races.
obama scored an important success when american special forces killed osama bin laden the al qaeda mastermind in 2011.
and he withdrew american troops from iraq and scheduled the removal of troops from afghanistan foreshadowing a reduction of the american military role in the middle east.
but instability in pakistan and the nuclear ambitions of iran suggested that americas worries about the region were far from over.
new challenges and old meanwhile the great recession knocked the federal budget wildly out of balance.
government revenues fell as unemployed workers no longer paid income taxes government spending rose to cover unemployment compensation and other recession related expenses.
by 2011 the annual deficit seemed stuck at more than 1 trillion.
reducing the deficit was the first priority to many voters and elected officials but if reducing the deficit required laying off government workers as it seemed certain to do it might aggravate the recession.
the problem for the moment defied solution.
other problems had deeper roots but no easier solutions.
the race question remained alive and contentious despite the presence of an african american in the white house.
affirmative action policies policies designed to ensure greater participation by minorities had been under scrutiny for years.
the bakke v regents of the university of california decision of 1978 had allowed the use of race as one factor in determining admission to colleges and universities so long as rigid racial quotas werent employed.
this dissatisfied many conservatives who during the 1980s and 1990s attacked affirmative action politically and in the courts.
in 1992 cheryl hopwood an unsuccessful white applicant to the university of texas law school challenged her rejection contending that the school had admitted less qualified african americans.
in 1996 the fifth circuit court of appeals decided in her favor and the hopwood decision raised the hopes of anti affirmative action groups that the supreme court would overturn bakke.
but in a 2003 case involving the university of michigan the supreme court ruled that student body diversity is a compelling state interest that can justify the use of race in university admissions in other words affirmative action in higher education could continue.
but the narrowness of the 5 4 vote suggested that affirmative action would continue to spark controversy as indeed it did.
even more controversial was abortion.
the issue had roiled american politics for decades but it did so particularly after the 2005 death of chief justice william rehnquist and the nearly concurrent retirement of associate justice sandra day oconnor.
the two vacancies on the supreme court allowed george w bush to nominate their replacements.
rehnquist had been a reliable conservative but oconnor was a swing vote and liberals feared that a more conservative successor would tip the balance against abortion rights among other contentious issues.
yet john roberts bushs nominee for chief justice and samuel alito the nominee for associate justice dodged democrats questions in hearings and both nominations succeeded.
almost immediately the south dakota legislature essentially banned abortion hoping to persuade the newly reconfigured court to revisit the 1973 roe decision which guaranteed abortion rights.
south dakota voters subsequently overturned the state law but the issue remained highly charged.
gay rights provoked fresh controversy as gay advocates pushed for equal marital rights.
after the massachusetts supreme court in 2004 struck down a state law barring same sex marriages gay advocates celebrated but conservatives in dozens of states pressed for laws and constitutional amendments reaffirming traditional views on the subject and defining marriage as the union of one man and one woman.
nearly all these efforts were successful suggesting that on this front at least the advances gay men and women had achieved since the 1960s had hit a wall.
the issue of military service proved similarly controversial.
bill clinton had achieved a minor breakthrough with the dont ask dont tell policy which allowed gay service as long as the men and women in question kept their sexual orientation to themselves.
barack obama campaigned to let gays come out of the military closet but the republican party resisted.
finally however in the lame duck session of congress in december 2010 the legislature approved and obama signed a measure repealing the dont ask dont tell policy and permitting gays to serve openly in the armed forces.
barack obamas triumph and trials watch the video the historical significance of the 2008 election barack obama takes the presidential oath of office from supreme court justice john roberts on january 20 2011 to become the 44th president of the united states.
president obamas wife michelle is holding the bible as an estimated 1 8 million people attended the inaugural on the national mall.
science and religion continued to battle in americas classrooms.
opponents of evolution revised their challenge to darwin replacing creationism with intelligent design and demanding that biology classes air this version of their beliefs.
school board elections hinged on the issue ohio embraced intelligent design only to reject it following an adverse 2005 court decision in a case from the dover school district.
for the moment the evolutionists held their own but given that public opinion polls consistently showed most americans rejecting evolution in favor of divine creation the fight was sure to continue.
doubting the future during most of american history every generation had been better off materially than the generation before.
events of the early twenty first century called this implicit guarantee into question.
the stubbornness of the great recession made americans wonder whether the economy would ever recover its resiliency.
the towering federal deficit imperiled such cherished programs as social security and medicare and put the myriad other contributions the federal government had long made to american life even more at risk.
demographics didnt help.
as the baby boom generation neared retirement the load on the social security system increased.
everyone realized that something would have to be done to keep the pension program afloat but no one could figure out how to make the necessary changes politically palatable.
middle aged americans faced the prospect of delayed retirement smaller pensions or both.
not surprisingly they objected.
younger americans resisted the tax increases that could have spared their elders such sacrifice.
the trend in health care costs was even more alarming.
for years medical costs had grown rapidly and as the population chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 aged the costs appeared certain to claim an ever larger share of the nations income.
the health care law enacted by congress at obamas behest promised to rein in medical costs but many observers doubted the promises and the republicans vowed to repeal it.
immigration remained controversial.
efforts to reduce the number of illegal entries by tighter enforcement at the border by sanctions on employers hiring undocumented aliens by temporary visas for guest workers stalled on the opposition of immigrant advocates businesses and other groups.
the cloud of the great recession had at least one silver lining as jobs grew scarce in america the flow of illegal immigrants diminished.
but no one doubted that the immigration issue would resurface or that it would provoke heated debate.
environmental problems demanded attention which they got and solutions which they didnt.
a broad consensus emerged among the scientific community that global warming had to be addressed but the proposed solutions higher mileage standards for automobiles a carbon tax on emissions of greenhouse gases greater reliance on nuclear energy among others were costly intrusive unproven or environmentally problematic in their own ways.
and though the scientists mostly agreed that humans were causing global warning the politicians did not.
as on other problems facing the country the consequence was deadlock.
the election of 2008 candidate obama mccain party democratic republican popular vote 69 456 897 59 934 814 electoral vote conclusion the end of the american future or not.
from before its eighteenth century birth as an independent nation america had been the land of the future.
immigrants to america left their pasts behind as they traveled to the new country native born americans treated the future as though they owned it.
and to nearly everyone in the country the future almost invariably looked bright.
by 2012 however the american future didnt look bright at all.
the terrorist attacks of 2001 had made americans feel vulnerable eleven years later they had suffered no comparable assaults but they still felt vulnerable.
they waited in long lines at airport security checkpoints and submitted to personal searches on entering public buildings and gathering places all over the country.
the great recession darkened americas economic horizons like nothing since the great depression and american officials could not agree on how to restore prosperity.
a poll released in 2011 revealed that only 44 percent of americans believed that the young people of this generation would live better than their parents the smallest percentage on record.
not everyone despaired though.
immigrants still came to america seeking its promise of a better life for themselves and their children.
high school graduates went to college in search of fulfilling jobs.
young men and women got married and had children hoping the little ones would fare well in the decades ahead.
those who knew history tended to be the most optimistic.
the country had been through difficult times in the past.
the american revolution the civil war the great depression and two world wars had tested americans mettle and faith in the future.
each time the country had survived typically stronger for the trial.
no one could guarantee that america would emerge from its current trials stronger than before but americans had never required guarantees.
study resources study y resources take the study plan for chapter 32 into the twenty first century 1989 2012 on myhistorylab time line 1989 berlin wall opens november 1990 saddam hussein invades kuwait august bush breaks no new taxes campaign pledge supports 500 billion budget deal november operation desert storm frees kuwait and crushes iraq january february soviet union dissolves replaced by commonwealth of independent states december riots devastate south central los angeles after verdict in rodney king case may bill clinton elected president november general motors announces loss of 23 4 billion the largest one year loss in u s corporate history 1994 republicans gain control of both houses of congress november u s troops arrive in bosnia as part of international peacekeeping force december clinton signs major welfare reform measure august terrorists bomb american embassies in kenya and tanzania senate acquits clinton of impeachment charges february dow jones industrial average goes over 10 000 for first time march y2k worries prove unfounded george w bush wins contested presidential election american economy goes into recession ending the longest period of expansion in u s history march terrorist attacks on world trade center and the pentagon september 11 anthrax spores found in mail october united states military action against the taliban regime in afghanistan october december 2002 department of homeland security created november 2003 u s troops invade iraq and overthrow saddam husseins regime march april saddam hussein captured december 2004 insurgency in iraq escalates global warming gains international attention george w bush reelected november 2005 bushs plan for social security reform fails hurricane katrina august devastates gulf coast and forces evacuation of new orleans 2006 proposed constitutional amendment to ban same sex marriage fails to achieve required two thirds majority in the senate 2007 troop surge in iraq helps calm insurgency february to 2008 real estate bubble bursts 2008 oil prices skyrocket before falling back federal government takes control of fannie mae and freddie mac september barack obama elected president november 2009 recession drives unemployment rate to 10 percent october 2010 health care reform passed january republicans regain control of house november 2011 osama bin laden killed may us troops leave iraq december chapter review the first president bush northern ireland the changing faces of america what were the important issues in george h w bushs presidency and how were they handled.
how did the american population shift and grow between 1990 and 2010.
in domestic affairs the first president bush focused on fixing the savings and loan industry and balancing the budget.
in foreign affairs he managed the end the cold war peacefully and successfully.
the gulf war of 1991 liberated kuwait and weakened the iraqi regime of saddam hussein but didnt remove saddam from power in baghdad.
p 770 americans continued to migrate to the sunbelt in the 1990s and early 2000s and immigration continued to grow.
hispanics formed the largest segment of the immigrant population and included millions of illegal immigrants.
african americans gained ground economically but still suffered from poverty as hurricane katrina demonstrated.
p 774 united kingdom north sea ireland denmark germany.
berlin wall breached nov 1989 east and west germany reunited oct 1990.
germany belg.
france switz.
free election sweeps noncommunists into power apr.
au s s italy chapter 32 chapter review the new democrats republicans triumphant what were the accomplishments and failures of the clinton administration.
how did george w bush become president and what did he do in the white house.
clinton balanced the federal budget and helped revive the economy which boomed during the 1990s.
the north american free trade agreement eliminated tariff barriers among the united states canada and mexico.
but personal scandals led to clintons impeachment which he survived although not without damage to his own reputation and that of the democrats.
p 778 george w bush became president in an election that turned on a ballot dispute in florida which was resolved only by the supreme court.
as president bush persuaded congress to cut taxes and after the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 to authorize invasions of afghanistan and iraq.
the war in iraq bogged down amid an insurgency against the american supported government in baghdad.
p 783 clinton and the world barack obamas triumph and trials what challenges faced barack obama and the american people during the first decade of the twenty first century.
how did clinton respond to the balkan wars.
ovenia 991 zagreb croatia 1991 eastern slavonia n io eg ar jin kra the breakup of communist yugoslavia in 1991 led to bloody ethnic fighting.
when serb forces began to commit atrocities first against muslim bosnians and then albanians in kosovo clinton organized military intervention by u s and nato forces that forced the serbs to stop and led to independence for both bosnia and kosovo.
p 781 voj bosnia and herzegovina 1992 sarajevo r in bosnia the culture wars between conservatives and liberals continued into the twenty first century with abortion affirmative action gay rights and evolution provoking controversy.
the great recession shook the economy and americans wondered how to deal with problems of health care retirement illegal immigration and the environment.
p 791 key terms and definitions americans with disabilities act ada passed by congress in 1991 this act banned discrimination against the disabled in employment and mandated easy access to all public and commercial buildings.
p 770 operation desert storm desert storm was the code name used the united states and its coalition partners used in the war against iraq in 1991 to liberate kuwait.
p 773 sunbelt a broad band of states running across the south from florida to texas extending west and north to include california and the pacific northwest.
beginning in the 1970s it experienced rapid economic and population growth.
p 774 undocumented aliens illegal immigrants mainly from mexico and central america.
p 776 contract with america in the 1994 congressional elections congressman newt gingrich had republican candidates sign a document in which they pledged support for such things as a balanced budget amendment term limits for members of congress and a middle class tax cut.
p 780 war on terror initiated by president george w bush after the attacks of september 11 2001 the broadly defined war on terror aimed to weed out terrorist operatives and their supporters throughout the world.
p 788 unilateralism a national policy of acting alone without consulting others.
p 789 affirmative action the use of laws or regulations to achieve racial ethnic gender or other diversity as in hiring or school admissions.
such efforts are often aimed at improving employment or educational opportunities for women and minorities.
p 792 critical thinking questions 1.
was the first president bush lucky or skillful in ending the cold war so successfully.
what do the internal migration to the sunbelt and the immigration to america from other countries have in common.
do you think president clinton should have been convicted on his impeachment charges.
many people thought the outcome of the 2000 election was a violation of democracy.
are you optimistic about americas future or pessimistic.
study resources myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 32 on myhistorylab the first president bush republicans triumphant view the closer look opening the wall berlin p 771 read the document george bush address to the nation on the persian gulf 1991 p 773 read the document illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 p 775 george w bush address to congress september 20 2001 p 789 watch the video bill clinton sells himself to america p 778 read the document bill clinton answers to the articles of impeachment p 781 clinton and the world read the document barack obamas triumph and trials the new democrats the balkan proximity peace talks agreement 1995 p 783 complete the assignment an inconvenient truth.
the controversy surrounding global warming p 786 read the document the changing faces of america view the closer look world trade center sept 11 2001 p 788 watch the video the historical significance of the 2008 election p 793 indicates study plan media assignment 894 chapter 27 tactics and motives most terrorists target high profile events or crowded places such as subway stations restaurants or shopping malls.
terrorists choose these spots carefully to gain the most attention and to achieve the highest level of intimidation.
terrorists use bullets and bombs as their main weapons.
in recent years however some terrorist groups have used biological and chemical agents in their attacks.
these actions involve the release of bacteria or poisonous gas into the air.
the reasons for terrorist attacks vary.
traditional motives include gaining independence expelling foreigners or changing society.
these objectives frequently give rise to domestic terrorism violence used by people to change the policies of their own government or to overthrow their government.
in the late 20th century another type of terrorism began to emerge.
terrorists wanted to achieve political ends or destroy what they considered to be forces of evil.
they attacked targets not just in their own country but anywhere in the world.
these terrorists were even willing to commit suicide to ensure the success of their attacks.
9 11 and its impact on september 11 the weapons the terrorists used were planes loaded with fuel.
the planes became destructive missiles when they crashed into their targets.
firefighters worked around the clock trying to find survivors in the wreckage.
medical workers rushed to staff the city s trauma centers.
but after the first wave of injured were rescued there were few survivors to treat.
a flood of volunteers assisted rescue workers.
from around the country people sent donations of blood food and money to new york city.
after the first few days the work at ground zero the world trade center disaster site shifted to recovering bodies and removing the massive amount of debris.
once the area was cleared plans to rebuild the site were proposed.
in february 2003 a development committee chose a design for a new building complex comprised of several buildings including freedom tower intended to be the tallest building in new york city and a memorial park with reflecting pools.
construction of the new design began in 2006.
the attacks of september 11 dramatically altered the way americans looked at life.
for the first time many americans became afraid that terrorism could happen in their own country at any time.
this sense of vulnerability intensified when another wave of attacks hit the united states a few days after september 11 letters containing anthrax spores were sent to people in the news media and to members of congress in washington d c.
when inhaled these spores could damage the lungs and cause death.
five people died after inhaling the spores in tainted letters.
some investigators believed that the letters were sent by a lone terrorist and not by a terrorist group.
no link between the letters and the september 11 attacks was ever found.
the anthrax letters increased americans fear of terrorism.
the twin towers of the world trade center in new york burn after the september 11 attacks.
issues for the 21st century to help share information about the risk of terrorist attacks with the american people the department created the homeland security advisory system.
the united states responds after conducting a massive investigation the u s government determined that osama bin laden a saudi arabian millionaire had directed the terrorists responsible for the september 11 attacks.
the terrorists were part of the al qaeda network.
the home base for al qaeda was afghanistan ruled by a strict islamic regime called the taliban.
the taliban supported the terrorist group.
in return bin laden provided fighters to the taliban.
the united states led by president george w bush built an international coalition or alliance to fight terrorism and the al qaeda network.
after the taliban refused to turn over bin laden coalition forces led by the united states began military action in afghanistan.
in october 2001 the united states launched operation enduring freedom.
the military began bombing taliban air defenses airfields and command centers as well as al qaeda training camps.
within two months u s special forces and marines and fighters from the northern alliance a coalition of anti taliban afghan troops drove the taliban from power.
american forces stormed into iraq in march of 2003 over intelligence of weapons of mass destruction.
by early april iraqi president saddam hussein s regime had fallen.
he was later captured and the united states moved to establish a new iraqi government.
in the years that have followed u s troops have been stationed throughout the middle east to train local security forces and help resolve conflicts.
president barack obama worked towards the withdrawal of military forces in iraq from 2009 2011.
in 2011 president obama announced u s forces had finally succeeded in killing osama bin laden in pakistan.
fighting terrorism at home to combat terrorism on the home front the bush administration created the department of homeland security in 2002.
this executive department was designed to analyze threats guard the nation s borders seaports and airports and coordinate the country s response to attacks.
the department of homeland security also searched for terrorists in the united states.
the government soon discovered that the al qaeda network had used sleepers to carry out its terrorist attacks.
sleepers are agents who enter a country blend into a community and when called upon secretly prepare for and commit terrorist acts.
u s officials detained and questioned arabs and other muslims who behaved suspiciously or violated immigration regulations.
many suspects captured in afghanistan were held in a prison camp at guantanamo bay cuba.
the united states faced criticism at home and abroad regarding its treatment of detainees.
critics claimed that detaining people without charging them and without access to attorneys violated their civil rights.
the government argued that limiting civil liberties in wartime to protect national security was not unusual.
u s officials used the same argument to try some terrorist suspects in military tribunals rather than in criminal courts.
usa patriot act in congress lawmakers took up the question about how to prevent future terrorist attacks.
in the years before 2001 many lawmakers opposed measures that infringed on the civil rights of americans.
after 9 11 congress quickly passed the usa patriot act on october 26 2001 to give the government power to conduct search and surveillance of suspected terrorists.
this law allowed the government to 896 chapter 27 detain foreigners suspected of terrorism for seven days without charging them with a crime.
in some cases prisoners were held indefinitely.
tap all phones used by suspects and monitor their e mail and internet use.
make search warrants valid across states.
order u s banks to investigate sources of large foreign accounts.
prosecute terrorist crimes without any time restrictions or limitations.
some people questioned the constitutionality of the law.
they claimed that it violated the first fourth fifth sixth and seventh amendments.
in 2005 it was revealed that president bush had ordered the national security agency nsa to spy on american citizens international telephone calls and e mails without obtaining warrants.
some critics complained that it gave law enforcement too much power and posed a threat to basic freedoms.
to address these concerns congress agreed to let some provisions of the law expire after a certain period of time.
since that time there have been repeated extensions on certain provisions for security purposes.
in 2011 president obama signed the patriot sunsets extension act.
an airport security official inspects a travelers shoe at a security checkpoint.
aviation security the federal government s role in aviation security also increased.
national guard troops began patrolling airports and sky marshals were assigned to airplanes.
in november 2001 president bush signed into law the aviation and transportation security act which made airport security the responsibility of the federal government.
previously individual airports had been responsible for their own security.
because of this new law an agency called the transportation security administration tsa was created to inspect airline passengers baggage and cargo as well as noncitizens training to be pilots.
the tsa is also responsible for safety on railroads buses and mass transit systems.
as the united states fights terrorism and tries to balance national security with civil rights the public debate over security measures continues.
summarizing how would you summarize the reaction of the american people to the attacks of 9 11.
analyzing effects how did the u s government respond to the threat of terrorism after 9 11.
evaluating why do some people think the usa patriot act is unconstitutional.
explain the constitutional issues raised by this act and other responses to the 9 11 terrorist attack.
drawing conclusions why do you think that certain provisions of the usa patriot act have been continually renewed.
issues for the 21st century 81 global involvement how does the united states participate in international organizations and treaties.
issues regarding the sovereignty of the united states have been up for debate since the nation s beginnings.
the nation s first president george washington warned about maintaining america s independence and not giving up power to other nations.
in the 21st century the u s has continued to be widely involved in world affairs.
in doing so america s leaders have had many debates about the nation s sovereignty and the role it should take on the world stage.
historical perspective the un general assembly meets in the un headquarters before a vote on a resolution to condemn abuses by the syrian government.
in george washington s farewell address of 1796 he advised america s current and future leaders to not give into foreign influence.
he warned that the united states should avoid permanent alliances and not let the affairs of other countries interfere with the nation s peace and prosperity.
for about 100 years u s leaders mostly followed washington s advice and kept the nation largely isolated from world affairs outside of the western hemisphere.
u s foreign policy changed during the 20th century.
some leaders wanted to remain isolationist but ultimately america was drawn into the first world war.
after world war i ended debates over america s sovereignty were ignited when president woodrow wilson called for the formation of the league of nations.
wilson believed that having such an international organization would help secure lasting peace in the world.
opponents of the league complained that it would limit america s independence in international affairs.
in the end the united states did not join the league of nations.
following world war ii an international organization known as the united nations un was formed to replace the league of nations.
this time the united states took an active role in its creation.
the un continues to operate as a kind of world government.
today the debate continues over whether international organiza tions and treaties should have authority over america s actions in global affairs.
the u s continues to grapple with the un and international treaties regarding military and other actions it takes that affect the whole world.
war in iraq after the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 the united states called for a renewal of the arms inspections in iraq.
in november 2002 the un security council passed a resolution designed to force iraq to give up all weapons of mass destruction wmd.
the security council is responsible for maintaining international peace and security.
the united states is one of the council s five 898 chapter 27 permanent members.
being a permanent member gives the united states more influence in the council.
when the arms inspections resumed hussein refused to cooperate fully.
soon the united states and great britain cut off diplomatic relations with iraq.
in early february 2003 u s secretary of state colin powell gave a presentation to the un security council maintaining that iraq was hiding wmd.
soon thereafter the united states and great britain pressed the un to pass a resolution that authorized the use of military force against iraq.
as an alternative france germany and russia presented a plan that called for intensifying the inspections.
the united states and great britain countered by claiming that a new un resolution was not necessary since iraq was in violation of the old agreement.
they also claimed that iraq s violation justified the use of military force to overturn hussein s regime.
operation iraqi freedom in march 2003 the united states and great britain launched operation iraqi freedom without the approval of the un security council.
the war began with massive air raids sections of baghdad were the primary targets.
coalition troops had taken control of most of iraq by april 14.
hussein was captured on december 13 2003.
he was convicted of crimes against humanity and hanged in 2006.
search for wmd the case for going to war against iraq was based on assertions by the united states and british governments that saddam hussein had wmd.
once major combat ended on may 1 u s forces began an extensive search for wmd.
movable biological laboratories were located but by mid 2005 no wmd had been found.
this led many in the united states and great britain to question the necessity for the war.
bush and british prime minister tony blair responded by claiming that they had based their decision on intelligence that was later proved faulty.
critics also questioned the legitimacy of the war given that the un security council had not approved of taking military action.
in may 2005 a top secret memo known as the downing street memo became public.
it suggested that the bush administration had planned to invade iraq as early as july 2002.
iraq after hussein after the fall of hussein s regime the united states led in the establishment f the coalition provisional authority cpa to temporarily govern iraq and oversee its reconstruction.
the creation of the cpa had the approval of the united nations security council.
on june 28 2004 the cpa was replaced by a temporary government made up of iraqis.
and n january 30 2005 shiite muslim parties won a majority of seats in iraq s election for a transitional national assembly that would draft iraq s constitution.
shiites eventually agreed to allow members of the sunni muslim minority to participate in shaping the country s constitution.
on october 15 2005 iraqi voters narrowly accepted a new constitution.
in december iraq held elections to choose a permanent parliament.
the shiites captured a majority of seats but not enough to control the government.
despite this progress violence between sunnis and shiites continued to plague iraq.
insurgents or rebels engaged in acts of violence that killed thousands militants also attacked u s troops.
in response president bush announced i plan in january 2007 to send 20 000 more u s troops to iraq.
in february 2009 president obama unveiled a plan to remove all u s troops from iraq.
the last u s ombat forces left iraq on december 18 2011.
in baghdad iraqis pull down a statue of saddam hussein after the dictators regime is overthrown.
issues for the 21st century 8.
international criminal court another organization that seeks to help govern the international community is the international criminal court icc.
it is the first treaty based international criminal court.
it is set up to try individuals who are accused of serious crimes that affect the international community.
the court was adopted in july 1998 but did not become active until july 2002.
the icc was ratified by 122 countries but it did not receive approval from the united states.
some americans think it is a good idea to have a neutral international court that deals with genocide and other crimes against humanity.
others do not want to see u s soldiers or other americans tried in an international court for crimes.
they say that america s founders never intended for americans to be tried in courts outside the united states.
treaties regulating global energy in the 21st century members of the international community have made efforts to combat climate change.
one of the main goals has been to reduce the amount of air pollution created from burning fossil fuels.
many believe that these pollutants are causing earth s climate to change in a negative way.
many experts think that the carbon dioxide gas released when people use fossil fuels is building up and warming earth s climate.
they believe that by reducing greenhouse emissions the negative effects of climate change can be offset or reduced.
differing opinions about climate change including whether or not humans are causing it have made it difficult to reach a consensus on what should be done about it.
the kyoto protocol the kyoto protocol is an international treaty that seeks to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.
the agreement is connected to the united nations framework convention on climate change.
the kyoto protocol was adopted in kyoto japan in december 1997 and went into effect in february 2005.
under the protocol countries emissions of greenhouse gases have to be recorded and revealed in annual reports.
students in beijing china show their support for the kyoto protocol.
900 chapter 27 many who think that earth s climate is changing and is affected by human activity believe that the kyoto protocol is a necessary step in the right direction.
critics of the protocol do not like the idea of american industries being monitored by an international organization and governed by the terms of an international treaty.
they believe that no americans should be subjected to any jurisdiction outside of the u s constitution.
the united states is a signatory or signer of the treaty but so far it has declined to ratify it.
the copenhagen accord the copenhagen accord is an international treaty that calls for a continuation of the kyoto protocol.
it also encourages a strengthening of worldwide efforts to combat climate change.
like the kyoto protocol the accord stresses that dramatic cuts in greenhouse gas emissions is necessary to slowing the effects of climate change.
the accord set an initial deadline of january 31 2010 for countries to submit their goals for reducing emissions.
the goal is to significantly reduce emissions by 2020.
in the united states support for the accord is divided along similar lines as the kyoto protocol.
many who believe that climate change is real support the accord.
they want to reign in industries emissions of air pollutants and other factors that can magnify climate change.
those who think climate change is not occurring do not support the accord.
they believe american industries should not be regulated by an international organization.
civil war in syria in 2013 a brutal civil war continued in the middle eastern nation of syria.
in august that year there was a suspicious and deadly attack that killed more than 1 000 people.
members of the international community suspected that president assad of syria had used chemical weapons on his own people.
president barack obama and members of his administration wanted to punish assad s regime with military action.
however other member nations of the un such as china and russia thought there was not enough evidence to connect the chemical attacks to assad.
some un member nations voted against taking forceful action against the assad regime.
different sides argued whether or not the united states should intervene without un approval and support.
americans continue to debate who decides when it is necessary to use military force.
people have different views on whether the final authority should come from the un security council or the president congress or the american people.
ultimately the united states decided to follow a diplomatic path with the un approval and avoided military conflict with the syrian government.
analyzing issues what are the pros and cons of the united states participation in international organizations and treaties.
evaluating decisions do you think the united states had the authority to launch operation iraqi freedom without the approval of the un security council.
explain your answer.
think about drawing conclusions why do you think there is so much disagreement over american industries reducing greenhouse gases.
explain your answer.
summarizing what are the main goals of the kyoto protocol and the copenhagen accord.
the circumstances that led up to the military operation the intelligence that the united states and great britain were aware of up to that point forming opinions some americans believe that global organizations are attempting to undermine u s sovereignty through the use of treaties.
do you agree or disagree.
support your answer.
issues for the 21st century 91 teks9a 9b 10e 11b 26c civil rights in the 21st century how has the civil rights movement grown and changed in the 21st century.
at the dedication of the martin luther king jr memorial in washington d c in october 2011 president obama acknowledged that if dr king were alive today he would recognize that the nation still faces many civil rights challenges.
president obama said that these challenges include neighborhoods with schools that are underfunded and lack of good health care for all.
much has changed since dr kings time but the civil rights movement continues in the 21st century.
african americans hispanic americans women and other groups continue to work for equal rights.
although there are many issues that still need to be resolved many victories have been achieved in the present day civil rights movement.
historical perspective the civil rights movement in the united states had its start during the colonial days with those colonists who opposed slavery.
it continued in the 1800s with the abolition movement.
in december 1865 after the civil war the thirteenth amendment to the constitution was ratified.
it officially outlawed slavery in the united states and its territories.
in 1868 the fourteenth amendment was ratified.
this amendment recognized the citizenship of african americans and granted the same civil rights to all people in the united states except for native americans.
two years later the fifteenth amendment was passed to guarantee the right to vote to african american men.
women had not yet gained the right to vote.
african american civil rights suffered setbacks after reconstruction.
in the late 1800s legalized racism returned to the south.
some states passed new laws that defied the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments.
these so called black codes differed from state to state but they often prevented african americans from voting or traveling freely.
they also kept african americans from owning certain kinds of property or working at certain kinds of jobs.
supported by the supreme court s 1896 ruling in plessy v ferguson the segregation of african americans and white people was the law of the land in much of the united states in the early 1900s.
in the late 1800s and early 1900s a new group of champions joined the battle for civil rights.
they included booker t washington and w e b.
du bois helped found the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp.
this organization was established in 1909.
in the decades ahead the naacp would be a powerful voice in the struggle to improve the legal rights of african americans.
902 chapter 27 hispanic civil rights issues for the 21st century african american civil rights the civil rights movement continues to work for equal rights for african americans.
in august 2013 on the 50th anniversary of dr king s march on washington civil rights leaders named three areas that they believe still need correction.
these areas are the gap between rich and poor efforts to restrict voters access to the polls and discrimination in the criminal justice system.
many leaders have also criticized the recent ruling from the supreme court that struck down a key part of the voting rights act of 1965.
martin luther king iii the son of dr king has said that more work needs to be done to achieve his father s vision of a country free of racial prejudice.
congressman john lewis who nearly died in a march for voting rights in selma alabama in 1963 also spoke at the march on washington anniversary.
he summed up the work that lies ahead for the civil rights movement.
he said we have come a great distance since that day but many of the issues that gave rise to that march are still pressing needs in our society violence poverty hunger long term unemployment homelessness voting rights and the need to protect human dignity.
today s civil rights workers hope to bring about as much progress as was made a half century ago.
they are taking up the cause of justice and equality with new tools.
they use the internet and social media to spread their message.
they register student voters electronically and also file online petitions.
pro immigration supporters take part in a rally held by lulac in dallas texas.
their appearance resembled those who perpetrated the attacks.
this led to more americans being suspicious of other immigrant groups as well.
many americans began calling for better border security including between the united states and mexico.
even though many hispanic americans had been living in the united states for hundreds of years they faced increased discrimination.
in 2004 some anti immigrant activists began organizing along the u s mexico border.
groups who supported immigrant rights held rallies to counter those activists.
in 2006 latin american immigrants and their supporters began holding demonstrations across the country in support of immigrant rights.
they also protested the growing hostility toward undocumented workers.
in may 2006 some hispanic immigrants took part in a day without immigrants in which they boycotted work school and shopping areas to remind people of the importance of immigrants to the u s economy.
in the discussion of hispanic civil rights immigration reform remains one of the most important and most polarizing issues.
the president and leaders from both parties in congress continue to debate the issue but it has been difficult to reach agreement between all the different sides involved.
meanwhile advocacy groups such as the league of united latin american citizens lulac continue to work for equal rights and equal opportunities for hispanic americans.
womens rights u s appeals court judge rosemary barkett center delivers the keynote address during a special session of florida s high court honoring the state s first 150 female lawyers on june 15 2000 in tallahassee florida.
in 1961 president john f kennedy named a commission to study the status of women in the workplace.
its report revealed that employers paid women less than men for equal work.
the report also said that women were rarely promoted to top positions in their fields.
about 40 years later the u s census bureau found that more women than ever before worked outside the home about 60 percent.
women made up 47 percent of the american work force.
yet in 2005 they held only 16 4 percent of the most senior jobs according to a sampling of the fortune 500 the nation s 500 largest companies.
women have made great strides in recent decades.
in 2002 they filled half of all jobs in managerial and professional specialty areas.
women have also been entering new fields including construction work and equipment repair.
the increase in the number of women in managerial and other professional jobs has helped change and shape american culture.
despite these positive signs the key issues of unequal pay and unequal representation remain.
women are still making less than their male counterparts averaging only 77 cents for every dollar earned by men.
in the nation s most top level jobs men continue to vastly outnumber women.
as of 2007 women headed only ten fortune 500 companies.
very few women who became corporate officers held line positions jobs with profit and loss responsibility.
in 2005 women held only 10 6 percent of line positions while men held 89 4 percent of them.
904 chapter 27 civil rights for all in the 21st century advocacy groups have become concerned that the constitutional rights of some americans are being violated.
gay rights groups are working to secure what they view as marriage equality for gay people.
groups who believe that some laws violate their right to bear arms are working to expand gun rights.
gay rights the gay rights movement in the united states has made great strides in recent years toward equal rights and opportunities.
for instance after years of protesting the u s military s policies regarding gay soldiers the don t ask don t tell policy that prevented openly gay individuals from joining the military was repealed in 2011.
in addition gay rights activists and many other american citizens believe that gay people should have the same right to marry the people they love that straight or heterosexual people have.
marriage equality usa is one organization that is working to get same sex marriage legalized in the united states.
it does this through education outreach and media campaigns.
those supporting same sex marriage have seen progress at the state level and in federal court.
supporters of the traditional idea of marriage as the union of one man and one woman have fought back.
groups like the national organization for marriage oppose what they call the redefinition of the institution.
gun ownership rights in 1993 president bill clinton signed the brady act which called for states to place a five day waiting period on the sale of handguns.
during that period police check the potential buyer s background.
if they find a criminal record a gun permit is denied.
however four years later in june 1997 the brady act was substantially weakened when the supreme court ruled that the federal government could not force state or local officials to run background checks on potential buyers of handguns.
at the center of the gun control issue lies a long standing constitutional debate.
the second amendment to the constitution states this a well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.
the national rifle association nra which is opposed to tougher gun control laws argues that gun control laws violate this right to bear arms.
founded in 1871 the nra is an american non profit organization that promotes firearm ownership.
the group s involvement in politics centers on its belief that firearm ownership is a civil right protected by the second amendment.
others contend that the second amendment was not intended to guarantee a right to personal weapons.
rather its purpose is to protect the state s right to maintain military units.
however recent rulings from the supreme court have affirmed that it is an individual right.
summarizing what new rights did the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments guarantee to african americans.
evaluating analyzing effects how do you think increasing numbers of women in managerial and other professional roles help shape american culture.
explain your answer.
how is todays civil rights movement different from how it was in the past.
how is it similar.
think about rights that african americans analyzing causes now that about a third of the states have legalized same sex marriage do you think more states will follow.
explain your answer.
fought for in the past rights that african americans fight for today 5.
categorizing identify and describe the organizations promoting civil rights for african americans hispanic americans women and other civil rights movements.
issues for the 21st century teks13b 22c 26a 26c immigration how does immigration affect the united states.
for hundreds of years immigrants have come to the united states from numerous places throughout the world.
the many immigrants who became u s citizens are held together by a common bond.
that bond is their shared belief in the self evident truths stated in the declaration of independence that all people are created equal and have the right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
immigrants who came to the united states looking for a better life have also helped shape the country.
latino ranchers developed many of the tools and skills of the american cowboy.
chinese laborers laid the tracks of the transcontinental railroad.
african americans though not voluntary immigrants labored to develop the agriculture of the south and the industry of the north.
farmers and workers of every origin built the nation we know today.
today s immigrants from latin america asia and other parts of the world continue to shape american culture.
they bring new ideas and new traditions.
they also affect america s demographic patterns which are the ways in which the nation s population changes.
historical perspective america has always been a nation of immigrants.
from 1900 into the 1940s economic troubles and rapid population growth spurred more than 16 million europeans to move to the united states.
the same pressures have more recently hit asia and latin america with the same effect on the united states.
between 1989 and 2009 more than 21 million new immigrants came to the united states.
many immigrants eventually choose to become naturalized citizens.
the pros and cons of immigration have been argued throughout american history.
in the 1700s benjamin franklin worried about the number of germans immigrating to pennsylvania.
sharp anti immigration sentiment spurred the nativist movement that developed in the 1830s and the america first campaign of the 1920s.
americans today are divided on the issue.
some agree with former new york city mayor rudolph giuliani that immigrants challenge us with new ideas and new perspectives.
they look at america s history of diversity and believe that immigrants bring new energy to the country.
others side with dan stein of the federation for american immigration reform who has said that large scale immigration is not serving the needs and interests of the country.
the debate over immigration complicating the debate over immigration has been the issue of immigrantswho enter the country illegally.
by 2009 the number of immigrants who have arrived 906 chapter 27 in the united states illegally was estimated at close to 11 million.
a 2004 report by the center for immigration studies suggested that households headed by immigrants who are in the country illegally each used about 2 700 more in federal government services than they paid in taxes.
congress had addressed such issues in the 1990s passing laws that toughened measures to bar illegal entry and limit benefits to immigrants who arrived illegally.
in february 2005 president george w bush proposed a new approach.
stating that america s immigration system is.
unsuited to the needs of our economy and the values of our country he endorsed a guest worker program.
this program would have allowed foreigners to work in the united states for a set period of time.
however as of 2010 a guest worker program had not been enacted into law.
in 2013 the debate over immigration reform continued.
in the meantime some states took action on the illegal entry of immigrants.
for example in 2010 arizona passed a law that enhanced state and local police authority to enforce federal immigration laws.
economic debate those who favor immigration limits claim that immigrants take jobs from americans.
however data suggest that immigration has not hurt the economy and may have helped fuel its growth.
at the same time that millions of immigrant workers including some undocumented workers were joining the work force the overall trend in unemployment was downward.
however in 2009 when unemployment rose above 9 percent the number of illegal immigrants in the united states fell.
another argument focuses on wages.
economists agree that immigrants tend to work for lower wages than native born workers.
harvard university economists estimated that one third of the gap between low paid and high paid workers results from higher numbers of immigrants.
but they also reported that other factors foreign trade declining union membership and new technology play a greater role in lowering wages.
immigrants fill skilled high paying jobs as well.
current law limits the number of immigrants who may enter the united states within specific employment categories or preferences.
the 2009 limit was set at about 140 000.
however there were more applicants than places in 2009.
responsibilities of citizenship some people are concerned that certain immigrants never become citizens and so fail to completely participate in american life.
statistics show that legal immigrants are becoming citizens in ever higher numbers.
even so many immigrants eligible for citizenship have not applied to become citizens.
experts attribute this to a variety of factors including the rising cost of filing for citizenship a backlog of applications and a presumed lack of interest among some immigrants.
the oath of u s citizenship carries with it such responsibilities as voting serving on juries and in some cases military service.
cultural concerns the diversity of the u s population has raised concerns that america has no common culture.
some say that at 12 6 percent of the population the foreign born are too numerous in america.
historian david kennedy points out that in 1910 the percentage was even higher 14 7 percent.
those who favor limits claim that new immigrants do not mix with other groups and instead form ethnic neighborhoods that divide society.
others believe that immigrants enrich american cultural life.
historically many immigrants have joined together in tight knit ethnic communities.
this has helped them to keep many of their native customs alive even as they have begun to blend into american society.
aspects of their vibrant heritages and religions have shaped the broader culture.
the traditions of immigrants from africa asia europe and latin america as well as other newcomers representing a variety of racial and ethnic groups have contributed to the nation s diverse culture and identity.
issues for the 21st century moral issues the issue of asylum providing a safe place for people fleeing oppression has been the toughest of all.
while immigration is allowed for political asylum those who flee famine or poverty are turned away.
are such policies fair.
some rules allow relatives of immigrants to enter the country.
representative lamar smith of texas believes that these rules admit immigrants who have no marketable skills and end up on welfare.
yet social scientist nathan glazer says that concern about the number of immigrants conflicts with sympathy for those trying to bring in wives children parents brothers and sisters.
some observers believe that there are simply too many immigrants.
slow immigration for a time they suggest.
in polls taken in mid 2010 about a third of the population seemed to agree with this idea expressing the opinion that the level of legal immigration should be decreased.
immigration and religion immigrants coming to the united states have always brought their cultures languages and traditions with them.
they also bring their religious beliefs.
most settlers in the original english colonies were protestant christians.
later immigration increased the numbers of catholics jews and other groups.
recently new immigrants have brought even greater diversity.
as more immigrants come from asia and africa various cultures and religions have been introduced to the united states.
today about 80 percent of people in the united states identify themselves as christians.
among organized religions the next largest group is judaism with about 2 percent of the population.
religions such as islam buddhism and hinduism are growing although members of each faith still make up less than 1 percent of the total u s population.
the first amendment of the u s constitution guarantees the free exercise of religion which means that anyone may practice his or her beliefs.
by guaranteeing freedom of religion the constitution has enabled the united states to become increasingly diverse in terms of religion.
unfortunately some religious minorities have faced persecution in the united states.
in the wake of terrorist actions against the united states committed by muslim extremists some muslim american citizens and muslim s 5 religious leaders from muslim christian and jewish faiths gather to oppose an anti muslim incident in 2011.
i 908 chapter 27 tomorrows population immigrants have been the targets of discrimination violence and other civil rights abuses.
in response organizations such as the council on american islamic relations cair have been working to protect and expand the political rights of muslim americans to ensure that they are able to enjoy full and equal participation in american society and government.
1 members of the latin american community in los angeles raise their hands to bless fruit baskets as a sign of immigrants daily work in californias fields.
the sign reads this fruit is the product of immigrants labor the u s census which measures the population every 10 years reveals several trends changing the face of america.
for example a comparison of 1980 and 2000 census data shows that the u s population has grown more diverse a trend expected to continue.
ethnic minorities such as african asian and hispanic americans currently make up about 30 percent of the u s population.
of the more than 30 million foreign born residents in the united states more than 50 percent were born in latin america and about 25 percent were born in asia.
by 2050 these groups are expected to form about half of america s total population.
the number of asian americans is expected to more than triple.
hispanic americans are expected to become nearly one fourth of the u s population.
the nation s growing minority groups will likely play a leading role in the future.
in part because much recent immigration has come from latin america hispanic americans are the largest and fastest growing minority group in the united states.
it is estimated that by 2020 hispanics will total an estimated 60 4 million people and account for half of the growth of the u s labor force.
with their rising numbers have come newfound political and economic powers.
many people point to the hispanic vote as a key factor in recent state and national elections.
about 50 percent of hispanics in the united states live in either texas or california.
after california texas has the largest hispanic population mostly of mexican origin.
unlike with earlier european immigrants mexican immigration has not come in a single wave but rather a continuous flow for more than 100 years.
analyzing issues what are some of the benefits of continued immigration to the united states.
what are some of the drawbacks.
summarizing explain actions taken to expand political rights for religious minorities in american society.
analyzing effects how have immigrants who have entered the united states illegally affected the debate over immigration.
think about the number of immigrants who have arrived illegally their use of federal government resources 4.
evaluating in what ways do you think u s citizens today embrace the self evident truths stated in the declaration of independence.
explain your answer.
drawing conclusions how have hispanic americans helped change the demographic patterns of the united states.
explain your answer.
issues for the 21st century j teks11b uf social issues and government responses who has the responsibility of helping the poor the uninsured and the retired in the united states.
politicians come into office with their own goals.
president lyndon johnson a former texas high school teacher and long time member of congress became president with the bold goal of creating a great society in which problems such as poverty and racism would be eliminated.
many of these programs passed and still exist today such as medicare and medicaid.
medicare provides health insurance for senior citizens while medicaid provides medical care for the poor.
many conservatives opposed johnson s great society programs.
they argued that his costly programs would increase both the size of government and the country s debt.
they feared a larger central government would rob people of their democratic freedoms.
since the founding of our country political leaders have disagreed about the role of government in business and our private lives and no one has yet found a solution to eradicate these issues.
historical perspective the united states was established on such ideals as human equality limited government and democratic representation.
today as when our nation was founded the american government is separated into three branches the executive branch the legislative branch and the judicial branch.
for over two hundred years these three branches have worked under a system of checks and balances so that no one branch ever becomes too powerful.
when the government gets involved in social issues it needs to work within this system to pass laws and garner support.
with each new administration leaders across the political spectrum propose and enact different approaches to solving social issues such as poverty health care and financial support for retirees.
some leaders advocate for government to play an expanded role in people s lives creating government programs to provide benefits.
others believe that government should take a more limited approach allowing state and local programs to solve problems.
they are wary of the cost of these government programs and the risk of taking away individual control.
citizens influence these views by voting for candidates whose ideals most closely match their own.
people also try to influence government through political and social advocacy groups.
these groups do not hold office but they try to influence lawmakers by swaying public opinion and arguing for certain legislation.
each group has its own motive for action and advocates for its cause.
for example the republican national hispanic organization advocates within the republican party for more electoral participation by hispanic minorities for hispanic interests and issues.
americans for democratic action advocates for progressive approaches to economic and social justice environmental policy and civil rights.
910 chapter 27 health care one major challenge for the future is health care.
advances in medical science are help ing americans live longer.
the nation s average life expectancy today is 78 years.
by 2025 it is expected to be about 80.
the u s population is aging and people typ ically require more health care as they age.
thus as older americans make up a large part of the population health care issues will affect more people.
at the same time the costs of health care and health insurance are rising.
the availability of health care and the role of government in health care have been major concerns in the united states in the 21st century.
political leaders across the spectrum have debated for over fifty years how medical coverage for the uninsured should be funded.
health care and politics national health insurance for americans was first proposed by president truman in 1949 but congress failed to approve it.
it took president lyndon b johnson to enact medicare in 1965.
the program covered most of the cost of medical care for people age 65 and above.
by the 1990s medicare required an increasing share of federal spending.
in hopes of controlling costs and providing universal coverage president clinton proposed a complex plan.
however lobbying by doctors and private insurers and the public s mistrust of big government caused congress to defeat clinton s plan in 1994.
meanwhile many americans were afraid they would be denied health insurance because of preexisting conditions medical conditions that are already present when a person applies for coverage.
the health insurance portability and accountability act passed in 1996 partly addressed that concern.
it limited the situations under which insurers could exclude from coverage those with preexisting conditions.
health care and the election health care continued to be a hot topic during the 2000 presidential campaign and beyond.
one of the issues was the rising cost of prescription drugs.
about 40 percent of people on medicare were without prescription drug coverage.
in 2003 president george w bush signed the medicare prescription drug improvement and modernization act mma.
this law provided access to drug coverage for elderly and disabled people on medicare beginning in 2006.
another worrying issue for policymakers in the early 2000s was the number of people without health insurance.
this problem was extensive some 17 4 percent of nonelderly americans were uninsured in 2008.
about 8 million of the uninsured were children.
in 2008 barack obama made health care reform one of his major campaign issues as he ran for president.
the patient protection and affordable care act ppaca was signed into law in 2010 by president obama.
it extended the children s health insurance program chip a program that provides health coverage to children of low income families.
it also tackled the issue of uninsured adults.
it extended private insurance coverage through individual mandates that is requiring individuals to get some level of health coverage.
beginning on october 1 2013 uninsured individuals could purchase health insurance plans that had been set up in accordance with the affordable care act.
individuals continue to discuss whether the government should be able to mandate that people obtain health insurance.
the affordable care act is trying to address issues surrounding access to medical care for more americans.
issues for the 21st century checks and balances the ppaca also known as obamacare shows the system of checks and balances in action in tackling social issues.
president barack obama from the executive branch suggested the law to congress.
members of the legislative branch in congress passed the law in 2010.
when some critics opposed the law they brought a case to the supreme court.
the court part of the judicial branch ruled that the law was constitutional and should be enacted.
poverty poverty has long been a problem in america.
a variety of factors including illness discrimination natural disaster and economic downturns have caused people to struggle to support themselves.
in the 1960s president lyndon b johnson declared unconditional war on poverty.
his administration expanded education training and financial aid for the poor.
the proportion of people living below the poverty level the minimum income necessary to provide basic living standards fell from 20 percent in 1962 to only 11 percent in 1973.
however economic hard times reappeared in the early 1980s and the poverty rate began to rise.
although the poverty level has both risen and fallen since then in recent years it has continued to grow.
federal welfare reform throughout the 20th century and into the 21st political leaders have disagreed about the best way for the government to help alleviate poverty.
some leaders feel that the government should provide relief programs despite the cost as it is the obligation of the government to help the citizens.
other leaders feel that there is little the government can do to solve the problem so funds should go toward growing the economy instead.
their criticism led to cries for welfare reform.
in 1996 the republican congress and president clinton passed the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act a law that cut more than 55 billion in welfare spending over six years and limited recipients eligibility to receive cash assistance to a five year maximum.
in addition the bill cut benefits to recipients who had not found a job within two years.
supporters cheered the reforms claiming that they transformed a system from one that fosters dependence to one that encourages self reliance.
opponents of the law accused the federal government of turning its back on the poor especially children.
in february 2006 congress reauthorized the temporary assistance for needy families tanf program created by the 1996 bill.
between august 1996 when the bill creating tanf passed and march 2006 the number of people on welfare declined to its lowest percentage since 1969.
new legislation a new economic crisis caused president obama to sign into law the american recovery and reinvestment act in 2009.
funds from the act could be used to fight hunger through the supplemental nutrition assistance program snap alleviate homelessness through neighborhood stabilization funds provide job training through the workforce investment system and increase income support for the unemployed.
opponents of these programs want to create tougher qualification guidelines.
despite the approaches and programs in 2012 around 16 of the united states population lived in poverty almost 50 million people.
social security another area that has been debated by political leaders is how to reform social security so that it will have enough money to pay retirees.
providing monthly pensions to retired people or their survivors is the best known social security program.
912 chapter 27 predicting effects what issues do you think impact the solvency of long term entitlement programs such as social security and medicare.
discuss these issues in a small group.
the social security act or fica began as a centerpiece of the second new deal in 1935 and was funded by a tax on workers and employers.
it created a pension fund for retired people over age 65 and offered government aid to poor people for the first time.
since its beginning in the 1930s social security has been expanded to cover children people with disabilities and others.
it also manages numerous welfare programs.
funding social security poses several problems.
one problem relates to population when the baby boomers those born between 1946 and 1964 retire their huge numbers about 70 million by the year 2020 may overburden the entitlement programs.
a second problem relates to longevity americans now live longer so an individual s share of benefits from the program is greater than in the past.
third the number of workers paying into social security per beneficiary will drop when the boomers start retiring.
currently social security collects more in taxes than it pays in benefits.
the extra goes into a trust fund that is invested.
around the year 2016 the program will begin paying out more to beneficiaries than it takes in from the payroll tax.
the program will begin to rely on the social security trust fund to pay retirees.
if that trend continues after 2037 social security will be able to cover only about 75 percent of scheduled benefits.
an issue of reform most experts recommend reforming the system.
one suggestion is to replace social security or part of it with private retirement accounts.
other options include raising social security taxes cutting benefits to recipients raising the retirement age and allowing individual investing.
political advocacy groups such as the american association of retired people aarp and the national center for policy analysis ncpa are also actively involved in the policy reform efforts with social security.
a social and political issue not surprising the issue of social security has been a political issue in recent elections.
president george w bush outlined an approach to privatization in 2000 and 2004 that did not garner enough support to pass.
in 2008 republican john mccain favored a partial privatization plan and democrat barack obama called for raising the cap on the amount of income subject to the fica tax.
the unresolved issue continued to be debated in 2012.
evaluating what political leaders have made changes to health care.
do you agree or disagree with their actions.
making inferences why do you think the aarp is involved in issues around social security reform.
analyzing what role do you think the govern ment should have in solving social issues such as health care and poverty.
issues for the 21st century teks11b 14a 14b conservation and the environment can the nation balance conservation with economic progress.
in 1990 oregon logger bill haire hung a new ornament on the mirror of his truck a tiny owl with an arrow through its head.
the trinket represented haire s feelings about the federal government s decision to declare millions of acres of forest off limits to the logging industry in order to protect the endangered spotted owl.
if it comes down to my family or that bird said haire that bird s going to suffer.
the battle between loggers and environmentalists over the fate of the spotted owl is just one example of the nation s ongoing struggle to balance conservation with industrial progress.
historical perspective conservation the management and protection of the earth s resources began as a national movement in the united states during the early 1900s.
in the wake of the country s industrial revolution the federal government enacted numerous measures to protect the nation s natural surroundings.
in the early 1900s president theodore roosevelt made a powerful impact on protecting natural resources.
roosevelt expressed a particular interest in preserving america s forestlands.
like other men who had thought about the national future at all he once remarked i had been growing more and more concerned over the destruction of the forests the first national park yellowstone had been signed into law in 1872 by president ulysses s grant.
thirty years later roosevelt established the first wildlife refuge in florida and added more than 150 million acres to the nation s forest preserves.
he used his executive power to set aside national forests as public lands establish parks monuments and historic landmarks and urge congress to create the forest service to manage this land in 1905.
in 1916 president woodrow wilson signed an act passed by congress that created the national park service to oversee the parks.
today there are over 400 national parks throughout the united states and its territories.
the 1960s and 1970s witnessed a resurgence of the conservation movement.
in 1962 marine biologist rachel carson published her book silent spring which warned of the destructive effects of pesticides.
the book awakened americans to the damage they were inflicting on the environment.
in the two decades that followed congress created the environmental protection agency epa and enacted such measures as the clean air act the clean water act and the endangered species act all in an effort to restore the health of the country s natural resources.
and since 1970 the country nearly tripled the size of its national park space.
by the early 2000s americans had done much to improve the environment.
between 1970 and 2008 for example the nation s yearly production of carbon monoxide emissions dropped from 204 million to about 72 million tons.
914 chapter 27 challenges of population growth and distribution despite the strides americans have made in protecting their natural resources over the past half century environmental problems still exist and the nation still struggles to strike a balance between conservation and economic growth.
business is deeply tied to resource development.
as the world s population grows so do the demands for housing materials food and other resources.
increased population growth and distribution in urban areas causes strain on the environment as people and businesses compete for and deplete resources.
as businesses and corporations extract resources to meet these demands the ecosystems are altered through these losses.
our increased demand for natural resources continues to drive the debate between environmentalists and industrialists around how to ensure supply of resources while also conserving the environment.
the greenhouse effect such a struggle is clearly visible in the greenhouse effect.
the greenhouse effect is the rise in temperature that earth experiences because certain gases in the atmosphere trap energy from the sun.
without these gases heat would escape back into space and earth s average temperature would be about 60f colder.
greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide occur naturally in the air.
but the burning of fossil fuels and other human activities add to the levels of these gases amplifying the greenhouse effect and causing an increase in global warming.
global warming is the rise in the earth s surface temperature over time.
earth s temperature has steadily increased over the last 100 years due in part to increased pollution caused by humans activities.
global warming could prompt a range of environmental calamities from severe flooding in some parts of the world to drought in others.
in 2005 a treaty called the kyoto protocol took effect.
it aims to reduce greenhouse gases overall by requiring developed countries to lower their emissions.
the united states the world s largest producer of greenhouse gases signed the treaty but did not ratify it.
president george w bush expressed doubt about global warming for several years.
he also claimed that the protocol was unfair because developing countries such as china were exempt.
as of 2013 the obama administration had not pushed for ratification.
hikers enjoy a wilderness trail.
issues for the 21st century 91 i energy sources one issue of great concern to americans today is the nation s growing appetite for energy.
the united states is by far the world s largest consumer of energy.
the united states consumes 19 percent of the world s energy nearly all of it in the form of non renewable fossil fuels such as oil coal and natural gas.
in fact the gap between how much energy the united states uses and how much it produces is widening.
to fill this gap the united states imports about a third of its energy.
much of the fuel america uses comes from places such as the oil rich middle east.
the reliance on foreign sources has left the united states vulnerable to price increases and fuel shortages.
in 2005 president bush outlined a plan to lessen u s dependence on oil imports.
he proposed using more nuclear power giving tax credits to buyers of energy efficient cars and appliances building new refineries and drilling for more oil at home.
five years later president obama presented a similar plan.
however he also pushed for heavier use of renewable energy sources and for taxes on businesses that produce high levels of carbon pollution.
fluctuating gasoline prices in 2007 and 2008 and a massive oil spill in the gulf of mexico in 2010 caused new energy worries.
balancing energy needs with environmental concerns is an issue that americans will grapple with for years.
managing the environment since the early 1900s the federal government has had an active although often debated role in protecting natural resources.
since the creation of the national park system over 84 million acres of land have been protected from mining for minerals raising trees for lumber and diverting water for waterpower.
yet corporate and business interests argue that resources are needed to support the needs of the growing population.
conservation efforts look to conserve or protect ecosystems and the diversity of life that they support.
over the past fifty years these conservation efforts have grown to include not only land resources but also the protection of air and water.
as the population grows and businesses expand particularly in urban areas our impact on the environment has grown and pollution levels have grown.
the federal government has responded by enacting legislation and creating federal agencies connected to conservation and resource management.
the environmental protection agency in 1970 president richard nixon created the environmental protection agency or epa to address environmental issues surrounding pollution.
the agency was charged with strengthening and enforcing laws that govern water and air quality and monitoring the creation and emissions of toxic substances.
the endangered species act in addition to protecting the air and water congress has passed laws to protect plants and animals.
as humans continue to utilize resources and impact the environment their actions affect ecosystems.
in 1966 congress passed the endangered species preservation act.
this aimed to list species as endangered and protect their habitats to avoid extinction.
in 1973 congress passed the endangered species act which expanded protections for threatened and endangered wildlife.
congress has continued to amend this act over the past twenty years as the specifics for conservation have grown and changed.
continued efforts in addition to federal efforts a number of states have made independent efforts to help.
california for instance has some of the nation s strictest air pollution control laws and these have helped to provide the 916 chapter 27 golden state with much cleaner air.
other states are playing their part as well in the nation s ongoing conservation effort.
however there is still much to be done especially about water pollution.
one indicator is data collected by the environmental protection agency for the first decade of the 2000s which showed that beach closings mostly due to unsafe levels of water pollution were at historically high levels.
social action groups and private citizens not all action has been through government.
advocacy groups such as the marine conservation institute and oceana advocate for ocean and marine life conservation and protection.
private groups such as the nature conservancy and local land trusts have raised money to purchase forest and watershed lands and keep them pristine.
in texas several entrepreneurs created the fossil rim wildlife center a 1 700 acre wildlife sanctuary for more than 50 animal species.
private citizens also help.
private citizens can conserve resources such as water land plants and animals and protect them for future generations.
people can choose energy efficient appliances to help reduce energy and water use.
water management is a critical issue in some states where the demand exceeds the supply.
in such cases water ecosystems must be protected and managed carefully.
another way to become involved is by contributing money and time to conservation efforts.
some individuals join advocacy groups or non profits that work for land and water conservation or support political candidates who support their beliefs.
in texas 97 percent of the land is privately owned.
the governor s office issued a report outlining specific programs designed to help landowners with conservation efforts on their land.
one example is the texas parks and wildlife department s private lands and habitat program which provides support to individual landowners in helping them conserve wildlife habitats found on their property.
many states have wildlife departments such as the texas parks and wildlife department to address issues such as land use wildlife education and conservation.
critical thinking predicting effects do you think the united states eventually will engage in greater domestic exploration of its natural resources to meet its growing energy needs.
why or why not.
forming generalizations what role do you think the government and private citizens should have in managing the environment.
analyzing effects what are two effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment.
think about energy use manufacturing supply and demand of resources 4.
hypothesizing is it possible for political leaders to address issues of conservation and balance economic progress simultaneously.
support your answer with details from the text.
issues for the 21st century teks25c 25d globalization and cultural diffusion how does american pop culture spread to other countries around the world.
in 1851 louise amelia knapp smith clappe wrote letters to her sister in massachusetts to describe her life in the gold mining camps near san francisco.
each letter took over three months to deliver.
today olivia can sit down at a computer in san antonio and update her blog about hollywood movies.
once she publishes her article online akili in kenya and hisako in japan can read her thoughts and share their own ideas about popular culture instantaneously.
technological advances and new inventions have changed the way people communicate ideas.
historical perspective smartphones allow people to have wireless internet access from almost any location.
in the 1940s when computers first came into use they took up huge rooms and required fans or elaborate air conditioning systems to cool the parts that provided them with power.
in the years since the parts that power computers have become miniaturized and have become much more powerful.
today not only can personal computers perform operations more quickly than the first giant computer did but they are also affordable for many people.
the development of inexpensive personal computers has made it possible for ordinary families to use the latest technology.
the numbers alone demonstrate the influence of computer technology on modern life.
in 1984 only 8 2 percent of households in the united states had a personal computer.
by 2003 more than 60 percent owned one.
by 2011 that number had grown to nearly 76 percent and nearly 72 percent were logging onto the internet both at home and at work.
what s more nearly every business in the nation from hospitals to accounting firms and airports has implemented computer systems to handle many daily operations.
technology and daily life the internet has linked computer users around the world.
developed in the late 1960s by the u s department of defense the internet soon spread to universities.
in the 1990s it boomed in popularity among the general public.
now millions of americans use the internet daily for activities that range from working to shopping for groceries to getting the news.
cellular phones have also transformed communication by allowing people to carry their phones anywhere.
in 1985 about 340 000 americans were cell phone subscribers.
in 2012 the pew research center noted that 88 of adults in the united states owned a cell phone.
the invention of tablets and smartphones has expanded access to music maps email news businesses and social networks from any location.
918 chapter 27 a global economy computer technology has not only improved how americans work but has also dramatically altered how they live.
millions of citizens now buy everything from flowers to books to stock online.
technology has helped to build a more global economy one in which countries around the world are linked through business.
via the internet companies on different continents do business as though they are in the same city.
trade and investments among nations have expanded and the economies of various countries are more closely linked.
this increased trade has led to globalization connecting the cultures and economies of the world more quickly than ever before.
globalization connects cultures around the world.
globalization and trade expanded and improved transportation communication and technology systems allow for better distribution of goods services and ideas around the world.
economic globalization has opened up the traditional marketplaces for acquiring raw materials and creating and distributing goods and services.
businesses choose more diverse geographic locations to source the different aspects of production and distribution.
stronger transportation systems and instantaneous communication systems allow access for these goods more quickly and economically taking away barriers that existed in the past.
computers have changed not just industries but also the lives of individual workers.
technology has given people access to far more information than ever before which has improved productivity in many industries.
workers share information through computer networks.
laptops and cell phones have enabled increasing numbers of people to work at home or in multiple locations.
communication and technology advances allow many large companies to outsource various tasks such as support services.
for example a company in florida may outsource technology support for customers to telephone operators in india.
benefits and challenges globalization has allowed people around the world to have access to materials goods and services they may not have had in the past.
but with each change comes challenges as well as benefits.
in the united states people have different opinions about economic globalization as businesses build factories in different countries and outsource work to employees abroad.
people worry about job loss as domestic companies move their factories and hire workers abroad to take advantage of lower wages and costs.
others feel globalization creates jobs as new international markets increase exports and new workers are needed to create products.
regardless globalization affects the economy of countries around the world as imports and exports are affected through these transactions.
cultural diffusion just as globalization has impacted the economies of the world as countries interact through business it has also affected their cultures.
in our global market citizens interact more frequently with one another.
in doing so they share their culture and influence each other in their beliefs behaviors and actions.
this has led to social globalization and cultural diffusion.
issues for the 21st century i cultural diffusion describes the way cultural practices diffuse or spread from one community to another and how cultures borrow traits such as beliefs ideas and material objects from one another.
with increased contact comes increased diffusion.
in today s world of instantaneous communication cultural diffusion is constant.
cultural diffusion is not a new concept.
people of various cultures have interacted with each other for centuries as people have journeyed done business and moved around the world.
the united states has always drawn business people travelers and immigrants from other lands.
in doing so people have brought and shared their foods languages traditions and values.
today you can find ethiopian chinese brazilian and french restaurants in the united states.
likewise american fast food restaurants can be found in places such as australia india and argentina.
for example mcdonald s has restaurants in more than 100 countries and starbucks has opened coffee shops in 37 countries.
tools such as videos digital photography cell phones and the internet allow for people around the world to share and expand upon popular culture.
popular culture popular culture is a collection of ideas attitudes and images that are part of a mainstream culture heavily influenced by and spread through the media.
pop culture can include movies music fashion and values that are popular in a particular culture.
technology has made the spread of pop culture more dramatic.
in the 1920s new media such as radio and movies were able to reach a growing share of the nation s population.
the radio helped break down barriers that had once separated country folk from city folk.
increasingly people all across the country were sharing the same information and enjoying the same pastimes creating a shared culture.
printed materials and television also helped spread pop culture.
today the internet is a driving force spreading popular culture around the world.
people around the world can hear the same news and listen to the same music.
they can hear the same advertisements and buy the same products.
not only can individuals receive the information but they can help create and share it as well.
the internet and media sources such as radio movies and social media sites have spread american pop culture quickly.
young people around the world can be found listening to american music wearing american fashions and watching american movies.
movies can be seen made and distributed around the world providing viewers the opportunity to experience different cultures and to have a shared global experience.
the spread of hip hop to look at how cultural diffusion can permeate the global market examine the spread of hip hop around the world.
originating in new york city in the 1970s hip hop usually includes rap music deejaying graffiti painting and hip hop dancing.
hip hop quickly took hold of popular american culture in new york city and spread through the country.
globalization allowed the hip hop culture to spread even farther as youth around the world identified with the themes and styles of hip hop.
american movies such as wild style introduced people as far as japan to the new style of dance and music in the 1980s.
in the 1990s global media companies saw an opportunity and began marketing hip hop related items to other countries.
these included music movies clothing and dance.
soon the hip hop culture had become popular on six continents.
920 chapter 27 the global spread of hip hop j v o hip hop originated in new york in the 1970s.
q hip hop developed from dub a musical form brought to new york by jamaican immigrants in the 1960s and 1970s.
other u s cities late 1970s early 1980s.
western europe early to mid 1980s africa early to mid 1980s eastern europe late 1980s early 1990s.
south america and caribbean mid 1980s.
southeast asia and australia early to mid 1980s south asia 1990s china 2000s.
as hip hop spread youth both borrowed elements of american hip hop dance music and art and influenced others as they incorporated their own cultural elements into their style and shared it with others.
for example in japan hip hop fashion incorporate the japanese language and symbols representing samurai.
lyrics often refer to japanese food and other cultural references.
today hip hop continues to be popular and the internet draws the hip hop community even more closely together.
a video by south korean rapper psy spread like wildfire over the internet after being promoted on social media.
although sung in korean the song and video found their way onto the top music charts for american audiences and influenced american pop culture.
new technologies continue to spread promote and alter popular culture around the world as ideas values fashion media and practices are shared.
a website focusing on hip hop allows people from around the world to come together to share their thoughts about current trends or to sell hip hop related goods and services.
video sharing websites blogs and social media allow people to post videos photos music and commentary instantaneously and remove any international barriers.
critical thinking analyzing causes how do new technologies movies and the internet help to create a common culture throughout the world.
summarizing what are the benefits and challenges of globalization.
synthesizing in what ways do you think the entertainment industry contributes to the global diffusion of american culture.
think about technology culture various media sources analyzing effects identify the impact of popular american culture on the rest of the world over time.
making inferences how would you account for the quick spread of hip hop around the world.
support your answer.
issues for the 21st century chapter assessment war on terrorism the united states created the department of homeland security and passed new laws to fight terrorism.
global involvement the united states has been involved in international organizations and treaties to address various global issues.
civil rights in the 21st century african americans hispanic americans women and other groups continue to work for their civil rights in the 21st century.
immigration immigrants who have entered the united states legally and illegally have changed the country s demographic patterns.
main ideas use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
the war on terrorism pages 894 897 1.
what constitutional issues are raised by policy changes by the federal government in relation to terrorism.
global involvement pages 898 901 2.
in what ways does the united states participate in international organizations and treaties.
civil rights in the 21st century pages 902 905 3.
trace the development of the civil rights movement in the 19th century including the ratification of the thirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth amendments.
describe the efforts of the national rifle association.
immigration pages 906 909 5.
how have people of different ethnicities changed the demographics of the united states.
in what ways have people of various racial ethnic and religious groups shaped american culture.
social issues and government responses pages 910 913 7.
what are two political issues related to social issues in the united states.
what are some controversies around how medical coverage for the insured is funded and what does this reflect about differences in political parties ideologies.
conservation and the environment pages 914 917 9.
what are the roles of government entities such as the national park system the epa and the endangered species act in managing the environment.
social issues ano government responses political leaders disagree about the role that government should play in social issues such as poverty and health care.
globalization and cultural diffusion pages 918 921 10.
how does american pop culture spread to other countries.
critical thinking evaluating how would the economy be both helped and hurt if social security benefits were cut.
conservation and the environment a growing population has caused challenges related to resource conservation energy management and greenhouse gases.
globalization and cultural diffusion american pop culture has spread around the world through cultural diffusion and technological advances have led to social globalization.
predicting effects what impact do you think continued population growth in the united states will have on the physical environment.
developing historical perspective create a continuum similar to the one below labeled with more liberal at the left end and more conservative at the right end.
identify significant social and political leaders and advocacy organizations from throughout the chapter and mark where you think they would fall on the continuum.
write a paragraph to explain your conclusions.
more liberal more conservative 922 chapter 27 texas test practice use the quotation and your knowledge of u s history to answer questions 1 and 2.
6 in the end the american dream is not a sprint or even a marathon but a relay.
our families dont always cross the finish line in the span of one generation.
but each generation passes on to the next the fruits of their labor.
my grandmother never owned a house.
she cleaned other peoples houses so she could afford to rent her own.
but she saw her daughter become the first in her family to graduate from college.
and my mother fought hard for civil rights so that instead of a mop i could hold this microphone 99 san antonio mayor julian castro keynote address to the democratic national convention september 4 2012 1.
based on the quotation it is reasonable to conclude that many people from various ethnic groups a take part in marathons.
b work hard to make their childrens lives better.
c grow fruits and vegetables.
d always send their children to college.
based on the quotation it is reasonable to infer that mayor castros mother fought for f integrated schools.
g the right to peacefully assemble.
h equal opportunities.
j the right to vote.
use the chart as well as your knowledge of united states history to answer question 3.
u s life expectancy 1970 2010 year expectation of life span at birth 1970 70 8 years 1980 73 7 years 1990 75 4 years 2000 76 8 years 2010 78 7 years sources u s census bureau and centers for disease control and prevention 3.
which of the following is true about the table.
a there is no need to worry about social security.
b in 1990 life expectancy was around 75 years.
c after 2010 life expectancy started to drop.
d life expectancy has decreased in the united states.
interact with history writesmart think about the issues you recorded as you read the chapter.
select one of the issues discussed in the chapter and discuss it with a partner.
each partner should write three questions about the chosen issue.
consider what an informed voter would need to know.
then each partner should ask the other his or her questions.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to record your questions and your partners answers.
k 1 cemtury you have been asked to promote a civil rights cause that is important to your or your community.
think about the many civil rights challenges that people still face in the twenty first century.
working with a partner design and create a poster that supports the civil rights cause that you have chosen.
collaborative learni 5.
j writesmart imagine you are a member of congress in october 2001.
consider whether you would support or oppose the usa patriot act legislation.
write a persuasive essay to bring others around to your point of view.
support your position with examples and address the concerns of those who take the opposite position.
use mywritesmart in your ebook to write your essay.
issues for the 21st century end of chapter skill activity using databases to pose and answer geographic questions defining the skill historians pose geographic questions to learn more about where and how people live in the world.
they ask questions to learn more about geographic patterns and distributions.
a geographic distribution shows where people plants and animals can be found in a certain area on earth.
geographic patterns refer to the pattern of a geographic idea or event you are discussing.
they can refer to repetitive distribution of such events as births deaths and life expectancies over time.
one way to find information about geographic patterns and distributions is by using a database.
a database is a collection of data or information that is organized so that you can find and retrieve information on a specific topic quickly and easily.
the database will provide a list of all information related to your topic.
understanding the skill strategy pose and answer questions using a database the following is a chart containing data from the american factfinder database on the u s census bureau website.
use the following strategies to use a database to pose and answer questions about geographic patterns and distributions.
l cumulative estimates of the components of population change april 1 2010 to july 1 2012 geography total population change natural increase vital events net migration births deaths total international domestic united states 5 166 532 3 315 603 8 918 468 5 602 865 1 850 929 1 850 929 n a northeast region 443 846 395 229 1 436 538 1 041 309 60 214 481 109 420 895 midwest region 388 808 573 004 1 875 748 1 302 744 181 688 237 208 418 896 south region 2 700 074 1 224 387 3 387 504 2 163 117 1 457 189 691 462 765 727 west region 1 633 804 1 122 983 2 218 678 1 095 695 515 214 441 150 74 064 source u s census bureau american factfinder database o choose your topic.
think about specific geographic patterns or distribution information you would like to examine.
for instance you might pose questions about the regional distribution of the u s population and how migration and vital events such as births and deaths affect that distribution.
identify a database you want to use to find information.
do research to determine the best database to use for the topic you are studying.
the u s census bureau is a good resource for data about the population of the united states.
another database might be a better choice for information about a different topic.
923 ski identify the headings and entries.
identify the column headings or categories and the row headings of the database to learn more about specific data.
this database provides information about such categories as total population change vital events and net migration.
use the database to help you quickly find the information to answer your questions.
you might ask which region of the united states experienced the greatest increase in population from april 1 2010 to july 1 2012 due to international migration strategy write a summary databases can provide an overwhelming amount of information.
it may help to summarize the information from the database in a paragraph.
the population rates continue to grow steadily in the united states.
the birth rate is almost twice the death rate.
population increases within the united states reflect both the natural increase due to birth and death rates as well as the effect of international migration.
from april 1 2010 to july 1 2012 the greatest net 1 increase was seen in the south.
in this region there was almost an even split between natural increase and net i international and domestic migration to the area.
the west also had a large increase in population but the f majority was due to a natural increase.
the net effect of international and domestic migration was a decrease in.
the northeast and midwest during this period.
however the overall population in these regions increased as a result of the birth rate.
applying the skill turn to chapter 27 section 4 pages 906 909 and read the passage titled the debate over immigration.
read about the changing demographic patterns resulting from illegal immigration to the united states.
use a database to find out more about the geographic patterns of illegal immigration in the united states over the course of ten years.
then use the information in the database to write a summary of your findings.
choose your topic.
in this case your topic is geographic patterns of illegal immigration in the united states over the past decade.
identify a database you want to use to find information.
consider what database might be the best choice for your topic.
do you think the u s census bureau would have the data you need.
why or why not.
research your options.
identify the headings and entries.
study the headings and entries to be sure that you understand the information presented in the database.
what headings clarify the information in the database you found.
what entries exist to help you pose and answer questions about illegal immigration to the united states.
use the database to help you quickly find the information to answer your questions.
draft a few questions to help you write a summary that focuses on your topic.
include the answers in your summary.
792 chapter 32 president clinton responded to the 1994 election results by shifting his own activist agenda conspicuously to the center announcing his own plan to cut taxes and balance the budget.
but the presidential politics of 1996 made compromise between the president and congress very difficult.
in november 1995 and again in january 1996 the federal government literally shut down for several days because the president and congress could not agree on a budget.
republican leaders refused to pass a continuing resolution to allow government operations to continue during negotiations in hopes of pressuring the president to agree to their terms.
that proved to be an epic political blunder.
public opinion turned quickly and powerfully against the republican leadership and much of its agenda.
newt gingrich emerged as one of the most unpopular political leaders in the nation while president clinton slowly improved his standing in public opinion polls.
by the time the 1996 campaign began in earnest president clinton was in a commanding position to win reelection.
unopposed for the democratic nomination he faced a republican opponent senator robert dole of kansas who inspired little enthusiasm even within his own party.
clinton benefited from the disastrous errors by congressional republicans in 1995 and early 1996.
but his greatest strength came from the remarkable success of the american economy and the marked reduction in the federal deficit.
like reagan in 1984 he could campaign as the champion of peace prosperity and national well being.
candidate party bill clinton democratic robert dole republican ross perot reform electoral vote popular vote 47 401 185 49 3 39 197 469 40 7 8 085 294 8 4 49 of electorate voting the election of 1996 ross perot received many fewer votes in 1996 than he had in 1992 and president clinton came much closer than he had four years earlier to winning a majority of the popular vote.
once again clinton defeated his republican opponent this time robert dole by a decisive margin in both the popular and electoral votes.
after the 1994 republican landslide in the congressional elections bill clinton had seemed permanently weakened.
what explains his political revival.
the age of globalization 793 in a flurry of activity in the spring and summer of 1996 congress passed several important bills.
the most dramatic was a welfare reform bill that ended the fifty year federal guarantee of assistance to families with dependent children and turned most of the responsibility for allocating federal welfare funds to the states.
most of all it shifted the bulk of welfare benefits away from those without jobs and toward low wage workers.
clintons buoyant campaign flagged slightly in the last weeks but the president nevertheless received just over 49 percent of the popular vote to doles 41 percent ross perot running now as the candidate of what he called the reform party received just over 8 percent of the vote.
clinton won 379 electoral votes to doles 159 perot won none as was clinton reelected the case in the 1992 election.
but the democrats failed to regain either house of congress.
clinton triumphant and embattled the first democratic president to win two terms as president since franklin roosevelt bill clinton began his second administration with serene confidence.
he proposed a relatively modest domestic agenda.
he negotiated effectively with the republican leadership on a plan for a balanced budget which passed with much fanfare late in 1997.
by the end of 1998 the federal budget was generating its first surplus in thirty years.
clintons renewed popularity was critical to his political survival in the turbulent year that followed when the most serious crisis of his presidency suddenly erupted.
clinton had been the target of accusations of corruption and scandal since his first weeks in office the investigation into whitewater charges of corruption against members of his cabinet and staff accusations of illegalities in financing his 1996 campaign and a civil suit for sexual harassment filed early in his first term by a former arkansas state employee paula jones.
in early 1998 inquiries associated with the paula jones case led to charges that the president had had a sexual relationship with a twenty two year old white house intern monica lewinsky.
the most damaging charge was that he had lied about it in his deposition before joness attorneys.
those revelations produced a new investigation by the independent counsel in the whitewater case kenneth starr a former judge and official in the reagan justice department.
clinton forcefully denied the charges and a majority of the public strongly backed him.
his popularity soared to record levels and remained high throughout the year that followed.
in the meantime a federal judge dismissed the paula jones case which had launched the scandal.
but the scandal revived again with great force in august 1998 when lewinsky struck a deal with the independent counsel and testified about her relationship with clinton.
starr then subpoenaed clinton himself who faced with the prospect of speaking the starr report to a grand jury finally admitted that he and lewinsky had had what he called an improper relationship a few weeks later starr submitted a lengthy and salacious report to congress on the results of his investigation recommending that congress impeach the president.
impeachment acquittal and resurgence on december 19 1998 the house voting on strictly partisan lines narrowly approved two counts of impeachment lying to the grand jury and obstructing justice.
the matter then moved to the senate where a trial of the president the first since the trial of andrew johnson in 1868 began in early january.
it ended with a decisive acquittal of the president.
neither of the charges attracted even a majority of the votes let alone the two thirds necessary for conviction.
794 chapter 32 still the trial dampened public support for the president and stiffened congressional opposition to any of his initiatives.
indeed the last two years of the clinton presidency were relatively quiet.
the president had no real hope of major domestic achievements in the face of a hostile republican congress.
overseas however he was more active.
in 1999 the president faced another crisis in the balkans.
this time the conflict kosovo involved a province of serbian dominated yugoslavia kosovo most of whose residents were albanian muslims.
a savage civil war erupted there in 1998 between kosovo nationalists and serbians.
in may 1999 nato forces dominated and led by the united states began a major bombing campaign against the serbians which after little more than a week led the leader of yugoslavia slobodan milosevic to agree to a ceasefire.
serbian troops withdrew from kosovo entirely replaced by nato peacekeeping forces.
a precarious peace returned to the region.
buoyed by his success overseas and a rising economy clinton actually finished his eight years in office with his popularity higher than it had been when he had begun.
no president in the years since has experienced the same approval ratings.
indeed despite politicians use of new technology and polling data to connect with the public the relationship between the elected and the voter has steadily deteriorated.
the election of 2000 the 2000 presidential election was one of the most extraordinary in american history not because of the campaign that preceded it but because of the sensational controversy over its results which preoccupied the nation for more than five weeks after the actual voting.
the two men who had been the front runners for their parties nominations a year before the election captured these nominations with only slight difficulty republican george w bush son of the former president and a second term governor of texas and democrat al gore former tennessee senator and vice president under clinton.
both men ran cautious centrist campaigns.
in the congressional races republicans maintained control of the house of representatives by a scant five seats while the senate split evenly between democrats and republicans.
among the victors in the senate races was first lady hillary rodham clinton who won in new york.
in the presidential race gore won the national popular vote by the thin margin of about 540 000 votes out of florida disputed about 100 million cast a difference of 0 5 percent.
but on election night both candidates remained short of the 270 electoral votes needed for victory because the florida results were too close to call.
after a mandatory recount over the next two days bush led gore in the state by fewer than 300 votes.
the technology of voting soon became central to the dispute.
the gore campaign asked for hand recounts in three critical counties which the florida supreme court unanimously supported.
the battle over the ballots continued between the candidates in the news and the courts until the u s supreme court ruled on december 12.
voting 5 to 4 along ideological lines the conservative majority ruled that the florida supreme courts order for a recount was unconstitutional insisted that according to u s code any revised recount order be completed by december 12 the same day that the ruling was issued and therefore impossible to execute and argued that the standards for evaluating punch card ballots were too arbitrary and unfair to withstand constitutional scrutiny.
with floridas results certified bushs victory in florida and thus nationally stood.
the age of globalization 795 candidate party electoral vote popular vote al gore democratic george w bush republican 51 003 894 48 50 459 211 48 51 of electorate voting the election of 2000 the 2000 presidential election was one of the closest and most controversial in american history.
it also starkly revealed a new pattern of party strength which had been developing over the previous decade.
democrats swept the northeast and most of the industrial midwest and carried all the states of the pacific coast.
republicans swept the south the plains states and the mountain states with the exception of new mexico and held on to a few traditional republican strongholds in the midwest.
compare this map to those of earlier elections in particular the election of 1896 chapter 19.
how did the pattern of party support change over the course of the twentieth century.
the presidency of george w bush george w bush assumed the presidency in january 2001 burdened by both the controversies surrounding his election and the widespread perception even among some of his own supporters that he was ill prepared for the office.
nevertheless bush moved forcefully to enact an ambitious and controversial agenda.
having campaigned as a moderate bush spent his first term as president governing as a staunch conservative and relying on the most conservative members of his party for support.
he won passage of the largest tax cut in american history 1 35 trillion.
critics noted that the massive tax cuts of 2001 went disproportionately to wealthy bush tax cuts americans reflecting the view of white house economists that the best way to ensure growth was to put money into the hands of people most likely to invest.
bushs other major domestic accomplishment was a controversial education reform bill known as no child left behind which tied federal funding in schools to the success of students in taking standardized tests.
still other proposals an effort to privatize some aspects of the social security system for example never attracted significant support in congress.
nonetheless for most of the first three years of his presidency george w bush was revered by many americans because of his resolute stance against terrorism.
even the iraq war which began in 2003 and initially enjoyed widespread backing helped sustain his popularity for a time.
796 chapter 32 as the 2004 election approached karl rove the presidents political adviser encouraged the administration to take increasingly conservative positions to mobilize the partys conservative constituency in what almost everyone agreed was likely to be a very close election.
the electorate was divided almost evenly throughout the campaign and in the end turnout proved decisive.
although the democrats turned out in much higher numbers than they had in 2000 the increase in the republican vote was even larger.
bush won a narrow victory with 51 percent of the popular vote and an electoral vote margin of 35.
the 2004 election was one of the last successful moments in the bush administration.
the publics recent turn against the war in iraq contributed to the rapidly declining approval ratings of the president himself ratings that by mid 2008 had reached the lowest level of presidential approval in the history of polling.
perhaps even more hurricane katrina damaging to bushs popularity was the governments weak response to hurricane katrina a category 3 hurricane of tremendous force that ravaged the gulf coast of louisiana and mississippi in late august 2005.
the storm leveled many communities along the coast and crippled the city of new orleans.
some of the levees that protected the city failed causing massive flooding and destruction.
while local state and federal governance fumbled the initial evacuation and recovery of southern louisiana the administration took the brunt of the blame.
the federal emergency management agency fema failed to handle the disaster effectively and arguably made it worse.
the political fallout from hurricane katrina along with scandals in the justice department revelations of violations of civil liberties revulsion from aggressive interviewing tactics used against suspected terrorists and declining e conomic prospects culminating in a disastrous financial crisis beginning in early 2008 all contributed to the growing unpopularity of the president.
bush managed some significant victories despite these setbacks.
he won confirmation of two justices that he proposed for the supreme court john roberts who succeeded william rehnquist as chief justice and samuel alito who succeeded the retiring sandra day oconnor.
both were fierce conservatives inspiring hopes among some and fears among others that the court would veer more sharply to the political right.
the election of 2008 the 2008 presidential election was the first since 1952 that did not include an incumbent president or vice president.
both parties began the campaign with large fields of candidates but by the spring of 2008 the contest had narrowed considerably.
senator john mccain of arizona emerged from the early primaries with his nomination ensured.
in the democratic race the primaries quickly eliminated all but two candidates senator hillary rodham clinton of new york the former first lady and senator barack obama of illinois a young charismatic politician and the son of an african father and a white american mother.
as the first woman and the first african american to have a realistic chance of being elected president clinton and obama attracted great enthusiasm.
the passions driving both campaigns led to a primary contest that lasted much longer than usual.
not until the last primaries in june was it clear that obama would be the nominee.
as the nomination campaigns were heating up a series of financial problems erupted that imperiled the state of the economy.
indeed by early 2008 the nation confronted its worst financial crisis since the great depression.
the problem had the age of globalization 797 several causes.
for years financial institutions had been developing new credit instruments intended to make borrowing easier and cheaper which had lured millions of people into taking on large and risky mortgages.
one such instrument called an adjustable rate mortgage arm offered homebuyers mortgages with initially low interest rates that would increase in later years.
other loans called jumbo loans extended credit to people who lacked the financial means needed to pay them back.
these new business practices were made possible with the repeal in 1999 of a centerpiece of new deal legislation the glass steagall act.
glass steagall had been passed in 1933 to prevent irresponsible banking practices by mandating layers of government oversight designed to catch fraud or risky investment strategies.
consumers responded to these new means of financing home purchases by snapping them up.
not surprisingly the sale of houses many of which were based on these risky mortgages soared for a while causing a housing bubble a rapid rise in housing prices fueled by high demand.
but the bubble eventually burst.
the price of homes soon leveled off and even dipped.
those with arms saw them reset at much higher rates and struggled to make the higher payments.
they and many owners of jumbo loans sought to sell their homes but couldnt because the market value of the home had often sunk below the value of the mortgages held forcing some to walk away from their property and default on their loans.
foreclosures skyrocketed across the country.
many of the nations largest banks had invested heavily in the securities that backed these risky loans now with the collapse of the housing market they lost vast sums of money.
the so called great recession of 2008 influenced by the loan crisis also pushed down wages and triggered widespread job layoffs.
the increased unemployment great recession of 2008 rate further accelerated the downward economic spiral.
many americans simply could not meet basic financial obligations such as the repayment of home car or school loans or credit card debt.
there was also less money available for investing or economic growth.
predictably the great recession fueled outrage among those most affected blue collar and trades workers manufacturers and the poor.
popular anger surfaced in art literature and especially contemporary music.
rap one of the newest and most successful forms of popular music chronicled lives of despair and called for economic change.
see patterns of popular culture rap by mid september 2008 the financial crisis suggested an economy spinning out of control.
secretary of the treasury henry paulson supported by other economic leaders stepped in.
he proposed a massive use of federal funds to help the government bail out banks that were failing.
both the bush administration and eventually the obama administration won congressional support for 750 billion in the form of the troubled asset relief program tarp to shore up the tottering financial institutions.
the bailout kept the economy from collapsing but it remained very weak for several years with exceptionally high unemployment rates.
this extraordinary crisis formed the backdrop against which the two presidential candidates fought out the last two months of their campaign.
neither offered clear or convincing solutions to the crisis but most voters came to believe that obama would likely be a better steward of the economy than mccain.
obama benefited both from the unpopularity of george w bush and from his success at persuading voters that mccain would continue bushs policies.
obama held on to and indeed increased his lead through late september and october helped by a heavily financed and highly disciplined campaign.
patterns of popular culture rap the long musical lineage of rap includes elements of the disco and street funk of the 1970s of the fast talking jive of black radio djs in the 1950s of the onstage patter of cab calloway and other african american stars of the first half of the twentieth century.
it contains reminders of tap and break dancing even of the boxing ring poetry of muhammad ali.
raps most important element is its words.
rap is as much a form of language as a form of music.
it bears a distant resemblance to some traditions of african american pulpit oratory which also included forms of spoken song.
it draws from some of the verbal traditions of urban black street life including the dozens a ritualized trading of insults particularly popular among young black men.
but rap is also the product of a distinctive place and time the south bronx in the 1970s and 1980s and the hip hop culture that was born there and that soon dominated the appearance and public behavior of many young black males.
hip hop is how you walk talk live see act feel said one bronx hiphopper.
some elements of hip hop culture faded and by the 1990s the most popular element of hip hop culture was rap which had by then been developing for nearly twenty years.
beginning in the early 1970s bronx djs began setting up their equipment on neighborhood streets and staging block parties where they not only played records but also put on shows of their own performances that featured spoken rhymes jazzy phrases and pointed comments about the audience the neighborhood and themselves.
gradually the djs began to bring rappers into shows young men who developed the dj style into a much more elaborate form of performance 798 usually accompanied by dancing.
as rap grew more popular in the inner city record promoters began signing some of its new stars.
in 1979 the sugarhill gangs rappers delight became the first rap single to be played on mainstream commercial radio and the first to become a major hit.
in the early 1980s rundmc became the first national rap superstars.
from there rap moved quickly to become one of the most popular and commercially successful forms of popular music.
in the 1990s and early 2000s rap recordings routinely sold millions of copies.
rap has taken many forms.
there have been white rappers eminem house of pain female rappers missy elliott queen latifah even religious rappers and childrens rappers.
but it has always been primarily a product of the young male culture of the inner city and some of the most successful rap has conveyed the frustration and anger that these men have felt about their lives a voice for the oppressed people one rap artist said that in many other ways dont have a voice in 1982 the rap group grandmaster flash and the furious five released a rap called the message a searing description of the ghetto and the lack of educational and economic opportunities.
in the late 1980s the compton and watts neighborhoods of los angeles two of the most distressed minority communities in the city produced their own style known as west coast rap with such groups as ice cube ice t tupac shakur and snoop doggy dog.
west coast rap often had a harsh angry character and at its extremes the so called gangsta rap it could be strikingly violent and highly provocative.
scandals erupted over controversial lyrics ice ts cop killer which some kanye west testifying to the continued popularity of rap as of 2014 rapper kanye west remains one of the bestselling artists of all time having sold well over 21 million albums and 66 million digital downloads in the united states alone.
time magazine has named west one of the 100 most influential people in the world.
he is a rapper songwriter record producer film director entrepreneur and fashion designer.
getty images entertainment getty images critics believed advocated murdering police and the sexually explicit lyrics of 2 live crew and other groups which critics accused of advocating violence against women.
but it was not just the lyrics that caused the furor.
rap artists were almost all products of tough inner city neighborhoods and the rough edged styles many took with them into the public eye made many people uncomfortable.
some rappers got caught up in highly publicized trouble with the law.
several including two of raps biggest stars tupac shakur and notorious b i g were murdered.
the business of rap particularly the confrontational business style of death row records founded by dr dre a veteran of the first major west coast rap group nwa was a source of public controversy as well.
these controversies at times unfairly dominated the image of rap as a whole.
some rap is angry and cruel as are many of the realities of the world from which it comes.
but much of it is explicitly positive some of it deliberately gentle.
chuck d and other successful rappers use their music to exhort young black men to avoid drugs and crime to take responsibility for their children to get an education.
and the form if not the content of the original rappers has spread widely through american culture.
rap came to dominate the music charts in america and its styles made their way onto sesame street and other childrens shows into television commercials hollywood films and the everyday language of millions of people young and old black and white.
it became another of the arresting innovative african american musical traditions that have shaped american culture for more than a century.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
what other african american musical forms have helped shape american popular culture.
if rap is so closely associated with the inner city culture where it originated what accounts for its widespread popularity and commercial success.
what other forms or styles of popular music enjoy a popularity that extends far beyond its cultural origins.
do you think raps popularity will endure.
why or why not.
799 800 chapter 32 21 11 candidate party electoral vote popular vote barack obama democrat 69 297 997 53 7 john mccain republican 59 597 520 46 2 the election of 2008 the election of 2008 produced a decisive victory for barack obama.
democrats won majorities in both the house and the senate only to see the republicans win a majority of the house two years later.
compare this map to the election of 2000 map.
which states did bush win that went to obama in 2008.
on november 4 2008 barack obama won a decisive victory winning the popular vote 53 percent to 46 percent and the electoral vote by an even larger margin.
obama became the first democratic candidate since lyndon johnson to win so large a victory.
obama and his opponents the global exuberance that obamas election created in 2008 did not linger for long.
the first two years of his presidency coincided with the worst period of the economic crisis.
but large supportive democratic majorities in both houses of congress strengthened obamas ability to enact broad reforms.
during those years obama passed a large stimulus package of 800 billion to support state and local budgets public works and other investments that he hoped would generate economic growth.
he and his congressional allies also succeeded in passing significant financial regulations that were designed to avoid another crisis like the one that began in 2008.
even more important he oversaw the passage of the affordable affordable care act care act a broad health care bill that would ensure that almost all americans would have access to insurance regardless of their means.
yet obamas legislation and especially his health care initiative triggered fear among many republicans about a federal government becoming too powerful and overstepping its limits.
indeed only one republican congressman supported the health care bill.
for obama who had built much of his presidential bid around the idea of bipartisanship and conciliation the polarization of the two parties was a significant setback.
many republican states attorneys sued to stop the health bill.
judges were divided as to whether the bill was constitutional and only favorable rulings by the supreme court in june 2012 and 2015 preserved it.
the 2010 midterm congressional campaigns were dominated by the emergence of a new tea party social movement the tea party movement a vigorous conservative effort to reduce the national debt lower taxes and limit the role of government.
this broad movement attracted mostly white men and women largely from the middle class.
it viewed the age of globalization 801 obama and his peers as dangerous enemies to a stronger more prosperous america.
it helped send a large majority of anti obama republicans to the house and reduced the majority of democrats in the senate.
for the next two years president obama struggled to get proposals passed by congress because nearly every republican summarily rejected them.
in september 2011 another movement emerged occupy wall street occupy wall street ows.
but this movement preached a radically different agenda than the tea party movement.
significantly smaller and younger than the tea party ows argued for stricter financial regulation progressive taxation stronger support for unions more resources to reduce unemployment assaults on economic inequality and the end of what it believed were unnecessary and failed wars.
its rallying cry was we are the 99 referring to the growing gap of income equality between the richest 1 percent and the rest of americans.
they symbolically demonstrated their grievances by camping in zuccotti park in the wall street area of lower manhattan.
soon after similar demonstrations took place in many other places in the united states and around the world.
ows never a broad based popular movement quickly lost steam and was largely extinguished by 2013.
yet it served as an emblem of popular concern over the unsteady recent history of the economy and the ability of politicians to solve crises in general.
obama and the challenge of governing the election of 2012 the most expensive campaign in history pitted president obama against mitt romney a former governor of massachusetts.
the campaign was not only expensive but also raucous and at times quite angry.
as election day neared the presidential debates in october became the most important part of the campaign.
in the first debate most viewers saw president obama as tired and uninterested a stigma that gave romney a significant boost in the polls.
but in the next two a more energetic and commanding obama captured support and slowly built a lead.
still the race was up in the air until the very end.
the polls showed obama with a persistent lead during the final weeks of the campaign but only a razor thin one.
enormous amounts of campaign money and effort flooded into the few states that were still up for grabs among them ohio virginia florida wisconsin iowa and new hampshire.
on election night it became clear that these states had tilted toward obama in the last few days.
he won all of them.
his victory was close in popular votes but his electoral college votes gave him a large lead with 332 votes.
the democrats also won several new senators giving the party a majority.
the house of representatives remained republican but the majority was now smaller.
the political gridlock of obamas presidency continued after his reelection.
many of his initiatives faced serious obstacles or simply did not come to pass.
a major disappointment for obama and his supporters involved the failure to enact meaningful gun control measures despite a series of horrific shootings occurring during his sandy hook shooting terms in office including the shooting of twenty children and six adults at the sandy hook elementary school in newtown connecticut on december 14 2012.
despite the presidents promise to exert whatever power this office holds to generate such gun control reform the congress resisted enacting any such legislation.
the national rifle association and the conservative wing of the republican party successfully warded off any change on the federal level of the right of americans to buy and use guns.
the gridlock of the house also dashed any hopes president obama had of gaining a deal on immigration.
after his second inaugural obama and his strategists hoped to cement their gains among the latino population revealed in the general election.
many republicans as well believed that their party should reach out to this growing sector 802 chapter 32 of the population by pushing through an immigration reform bill.
on june 27 2013 the senate in a rare show of bipartisanship passed the border security economic opportunity and immigration modernization act of 2013 as a comprehensive package of provisions including a path to u s citizenship for illegal immigrants already in the country.
but powerful conservative republican opposition in the house based largely on the idea that illegal immigrants should not be granted citizenship doomed the bill and it died in congress.
obama responded by issuing an executive order through which he sought to implement many of the provisions of the bill over the howls of protest from house republicans.
a federal judge eventually intervened in december 2014 ruling that the presidents actions were unconstitutional.
this decision along with lawsuits filed by individual states has effectively killed the reform at least for the immediate future.
the fate of the immigration bill embodied the challenge of governing in the early twenty first century.
president obama had whipped up popular support for a bill tackling a pressing social issue and rallied the senate to pass it only to see it twist in the wind of partisan debate in the house and eventually die there.
as clinton and bush had before him obama confronted the painful realities of political leadership in modern america where fealty to political ideology often trumped any desire to compromise with a member of the opposite party or even with those in the same party.
science and technology in the new economy the last three decades have seen remarkable changes in american life some a result of the end of the cold war some the changing character of the american population and some a product of a rapidly evolving culture.
but most of these changes were at least in part a product of the dramatic transformation of american trade and industry.
indeed this new economy represented a profound shift in the nations financial history.
throughout much of the twentieth century manufacturing had powered the nations economy.
making cars rubber steel and airplanes for example had provided many workers with steady jobs and decent wages and benefits as well as entry into the middle class.
but in the face of the sluggish growth and persistent inflation of the last decades of the 1900s many american corporations began making drastic changes in the way they ran their businesses.
they invested heavily in new technology to make themselves more efficient and productive and more significantly aggressively reduced their labor costs which were among the highest in the world and which many economists and business leaders believed had made the united states uncompetitive against the emerging economies that relied on low wage workers.
businesses now took a much harder line against unions.
and nonunion companies became more successful in staving off unionization drives.
some companies actually moved their operations to areas of the country where unions were weak and wages low the american south and midwest in particular.
others simply relocated much of their production out of the united states to such nations as mexico and china where there were large available pools of unorganized cheap labor.
at the same time the digital revolution took hold.
the rapid development of the personal computer and the internet profoundly reshaped how companies operated and organized themselves rewarding in particular college educated workers skilled in software design and application.
it also redefined how people communicated worked shopped and spent their free time.
the age of globalization 803 the digital revolution the dramatic growth in the use of computers and other digital devices was among the most significant innovations of the late twentieth century.
the development of the microprocessor first introduced in 1971 by intel represented a notable advance in the technology of integrated circuitry.
a microprocessor miniaturized the central processing unit cpu of a computer making it possible for a small machine to perform calculations that in the past only very large machines could do.
considerable technological innovation was needed before the microprocessor could actually become the basis of what was first known as a minicomputer and later a personal computer or pc in 1977 apple launched its apple ii personal computer the first such machine to be widely available to the public.
several years later international business machines ibm entered the personal computer market with the first pc.
so that it could focus its internal resources on developing computer hardware ibm had engaged a small software development company microsoft to design an operating system for its new computer.
no pc could operate without it.
the pc and its software made its debut in august 1981 and immediately became enormously successful.
three years later apple introduced its macintosh computer.
for a time apple could not match ibms marketing power.
by the late 1980s the pc had established its dominance in the booming personal computer market but ibm was replaced by microsoft as the dominant computer company in the world.
the computer revolution created thousands of new lucrative businesses computer manufacturers themselves makers of the tiny silicon chips that ran the computers and makers of software.
the internet out of the computer revolution emerged another dramatic source of information and communication the internet a vast geographically far flung network of computers that allows people to communicate with others all over the world.
it had its beginning in 1963 in the u s governments advanced research projects agency arpa which funneled federal funds into scientific research projects.
in the early 1960s j c r licklider the head of arpas information processing techniques office launched a program to link together computers over large distances.
it was known as arpanet.
for several years arpanet served mainly as a way for groups of people to exchange information and collaborate with one another through the remote use of a small handful of computer networking facilities.
gradually however both the size and the uses of the network expanded.
two new important technologies made arpanets expansion possible.
the first was a system for transmitting large quantities of data in packets that took advantage of arpanets indirect structure.
the second was the development of the transmission control protocol internet protocol tcp ip which not only provided a way to deliver addresses to machines and networks but also provided protection against lost data packets on the network.
by 1971 arpanet linked twenty three computers which served mostly research labs and universities.
gradually interest in the system began to spread and the number of devices connected to it grew.
in the early 1980s the defense department an early partner in the development of arpanet withdrew from the project for security reasons.
the network soon renamed the internet was then free to develop independently.
in 1989 tim berners lee a british scientist working at a laboratory in geneva introduced the world wide web which helped establish an orderly system for both the distribution and retrieval of electronic information over the internet.
by 2012 there were well over a 804 chapter 32 the digital revolution has contributed to a vast change in the reporting of news events and political commentary.
politicians now have much less control over how their messages are transmitted and received.
ian dagnall alamy twenty four hour news cycle billion computers in use in the world and many more now obsolete ones.
virtually all of them are connected to the internet.
the development of the internet along with the emergence of the computer industry and digital technology made possible an enormous range of new products and services that quickly became central to economic life digital music video and cameras ipods smartphones and tablets and facebook instagram youtube and vine.
these modern industries employed hundreds of thousands of people many of them from outside the united states and created new consumer needs and appetites.
breakthroughs in genetics computers helped create new scientific breakthroughs in genetics.
early discoveries in genetics by gregor mendel thomas hunt morgan and others laid the groundwork for more dramatic breakthroughs the discovery of dna by the british scientists oswald avery colin macleod and maclyn mccarty in 1944 and in 1953 the dramatic discovery by the american biochemist james watson and the british biophysicist francis crick of the double helix structure of dna and thus of the key to identifying genetic codes.
from these discoveries emerged the new science and ultimately the new industry of genetic engineering through which new medical treatments and new techniques for hybridization of plants and animals have already become possible.
scientists began to identify specific genes in humans and other living things.
but the identification of genes was painfully slow and in 1989 in an effort to accelerate the process the federal government appropriated 3 billion to fund the national center for human genome project the human genome.
the human genome project formally began its mission to identify and classify all of the more than 100 000 genes in 1990 and declared its work complete in 2003.
but genetic research was and continues to be a source of great controversy.
many people feared that the new science might alter aspects of human life that previously seemed beyond human control.
some critics opposed genetic research on religious grounds seeing it as an interference with gods plan for human nature.
still others complained the age of globalization 805 that it equipped humans with immoral powers such that for example parents could design their children and order certain desirable traits.
and a particularly heated controversy emerged over the ways in which scientists obtained genetic material.
one of the most promising sources of genetic research comes from stem cell material from human embryos but the research deeply offends those who believe that the embryo is an earlyaged human life deserving of protection from harm.
in 2001 president bush issued an executive order banning federal funding of research using new sources of human stem cells.
president obama reversed the order in 2009.
a changing society the american population changed dramatically in the late twentieth and early twenty first centuries.
it grew larger older and more racially and ethnically diverse.
it debated the success and scope of earlier landmark events such as the civil rights movement and the right to an abortion.
at the same time the nations citizenry confronted powerful new challenges such as the spread of aids the debate over gay rights and same sex marriage and the prospect of dwindling natural resources.
a shifting population decreasing birthrates and growing life spans contributed to one of the most important characteristics of the american population in the early twenty first century its increasing agedness.
the enormous baby boom generation people born in the first ten years after world war ii drove the median age steadily upward from 34 in 1996 to 37 in 2011 to a projected 39 by 2035.
it had important implications for the workforce.
in the last twenty years of the twentieth century the number of people aged 25 54 known statistically as the prime workforce grew by over 26 million.
in the first ten years of the twenty first century the number of american born workers in that age group did not grow at all.
this combination of fewer americans working and more of them retired put enormous stress on the social security and medicare systems to continue to fulfill their financial obligations.
the slowing growth of the native born population and the workforce shortages it helped create was one reason for the rapid growth of immigration.
in 2011 the number of foreignborn residents of the united states was the highest in american history more than 40 million people.
these immigrants came from a wider variety of backgrounds than ever before as a result of the 1965 immigration reform act which eliminated national origins as a criterion for admission.
the growing presence of the foreign born contributed to a significant drop in the percentage of white residents in the united states from 90 percent in 1965 to 80 percent in 2008.
relative to the overall population non hispanic whites constituted just over 65 percent.
latinos and asians were by far the largest groups of immigrants in these years.
but others came in significant numbers from africa the middle east russia and eastern europe.
african americans in the post civil rights era the civil rights movement and other liberal efforts of the 1960s had two very different effects on african americans.
on one hand they increased opportunities for advancement to those in a position to take advantage of them.
and they helped make possible the election of the first black american to the white house an event unthinkable to all but 806 chapter 32 14 0 10 0 8 0 6 0 4 0 immigrant share of the total u s population number of immigrants in millions 12 0 2 0 number of immigrants immigrant share of the total u s population 0 0 this chart shows the tremendous increase in immigration to the united states in the decades since the immigration reform act of 1965.
at what point since 1850 was the immigrant share of the total u s population highest.
when was the last time that the immigrant share was at its current level.
source of data migration policy institute and u s census bureau.
immigrant population and share over time 1850 present the most optimistic freedom fighter during the king years.
on the other hand as the industrial economy declined and government services dwindled there was a growing sense of helplessness and despair among large groups of poor nonwhites who continued to find themselves barred from upward mobility.
by the early twenty first century the black middle class constituted over half of the african growth of black middle class american population progress was remarkable in the decades after the high point of the civil rights movement.
disparities between black and white professionals did not vanish but they diminished substantially.
african american families moved into more affluent urban communities and in many cases into suburbs at times as neighbors of whites more often into predominantly black communities.
the percentage of black high school graduates going on to college was virtually the same as that of white high school graduates by the early twenty first century although a smaller proportion of blacks than whites managed to complete high school.
and african americans were making rapid strides in many professions.
a generation earlier they had been barred from many jobs because of segregation.
over half of all employed african americans in the united states had skilled white collar jobs in 2010.
there were few areas of american life from which blacks were any longer entirely excluded.
but the rise of the black middle class also accentuated the increasingly desperate plight of less fortunate african americans.
economic growth and the activist programs of the 1960s and beyond had never reached them.
a third of the nations black population was categorized as impoverished often described as the underclass as more successful plight of impoverished people blacks moved out of the inner cities the poor were left behind in their decaying neighborhoods.
less than half of young inner city blacks f inished high the age of globalization 807 school in 2010 more than 60 percent were unemployed.
the black family structure changed as well from the dislocations of urban poverty.
there was a radical increase in the number of single parent female headed black households.
in 1970 59 percent of all black children under eighteen years old lived with both their parents already down from 70 percent a decade earlier.
in 2010 only 35 percent of black children lived in such households compared to 77 percent of non hispanic white children.
nonwhites were also disadvantaged by many other factors in the changing social and economic climate of the late twentieth and early twenty first centuries.
among them was clintons revision of federal welfare policies and a growing impatience with affirmative action.
there was also a steady decline in the number of unskilled jobs in the economy.
not surprisingly then many blacks openly questioned the long term successes of the civil rights movement.
a steady rise in the rate of the incarceration of young black men prompted calls for better schools and intervention programs as well as a review of the justice system as a whole.
signs of popular despair surfaced during moments of racial tension especially after the use of questionable policing tactics left black men dead as in the case of eric garner in new york city in july 2014 and eighteen year old michael brown in ferguson missouri in august 2014.
in these highly publicized cases hundreds of blacks took to the streets demanding fairer treatment by local police and decrying a lack of racial respect between americans of different colors.
the abortion debate among the principal goals of the growing power of conservatism as it became more assertive in the late twentieth century was a challenge to feminism and its achievements.
leaders of the new right had campaigned successfully against the proposed equal rights amendment to the constitution.
and they played a central role in the most divisive issue of the late 1980s and 1990s abortion rights.
for women who choose to terminate unwanted pregnancies the supreme courts decision in roe v wade 1973 had seemed to settle the question.
by the 1980s abortion was the most commonly performed surgical procedure in the country.
but at the same time critics of abortion began to build a powerful grassroots movement.
the right to life or pro life movement as it called itself found its most fervent s upporters among catholics and right to life movement indeed the catholic church itself lent its institutional authority to the battle against legalized abortion.
religious doctrine also motivated the anti abortion stance of mormons evangelical christians and other groups.
the opposition of other anti abortion activists had less to do with religion than with their commitment to traditional notions of family and gender relations.
to them abortion was a particularly offensive part of a much larger assault by feminists on the role of women as wives and mothers.
it was also many foes contended a form of murder.
fetuses they claimed were human beings who had a right to life from the moment of conception.
although the right to life movement was persistent in its demand for a reversal of roe v wade or barring that a constitutional amendment banning abortion it also attacked abortion in more limited ways and at its most vulnerable points.
starting in the late 1970s congress and many state legislatures began barring the use of public funds to pay for abortions thereby making them almost inaccessible for many poor women in some states.
the reagan and the two bush administrations imposed further restrictions on federal funding and even on the right of doctors in federally funded clinics to give patients any information on abortion.
extremists in the right to life movement began picketing occupying and at rare times even bombing abortion clinics.
several anti abortion activists murdered doctors who performed abortions others subjected physicians to campaigns of terrorism and harassment.
the shifting composition of the supreme court between 1981 808 chapter 32 and 2010 during which time new conservative justices were appointed to the court renewed the right to life movements hopes for a reversal of roe v wade.
the changing judicial climate of the late twentieth and early twenty first centuries mobilized defenders of abortion as never before.
they called themselves the pro choice pro choice movement movement because they were defending not so much abortion itself as every womans right to choose whether and when to bear a child.
the pro choice movement was in many parts of the country at least as strong as and in some areas much stronger than the right to life movement.
with the election of president clinton in 1992 a vocal supporter of choice the immediate threat to roe v wade faded.
clintons reelection in 1996 was evidence that the prochoice movement maintained considerable political strength.
but abortion rights remained highly vulnerable.
clintons successor george w bush openly opposed abortion.
whereas clinton had refused to sign the partial birth abortion ban act bush to great fanfare inked it into law in 2003.
the legislation forbade physicians from performing a medical procedure called intact dilation and extraction the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of the law in gonzales v carhart in 2007.
barack obama supported the right to abortion when he became president but judicial struggles over whether and to what extent society has an obligation to protect it continued.
in 2007 the state of massachusetts amended its reproductive health facility act originally passed in 2003 to create a 35 foot buffer zone around reproductive centers that offered abortions.
its intent was to provide patients entering an abortion clinic a greater measure of safety and relief from confrontational protesters.
the supreme court however declared this law unconstitutional in 2014.
in mccullen v coakley the court ruled that the 35 foot protective zone violated the right of abormccullen v coakley tion opponents to protest peacefully and unfairly limited their free speech.
aids and modern america two new and deadly epidemics ravaged many american communities beginning in the 1980s.
one was a dramatic increase in drug use which penetrated nearly every community in the nation.
the enormous demand for drugs and particularly for crack cocaine in the late 1980s and early 1990s spawned what was in effect a multibillion dollar industry.
drug use declined significantly among middle class people beginning in the late 1980s largely because of educational campaigns but the epidemic declined much more slowly in the poor urban neighborhoods where it was doing the most severe damage.
the drug epidemic was related to another scourge of the late twentieth and early twenty first centuries the rapid spread of a new and lethal disease first documented in 1981 and soon named aids acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
aids is the product of the human immunodeficiency virus hiv which is transmitted by the exchange of bodily fluids blood or semen.
the virus gradually destroys the bodys immune system and makes its victims highly vulnerable to a number of diseases particularly to various forms of cancer and pneumonia to which they would otherwise have a natural resistance.
during the early history of the disease those infected with the virus that is those who identified as hiv positive and became ill were almost certain to die.
the first american victims of aids and for many years the group among whom cases remained the most numerous were gay men.
but by the late 1980s as the gay community began to implement aggressive education and intervention programs the most rapid increase in the spread of the disease occurred among heterosexuals many of them intravenous drug users who spread the virus by sharing contaminated hypodermic needles.
the age of globalization 809 in the mid 1990s aids researchers after years of frustration finally began discovering effective treatments for the disease.
by taking a combination of powerful drugs on a rigorous schedule among them a group known as protease inhibitors even people with advanced cases of aids experienced dramatic improvement so much so that in many cases there were no measurable quantities of the virus left in their bloodstreams.
currently a diagnosis of aids is not the near certain death sentence it was in the late nineties rather new medication regimes permit those living with aids to successfully manage the disease and live mostly normal lives.
every president has steadily increased federal funding for aids research and education and for the care of individuals living with aids both domestically and abroad.
president george w bush provided 15 billion to fight aids in africa where the epidemic was rampant and the poor had little access to drugs.
in the budget for 2015 president obama called for 30 4 billion to combat aids.
the centers for disease control and prevention cdc estimates that 1 3 million americans currently suffer from aids nearly one in seven not even realizing that they are infected.
but the united states represents only a tiny proportion of the worldwide total of people afflicted with hiv an estimated 35 million people.
over two thirds of those cases are concentrated in africa.
gay americans and same sex marriage in the late twentieth century inspired in part by the success of aids activists in winning political support and funding many gay men and lesbians began to lobby for greater protections under the law particularly the right to marry.
until the 1990s the issue of same sex marriage was not a national political issue.
but in 1993 hawaiis supreme court ruled in baehr v lewin that the state needed a compelling reason to bar same sex marriage.
in response congress easily passed the defense of marriage act doma in 1996 doma with rare bipartisan support.
president clinton signed it into law.
doma exempted states from being required to recognize same sex marriages from other states.
it also defined marriage as being between a man and a woman and denied same sex married couples the ability to be classified as spouses for federal purposes such as the filing of joint tax returns social security survivor benefit claims adoption papers and immigration applications.
gay rights activists identified more than 1 000 protections and responsibilities of marriage denied them by doma.
thirty states quickly followed suit with similar laws.
almost immediately gay men and lesbians and their supporters took to the courts in protest.
they typically argued that doma and related state laws violated the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment of the u s constitution.
they gained many victories.
by 2013 eleven states had passed new legislation making same sex marriage legal.
that year as well the u s supreme court struck down the section of doma defining marriage as being between two people of the opposite sex so that all married couples living in states where same sex marriage is legal are classified as spouses by the federal government.
the tide against same sex marriage appeared to be turning.
by early 2015 state and federal courts had overturned legal barriers to same sex marriage in twenty six states.
finally on june 26 2015 the supreme court in a close 5 4 decision ruled that the ability of same sex couples to marry was a right guaranteed by the constitution.
writing for the majority justice anthony kennedy proclaimed that no longer may this liberty be denied driving the radical change in the legal status of same sex marriage in addition to the guidance and political savvy of its advocates was a profound shift in public opinion about the issue.
indeed broad popular support for same sex marriage grew steadily since the co ns ider t he s o urc e same sex marriage 2015 the debate over the right of people of the same sex to marry legally and enjoy the full range of benefits accorded to married couples under federal and state law hit a fever pitch in early january 2015.
nearly four years earlier cari searcy and kimberly mckeand a same sex couple who were legally married in california under that states laws wanted searcy to be able to adopt mckeands eight year old biological son under a provision of alabamas adoption code that allows a person to adopt her spouses child but searcys petition was denied in december 2011 based on the alabama sanctity of marriage amendment and the closely related alabama marriage protection act.
both laws declared that marriage is inherently a unique relationship between a man and a woman that no marriage license shall be issued in the state of alabama to parties of the same sex and that the state of alabama shall not recognize as valid any marriage of parties of the same sex that occurred or was alleged to have occurred as a result of the law of any jurisdiction regardless of whether a marriage license was issued therefore because alabama does not recognize the legality of same sex plaintiffs marriage searcy failed to qualify as a spouse for adoption purposes.
searcy appealed the denial of her adoption petition to the alabama court of civil appeals which ruled against her and affirmed the decision of the probate court.
in federal court searcy sued the attorney general of alabama luther strange and sought to declare these two alabama state laws unconstitutional on the grounds that they violated the due process clause and equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment.
callie granade a federal judge for the u s district court in alabama southern division agreed in january 2015.
she ordered the state to begin to issue marriage licenses to same sex 810 couples immediately though the order was delayed while attorney general strange appealed to the u s supreme court for a stay.
but once the high court refused to hear the case on february 9 granades order took effect.
some counties obliged but others didnt heeding the encouragement of alabamas supreme court justice roy moore to ignore the federal ruling.
then in march 2015 the states supreme court ruled 7 to 1 that all probate justices county officials officially charged with the management of marriage licenses must cease issuing marriage licenses to same sex couples.
in june the u s supreme court ruled that gay marriage bans such as alabama s were unconstitutional.
in the following excerpt from judge granades ruling she clarifies why she ruled in favor of same sex marriage.
defendant contends that alabama has a legitimate interest in protecting the ties between children and their biological parents and other biological kin.
however the court finds that the laws in question are not narrowly tailored to fulfill the reported interest.
the attorney general does not explain how allowing or recognizing same sex marriage between two consenting adults will prevent heterosexual parents or other biological kin from caring for their biological children.
he proffers no justification for why it is that the provisions in question single out same sex couples and prohibit them and them alone from marrying in order to meet that goal.
alabama does not exclude from marriage any other couples who are either unwilling or unable to biologically procreate.
there is no law prohibiting infertile couples elderly couples or couples who do not wish to procreate from marrying.
nor does the state prohibit recognition of marriages between such couples from other states.
the attorney general fails to demonstrate any rational much less compelling link between its prohibition and non recognition of same sex marriage and its goal of having more children raised in the biological family structure the state wishes to promote.
there has been no evidence presented that these marriage laws have any effect on the choices of couples to have or raise children whether they are same sex couples or opposite sex couples.
in sum the laws in question are an irrational way of promoting biological relationships in alabama.
if anything alabamas prohibition of same sex marriage detracts from its goal of promoting optimal environments for children.
those children currently being raised by same sex parents in alabama are just as worthy of protection and recognition by the state as are the children being raised by opposite sex parents.
yet alabamas sanctity laws harms the children of same sex couples for the same reasons that the u s supreme court found that the defense of marriage act harmed the children of samesex couples.
such a law humiliates.
thousands of children now being raised by same sex couples.
the law in question makes it even more difficult for the children to understand the integrity and closeness of their own family and its concord with other families in their community and in their daily lives windsor 133 s ct at 2694 alabamas prohibition and non recognition of samesex marriage also brings financial harm to children of same sex couples id at 2695 because it denies the families of these children a panoply of benefits that the state and the federal government offer to families who are legally wed additionally these laws further injures those children of all couples who are themselves gay or lesbian and who will grow up knowing that alabama does not believe they are as capable of creating a family as their heterosexual friends.
for all of these reasons the court finds that alabamas marriage laws violate the due process clause and equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment to the united states constitution.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
how does judge granades ruling re flect or not reflect changing popular attitudes toward gay men and lesbians.
how is the definition of a family being redefined.
in what ways do the actions of judge roy moore and the alabama supreme court evoke tensions between the state and civil rights protesters of the 1950s and 1960s.
or are the civil rights of black americans and gay and lesbian americans two very different issues.
in his dissenting opinion in obergefell v hodges supreme court justice john roberts said the fundamental right to marry does not include a right to make a state change its definition of marriage what does the decision in searcy v strange have to say about the states definition of marriage.
source searcy v strange civil action no.
14 0208 cg n s d.
ala jan 25 2015 case case 14084561318965877067 hl en as sdt 6 as vis 1 oi scholarr accessed march 19 2015.
end of the twentieth century primarily among younger generations of americans.
still there was no national consensus about the legality of same sex marriage and many southern and midwestern states had laws on the books preventing same sex marriage or were engaged in heated legal battles over it.
for example in january 2015 in alabama a federal judge ruled in favor of same sex marriage.
see consider the source same sex marriage 2015 but less than two months later alabamas supreme court by a vote of 7 to 1 forbade county officials from issuing a marriage license to any same sex couple.
ultimately the decision by the u s supreme court broke the legal stalement and compelled alabama and all states with gay marriage bans to issue the licenses.
811 america in the world the global environmental movement an international movement for well over a century environmentalism has grown rapidly throughout the world in the late twentieth and early twenty first centuries.
what began as a series of localized efforts to preserve wilderness sites and to clean up air and water has evolved into a broad effort to deal with concerns that affect and threaten the entire globe.
during the 1960s 1970s and 1980s while long standing american environmental associations such as the wilderness society the sierra club and the national audubon society were being rejuvenated organizations elsewhere in the world sought to create an international environmental movement.
the world wildlife fund wwf created in switzerland in 1961 eventually attracted more than 5 million supporters in over 150 countries and now claims to be the worlds largest independent conservation organization.
greenpeace was founded in canada in 1971 to oppose u s nuclear testing off the coast of alaska.
it too has grown into an international organization with 2 8 million financial supporters worldwide and a presence in forty nations.
nongovernmental organizations ngos such as greenpeace and wwf were not the only institutions to recognize environmental concerns.
in june 1972 the united nations un held its first conference on the human environment in stockholm sweden.
representatives of 113 countries attended the conference to discuss issues of global environmental importance including the role of chlorofluorocarbons cfcs a chemical compound used in refrigerants and aerosol sprays in depleting the ozone layer.
after the conference the un 812 created the united nations environment programme unep to help coordinate international efforts for environmentalism and encourage sustainable development in poorer nations around the world.
the worlds first green parties political parties explicitly devoted to environmental concerns and often to other issues of social justice appeared in 1972 beginning in new zealand the values party and tasmania the united tasmania group.
since then green parties have proliferated throughout the world including in the united states.
the most powerful green party to date has been die grnen in germany founded in 1980.
die grnen allied with the social democratic party in a governing coalition from 1998 and in 2000 this coalition successfully passed the nuclear exit law which set a timetable of twenty years for germanys eventual abandonment of nuclear power and a switch to renewable energy.
large scale ecological catastrophes have often helped galvanize the global environmental movement.
among the more significant of these events was the bhopal disaster of 1984 in which a gas leak at a union carbide pesticide plant in bhopal india resulted in the deaths of between 3 000 and 15 000 people.
two years later a nuclear reactor accident in the soviet city of chernobyl in ukraine caused fifty six direct deaths with predictions of many thousands more deaths to follow as a result of exposure.
the area around chernobyl itself is expected to be partially contaminated for 24 000 years the radioactive half life of plutonium 239.
a less catastrophic nuclear accident at three mile island pennsylvania in 1979 heightened antinuclear sentiment in the united states.
in 1989 the oil tanker exxon valdez ran aground on bligh reef in prince william sound alaska and spilled approximately 10 9 million gallons of crude oil.
eventually covering thousands of square miles of ocean water and 1 300 miles of alaska shoreline in oil the spill killed hundreds of thousands of animals instantly and devastated the fragile ecosystem of the sound.
the 2010 explosion of the deepwater horizon well about 50 miles southeast of the mississippi delta caused the largest marine oil spill in history.
in developed industrialized nations environmental advocacy has largely focused on energy policy conservation clean technologies and changing individual and social attitudes about consumption as in the recycling movement.
the growth of environmentalism is often linked to issues of human and democratic rights and freedom from first world exploitation.
for example the green belt movement in kenya begun in 1977 by wangari maathai encouraged kenyan women to plant over 30 million trees across the nation to address the challenges of deforestation soil erosion and lack of water.
the green belt movement became an important human rights and womens rights organization focused on reducing poverty and promoting peaceful democratic change through environmental conservation and protection.
maathai won the 2004 nobel peace prize for her achievements.
over the past two decades the environmental movement has grown even more global in scope with multilateral environmental treaties and worldwide summits becoming the principal strategies of advocates.
in 1997 an international effort to reduce global warming by mandating the lowering of greenhouse gas emissions culminated in the kyoto protocol which the united states did not join.
while the george w bush administration rejected most efforts to limit carbon emissions other leading americans helped bring the issue of global warming to wide attention both in the united states and around the world.
perhaps most notable has been former vice president al gore whose 2006 film an inconvenient truth may have done more to raise awareness of the threat of global warming than any other recent event both in the united states and in many other nations.
as a result of his efforts gore won the 2007 nobel peace prize an honor he shared with others appropriately given the global character of the movement he has championed.
his cowinner was the intergovernmental panel on climate change launched in switzerland in 1988 and affiliated with the united nations.
understand analyze evaluate 1.
why are environmental movements in developing nations often linked to issues of human rights and protection from exploitation by developed nations.
how do developed nations threaten the environment of developing nations.
what is the current status of un initiatives to reduce carbon omissions such as the kyoto protocol.
the contemporary environmental movement the environmental movement in the united states continued to expand in the decades after the 1980s.
it drew inspiration from the older international environmental movement which organized in the 1960s and steadily grew in political power.
see america in the world the global environmental movement after the first earth day domestic environmental issues gained increasing attention and support.
although the federal government displayed only intermittent interest in the subject environmentalists won a series of significant battles mostly at the local level.
they blocked the construction of 813 814 chapter 32 roads airports and other projects that they claimed would be ecologically dangerous taking advantage of new legislation protecting endangered species and environmentally fragile regions.
in the late 1980s the environmental movement began to mobilize around a new and ominous challenge global warming it produced a steady rise in the earths temperature as a result of emissions from the burning of fossil fuels most notably coal and oil.
although considerable controversy has continued for years over the pace and even the reality of global warming by the early twenty first century a growing consensus began to emerge in part as a result of the leadership of significant public figures such as former vice president al gore who won a nobel peace prize in 2007 for his efforts to draw attention to the problem.
in 1997 representatives of the major industrial nations met in kyoto japan and agreed to a broad treaty establishing steps toward reducing carbon emissions and thus slowing or reversing global warming.
the clinton administration formally signed the kyoto protocol but nothing came of it.
reading the handkyoto protocol writing on the wall clinton never even submitted it for ratification because the senate had earlier passed the byrd hagel resolution by a vote of 95 to 0 that rejected the treatys key tenets.
president george w bush while proclaiming grave concern over climate concern refused to support the kyoto protocol because it excluded developing countries like china and india.
since 2009 president obama has met with mixed success on climate change issues.
while major international agreements have not materialized during his presidency the president did champion and sign legislation raising fuel efficiency in passenger cars and trucks in 2012 and has since directed the environmental protection agency to regulate coal ash a major co2 emitter primarily used in creating electricity to intense political scrutiny.
deepwater horizon disaster in 2010 a bp british petroleum offshore well deepwater horizon suffered a crippling explosion that sent approximately 5 million barrels of oil into the gulf of mexico.
this photograph shows the attempt to cap the well.
the oil leaked for months destroying local fisheries and the effects to the environment from the oil and the dispersants used to clean it up are still unknown.
the event galvanized the global environmental movement.
julie dermansky corbis the age of globalization 815 america in the world the celebration of the beginning of a new millennium on january 1 2000 was an important moment not just because of the change in the calendar.
it was notable above all as a global event a shared and for the most part joyous experience that united the world in its exuberance.
but if the millennium celebrations suggested the bright promise of an interconnected world other events at the dawn of the new century suggested its dark perils.
indeed the united states increasing role as an economic and military superpower triggered fears among many americans about a foreign policy that was too aggressive and trade initiatives that took advantage of low wage workers in other countries and unfairly benefited large international businesses.
the rise of mass protests over americas global economic policies and terrorism painfully brought home the dangers of living in the twenty first century.
opposing the new world order in the united states and other industrial nations opposition to globalization or to what president george h w bush once called the new world order took several forms.
to many americans on both the political left and right the nations increasingly interventionist foreign policy was deeply troubling.
critics on the left charged that the united states was using military action to advance its economic interests in the 1991 gulf war and above all in the iraq war that began in 2003.
critics on the right criticized humanitarian interventions in somalia in 1993 and the balkans in the late 1990s as too costly and risky.
others complained that the united states was ceding its sovereignty to international organizations such as united nations led peacekeeping missions.
labor unions insisted that the rapid expansion of free trade agreements led to the export of jobs from advanced nations to less developed ones.
other groups attacked working conditions in new manufacturing countries on humanitarian grounds arguing that the global economy was creating new classes of slave laborers working in conditions that few western nations would tolerate.
environmentalists argued that globalization in exporting industry to low wage countries also exported industrial pollution and toxic waste into nations that had no effective laws to control them and contributed significantly to global warming.
and still others opposed global economic arrangements on the grounds that they enriched and empowered large multinational corporations and threatened the freedom and autonomy of individuals and communities.
varied opponents of globalization found a common enemy in the multinational institutions that policed and advanced the global economy.
among them were the world trade organization which monitored the enforcement of the general agreement on tariffs and trade gatt treaties of the 1990s the international monetary fund imf which controlled international credit and exchange rates and the world bank which made money available for development projects in many countries.
in november 1999 when leaders of leading industrial nations gathered for their annual meeting in seattle washington tens of thousands protested most of them peacefully.
but some of them clashed with police smashed store windows and all but paralyzed the city.
a few months later a smaller but still substantial demonstration disrupted meetings of the imf and the world bank in washington d c and in july 2001 at a meeting of the same leaders in genoa italy an estimated 50 000 demonstrators clashed violently with police in a melee that left one protester dead and several hundred injured.
the participants in the meeting responded to the demonstrations by pledging 1 2 billion to fight the aids epidemic in developing countries and by deciding to hold future meetings in remote locations far from major cities.
816 chapter 32 thousands of demonstrators rallied at the site of the 1999 world trade organization meeting to protest the wtos role in the globalization of the economy and they believed the exploitation of working people.
they succeeded in postponing the opening of the conference.
in this photograph a protester faces seattle police in a cloud of tear gas waiting to be arrested.
andy clark reuters corbis protesting the wto in seattle 1999 defending orthodoxy outside the industrialized west the impact of globalization sparked other controversies.
many citizens of nonindustrialized nations resented the way the world economy had left them in poverty.
in their view the developed world exploited and oppressed them.
in some parts of the nonindustrialized world particularly in some of the islamic nations of the middle east the increasing reach of globalization created additional grievances rooted not just in economics but also in religion and culture.
the iranian revolution of 1979 in which orthodox muslims ousted a despotic government was one of the first large and visible manifestations of a phenomenon that eventually reached across much of the islamic world.
it threatened the stability of the globe.
militants used isolated incidents of violence and mayhem designed to disrupt societies and governments and to create fear among their peoples.
such tactics are known to the world as terrorism.
the rise of terrorism the term terrorism was used first during the french revolution in the 1790s to describe the actions of radical jacobins against the french government.
it continued to be used intermittently throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to describe the use of violence as a form of intimidation against peoples and governments.
but the widespread understanding of terrorism as an important fact of modern life is largely a product of the end of the twentieth century and the beginning of the twenty first.
the age of globalization 817 acts of what came to be called terrorism have occurred in many parts of the world.
irish revolutionaries engaged in terrorism regularly against the english through much of the twentieth century.
jews used it in palestine against the british before the creation of israel and palestinians have used it frequently against jews in israel particularly in the past several decades.
revolutionary groups in italy germany japan and france have engaged in terrorist acts intermittently over the past several decades.
the united states too has experienced terrorism for many years much of it against american targets abroad including the bombing of the marine barracks in beirut in 1983 the explosion that brought down an american airliner over lockerbie scotland in 1988 the bombing of american embassies in 1998 and the assault on the u s naval vessel cole in 2000.
terrorist incidents were relatively rare terrorist incidents before 9 11 but not unknown within the united states itself prior to september 11 2001.
militants on the american left performed various acts of terror in the 1960s and early 1970s.
in february 1993 a bomb exploded in the parking garage of the world trade center in new york killing six people and causing serious but not irreparable structural damage to the towers.
several men connected with militant islamic organizations were convicted of the crime.
in april 1995 a van containing explosives blew up in front of a federal building in oklahoma city killing 168 people.
timothy mcveigh a former army soldier who had become part of a militant a ntigovernment movement of the american right was convicted of the crime and eventually executed in 2001.
september 11 2001 a new york city symbol stands against a sky filled with the thick smoke from the destruction of another american symbol new york citys world trade center towers a few hours after terrorists crashed two planes into them.
daniel hulshizer ap images 818 chapter 32 most americans however considered terrorism a problem mainly confined to other nations.
one of the many results of the terrible events of september 11 2001 was to jolt the american people out of their complacency and alert them to the presence of continuing danger.
predictably that awareness increased dramatically in the years following september 11.
new security measures changed the way in which americans traveled.
new government regulations altered immigration policies and affected the character of international banking.
warnings of possible new terrorist attacks created widespread tension and uneasiness.
the war on terror in the aftermath of september 11 2001 the united states government launched what president bush called a war on terror the attacks on the world trade center and the pentagon government intelligence indicated had been planned and orchestrated by middle eastern agents of a powerful terrorist network known as al qaeda.
its leader osama bin laden until osama bin laden and al qaeda 2001 little known outside the arab world quickly became one of the most notorious figures in the world.
the militant taliban government of afghanistan had sheltered and supported al qaeda previously and most reports placed bin laden in continued care.
in 2001 nato led by the united states began a sustained campaign of bombing against the regime and sent in ground troops.
afghanistans taliban regime quickly collapsed and its leaders along with the al qaeda fighters allied with them fled the capital kabul.
american and anti taliban afghan troops pursued them into the mountains but failed to capture bin laden and the other leaders of his organization.
american forces in afghanistan rounded up several hundred people with suspected connections to the taliban and al qaeda and moved these prisoners and eventually guantnamo others to a facility at the american military base in guantnamo cuba.
they were among the first suspected terrorists to be handled under new standards established by the federal government in dealing with terrorism after september 11 2001.
they were held for months and in some cases years without access to lawyers without facing formal charges and were subjected to intensive interrogation and at times torture.
many critics denounced the dangers to basic civil liberties that they believed the war on terror had created.
others argued that the new tactics were necessary to protect americans.
president obama in his first month in the white house pledged to close the prison at guantnamo.
but he soon found that the promise was difficult to keep.
the iraq war in his state of the union address to congress in january 2002 president bush spoke of an axis of evil which included the nations of iraq iran and north korea all countries with anti american regimes that either possessed or were thought to be trying to acquire nuclear weapons.
although bush did not say so at the time many people around the world interpreted these words to mean that the united states would soon try to topple the government of saddam hussein in iraq.
for over a year the bush administration slowly built a public case for invading iraq.
much of that case rested on two claims.
one was that iraq was supporting terrorist groups that were hostile to the united states.
the other and eventually the more important was that iraq either had or was developing what came to be known as weapons of mass weapons of mass destruction destruction which included nuclear weapons and agents of chemical and biological warfare.
less central to these arguments at least in the united the age of globalization 819 states was the charge that the hussein government was responsible for major violations of human rights.
except for the last none of these claims turned out to be accurate.
in march 2003 american troops with support from great britain and several other countries and partial authorization from the united nations invaded iraq and quickly toppled the hussein regime.
hussein himself went into hiding but was eventually captured in december 2003.
he was executed in iraq on december 30 2006.
in may 2003 shortly after the american capture of baghdad president bush made a dramatic appearance on an aircraft carrier off the coast of california where he declared victory in the battle of iraq praised the military and allies in the war effort and warned weakly of the difficult work to do in iraq while standing in front of a large sign reading mission accomplished in the following months however events in iraq suggested that the mission had only just begun.
of the more than 4 800 american soldiers killed in iraq as of 2014 over 4 000 of them died after the mission accomplished speech.
and despite significant efforts by the united states and its allies to hand over authority to an iraqi government and to restore order to the country insurgents continued to disrupt the recovery with persistent attacks and terrorist actions throughout the fragile nation.
support for the war in the united states steadily declined in the years after the first claim of victory.
the failure to find evidence of the weapons of mass destruction whose existence the president had claimed was a hammer blow to the wars credibility.
another blow came from reports of the torture and humiliation of iraqi prisoners by american soldiers abu ghraib at the abu ghraib prison in baghdad and other sites in iraq and around the world.
the invasion of iraq was the most visible evidence of a basic change in the structure of american foreign policy under the presidency of george w bush.
ever since the late 1940s the containment policy had become the cornerstone of americas role in the world.
the united states had worked to maintain stability in the world by containing but not often directly threatening or attacking its adversaries.
even after the cold war ended the united states continued to demonstrate a level of constraint despite its now unchallenged military preeminence.
in the administrations of george h w bush and bill clinton for example american leaders worked closely with the united nations and nato to achieve u s international goals and resisted taking unilateral military action.
there had always been those who criticized these constraints.
they believed that america should do more than maintain stability and should move actively to topple undemocratic regimes and destroy potential enemies of the united states.
in the administration of george w bush these critics took control of american foreign policy and began to reshape it.
the legacy of containment was largely repudiated.
instead the public bushs foreign policy doctrine stance of the american government was that the united states had the right and the responsibility to fight tyranny and spread freedom throughout the world not just by exhortation and example but also when necessary by military force.
in latvia in may 2005 president bush spoke of the decision at the end of world war ii not to challenge soviet domination of eastern europe.
that decision had rested on the belief that such a challenge would lead the united states into another war.
the controversial agreement negotiated at yalta in 1945 by roosevelt churchill and stalin which failed to end the soviet occupation of poland and other eastern european nations was the president said part of an unjust tradition by which powerful governments sacrificed the interests of small nations.
this attempt to sacrifice freedom for the sake of stability the president continued left a continent divided and unstable the lesson bush suggested was that the united states and other great powers should value stability less and freedom more and should be willing to take greater risks in the world to end tyranny and oppression.
820 chapter 32 america after the iraq war the end of the american combat role in iraq was already under way in the last year of the bush administration.
obama brought it to an end in 2010.
at the same time he comescalation in afghanistan mitted significant additional troops to the war in afghanistan where americans had been fighting since 2001.
obama escalated the afghan war in 2011.
for almost ten years a major goal of american foreign policy was to find osama bin laden the head of al qaeda the organization behind the destruction of 9 11.
in may 2011 navy seals found and killed bin laden.
shortly afterward leaders from countries of the north atlantic treaty organization drafted a plan for the withdrawal of international forces from afghanistan and facilitated peace talks between the afghan government and the taliban.
obama ordered nearly all american troops to leave the country and cease combat operations by the close of 2014 in effect ending american involvement in the conflict.
despite the end of the iraq war and the killing of bin laden conflict in the middle east continued to dominate american foreign policy.
obama had appointed hillary clinton as his hillary clinton as secretary of state secretary of state and together they tried to create peace between israel and palestine an effort that made little or no progress.
elsewhere they sought to improve relationships damaged by the iraq war and to build new international trade opportunities as well.
but increasing turmoil in the middle east and the growing power of china created new challenges.
the united states intervened in a civil war in libya and helped end the regime of the long standing leader muammar qadaffi.
and in 2012 obama and clinton sought to stop iran from creating nuclear weapons an effort that remained unfinished.
unmanned combat air vehicles ucavs also known as drones have become weapons of choice during many u s military engagements throughout the world.
pilots operate these vehicles from remote sites a practice that was unimaginable when the international laws of war were last drafted in 1949.
in calling for an examination of this practice critics have cited the unintended killing of civilians in pakistan and the targeting of three american citizens by u s drones in yemen as well as the potential for foreign governments to develop drones and follow the american precedent.
kirsty wigglesworth ap images drones the age of globalization 821 syria a country locked in violent civil war since 2011 experienced a new and terrifying level of bloodshed.
opponents of the baath government sought the syrian civil war ouster of president bashar al assad and his repressive regime.
assad unleashed the army in response killing an estimated 120 000 of his own people by september 2013.
the displacement of hundreds of thousands of syrians into neighboring countries threatened to further destabilize the region.
assads use of chemical weapons triggered a strong condemnation by the united states and its european allies.
working with russia a traditional ally of the assad regime the united states and europe brokered a deal to remove the stockpile of chemical weapons from the country.
obama aware of his nations unwillingness to become involved in another ground war resisted calls for sending troops to dislodge assad.
the violent struggle continued in 2015 with no sign of abatement in sight.
a key element in the syrian conflict has been the rise of rebel groups committed not only to overthrowing the assad government but also violently resisting western backers of the ruling regime and attacking western influence over traditional islamic society.
most notably isis the islamic state of iraq and syria a powerful and deadly opposition force has isis recently embarked on campaigns of terror against western nations including the public execution of american and british citizens uploaded to social media websites around the world.
in 2015 isis serves as a symbol of the persistent instability of the region and a reminder of the continuing threat of terrorism.
turmoil in the middle east and the threat of terrorism are not the only focal points of current american foreign policy.
in a bold move that reignited memories of the cold war russia under the leadership of president vladimir putin annexed the vladimir putin ukrainian territory of crimea in march 2014.
putin inserted military troops to support russian separatists and quickly established a firm grip over the local government and untrammeled access to the city and bay of sevastopal home to russias black sea fleet.
ignoring a flurry of international peace initiatives and sanctions imposed by the united states its allies and the united nations putin tightened his hold over crimea and even implemented sanctions of his own he eliminated most agricultural imports from countries opposing him.
the relationship between russia and america remains tense with no resolution satisfactory to both countries over the issue of crimea in sight.
it reminds us that major conflicts between the united states and countries in central and eastern europe did not end with the fall of the berlin wall or collapse of the soviet union but persist in the form of nations like russia intent on aggressively expanding its sphere of international influence.
conclusion the united states in the first decade of the twenty first century was a nation beset with many problems and anxieties.
u s foreign policy after the attacks of september 11 2001 had not only divided the american people but had also deeply alienated much of the world.
crises in the middle east made it impossible to ignore the persistent threat of terrorism and extremism while conflict with russia brought back cold war fears of instability in eastern and central europe.
the american economy was struggling as early as 2007 and in the fall of 2008 experienced the worst economic crisis since the great depression.
by 2014 the economy had improved but some polls indicated a continuing sense of uncertainty about the future among many americans.
gridlock continued at the federal level making it difficult to achieve sweeping reform in several key areas.
political 822 chapter 32 divisions not only among politicians but also among voters were as great in 2015 as they had been in many years.
the united states remains the wealthiest and most powerful nation in the world and it continues to cherish great ideals and great hopes.
moving forward into an uncertain future americans are burdened with serious problems and great challenges but they are also armed with extraordinary resilience and energy that has allowed the nation through its long and turbulent history to endure to flourish and to imagine and strive for a better future.
key terms people places events affordable care act 800 afghan war 820 aids 808 al qaeda 818 barack obama 796 defense of marriage act doma 809 george w bush 795 great recession of 2008 797 guantnamo 818 hillary rodham clinton 796 human genome project 804 iraq war 795 new world order 815 9 11 attacks 817 occupy wall street ows 801 osama bin laden 818 tea party 800 terrorism 816 vladimir putin 821 recall and reflect 1.
how has partisanship affected how presidents governed in the last twenty five years.
how has americas relationship to the rest of the world changed as a result of the war on terror and in particular the iraq war.
how did the digital revolution affect the american economy.
what were the key causes of the great recession.
